Chapter 5
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of violations — See
Ch. 67.
§ 5-1. Title and purpose.
§ 5-2. Permit requirements; fee.
No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
without a valid permit issued in accordance with this chapter. A separate
permit is required for each alarm site. There will be a one-time fee of $25
for a permit of an alarm site.
§ 5-3. Alarm system operation and maintenance.
This chapter shall be known as the "Alarm System Bylaw" and shall
regulate alarms which cause a message to be transmitted to the Police
or Fire Departments.
A.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users to maintain
the operational reliability of their alarm systems, to reduce or eliminate
false alarm dispatch requests, to establish a system of regulations and
fees with respect to alarm systems, and to provide for penalties for
violations of this chapter.
B.
The alarm user shall maintain the alarm site and alarm system in a
manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches.
A.
The alarm user shall make every reasonable effort to respond or cause
a representative to respond within one-half hour, when notified, to
deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system or to provide access to the
alarm site.
B.
The alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to
be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm
site will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated.
C.
The alarm business performing monitoring services shall attempt to
verify every alarm signal, except a duress or hold-up alarm activation,
before requesting a police response to an alarm signal.
D.
An alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or an
alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not
have a sound device which can be heard on the exterior of the alarm
site.
E.
5:1
§ 5-4. Fines.
§ 5-5. General provisions.
F. Automatic dialers to the Police or Fire Departments are prohibited.
G. The Police or Fire Departments shall not serve as alarm monitors.
Effective July 1, 2009, an alarm user shall be subject to warnings and
fines depending on the number of false alarm dispatches emitted from
an alarm system within the fiscal year, based on the following schedule:
Number of
False Alarm
Dispatches
Action
Taken Fine
1 Warning None
2 Warning None
3 3rd offense $50
4 4th offense $75
5 5th and
subsequent
$100
A.
Any persons operating an alarm system without a permit issued in
accordance with this chapter shall be subject to an additional fine of
$100 for each false alarm dispatch.
B.
An alarm dispatch request caused by a criminal offense, a fire or other
emergency, or an alarm resulting solely from power outages or extreme
weather conditions shall not be counted as a false alarm dispatch.
C.
All fines and fees resulting from the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter shall be collected in the form of a personal check, money
order or registered check, made payable to the Town of Barre and
forwarded to the Police Department.
D.
State and municipal entities and nonprofit organizations shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
E.
All fines shall be paid within 21 days of receipt of a noncriminal
violation notice.
F.
Except as otherwise required by law, the information furnished and
secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and
shall not be subject to public inspection.
A.
The alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator
to the Town Administrator or designee by filing a written request
for a review within 10 days after receipt of a noncriminal violation
notice. The Town Administrator or designee shall conduct a hearing
B.
§ 5-3 BARRE CODE § 5-5
5:2
Chapter 7
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol use on the job (just cause
standard) — See Ch. 84.
and render a written decision within 30 days. The decision of the Town
Administrator or designee shall be final.
The Chief of Police shall serve as the alarm administrator to: administer,
control and review alarm applications, permits, and alarm dispatch
requests, develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm
dispatch requests, promulgate such regulations as may be necessary or
required to implement this chapter.
C.
§ 5-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 5-5
5:3

ARTICLE I
Consumption or Possession in Public
[Adopted 12-30-1974 STM, Art. 1]
§ 7-1. Public ways and vehicles; fine. [Amended 6-18-1983 ATM, Art.
22]
Whoever shall, within the limits of any public way located within the town,
whether that public way be a town way, county highway, state highway, or
a private way open to the public, consume intoxicating beverages or has
in possession an open container thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $50. This section shall also be construed so as to prohibit the
following: the consumption of intoxicating beverages or the possession of
an open container thereof by any person while such person is standing,
sitting, walking, running or otherwise present within such way or is within
any vehicle, whether parked or moving, which is within the limits of such
public way.
§ 7-2. Public and school property; fine. [Amended 6-18-1983 ATM,
Art. 22]
Whoever shall consume any intoxicating beverage or has in possession an
open container thereof in any public building, or on any public property,
including parks, cemeteries, school houses and school grounds, and public
squares, or in any private way or parking area regulated under the
provisions of MGL c. 90, § 18, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.
§ 7-3. Exceptions.
The foregoing §§ 7-1 and 7-2 shall not apply to any activity duly licensed
by the Board of Selectmen under the applicable provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 7-4. Arrest of violators. [Added 10-11-1978 STM, Art. 4]
Any person who consumes intoxicating beverages, or has in possession an
open container thereof as prohibited by § 7-1 or 7-2 shall be subject to
arrest, without a warrant, by a Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, town police officer,
or state police officer.
§ 7-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 7-4
5:5
Chapter 11
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 401.
§ 11-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 18]
Definitions of "animals," "keeper," "owner," and "run at large" are defined in
MGL c. 140, § 136A.
§ 11-2. Running at large prohibited; exception for sporting events.
No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit such dog, whether licensed or
unlicensed, to run at large within the Town of Barre, except that a dog may,
for the purpose of sporting events such as hunting, field trials or training
purposes, be exempt from the restraining order during such period of time
as the dog is actually engaged in the event or sport.
§ 11-3. Leashing required; length of leash.
Dogs may be taken from the owner's premises, provided that such dogs are
on a leash or under the control of the owner or keeper. Said leash shall not
be more than 15 feet long.
§ 11-3.a. Removal of nuisances.
The owner or keeper of dogs shall immediately remove any defecation from
any street, public place and property of another.
§ 11-4. Impoundment of unrestrained dogs.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any dog
found unrestrained and running at large and to impound such dog or other
animal in a suitable place or to order the owner or keeper thereof to restrain
said dog or other animal.
§ 11-5. Notice to owner of impounded animal; reclamation fee.
If such dog or other animal so impounded has upon it the name and
address of the owner thereof, or if the name of said owner is otherwise
known, then the Animal Control Officer shall attempt to immediately
notify the owner, and if the owner is not known, then no notice shall be
necessary. [Amended 6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 18]
A.
The owner of any dog or other animal so impounded may reclaim such
dog or other animal upon the payment of the impoundment fee as set by
the Board of Selectmen and in accordance with Chapter 46, Article III
B.
§ 7-4 BARRE CODE § 11-5
5:6
§ 11-6. Disposition of funds. [Amended 6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 25;
6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 18]
The sums collected pursuant to the provisions of this bylaw shall be
accounted for and paid to the Town Treasurer with the exception of the
pickup and impoundment fees which are paid directly to the Town of
Rutland as outlined in the Regional Animal Control Agreement until the
termination of that agreement.
§ 11-7. Disposition of unclaimed animals. [Amended 6-18-2013
ATM, Art. 25]
Any dog or other animal which has been impounded and has not been
redeemed by the owner within seven days shall be disposed of as provided
by MGL c. 140, § 151A, and any amendments thereto.
§ 11-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 25]
Any owner or keeper found in violation of any of the provisions of the
bylaw shall be subject to the fines and fees as established by the Board of
Selectmen and in accordance with Chapter 46, Article III of the Barre Code.
Further, if the owner or keeper of a dog or other animal is a minor, the
parent or guardian of such minor shall be held liable for any violation of this
bylaw. Owners of dogs or other animals who receive five or more notices
of violation of this bylaw shall be subject to a hearing before the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 11-9. Enforcement. [Amended 6-12-2006 ATM, Art. 32]
The Animal Control Officer or officers duly appointed shall enforce the
provisions of this bylaw relating to dogs, cats or other animals and shall
attend to all complaints or other matters pertaining to dogs, cats or other
animals in the Town of Barre.
§ 11-10. Alternative enforcement procedure. [Amended 6-12-2006
ATM, Art. 32; 6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 25; 6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 18]
in the Town of Barre Code. Such payment shall include day in and day
out and any part thereof that the dog or other animal is held thereafter.
However, if the dog is not licensed or is not up to date on its rabies
vaccination, these violations must be brought into compliance before
the dog is released to any person. Any and all violations shall be paid by
the owner or keeper before the dog is returned. [Amended 6-18-2013
ATM, Art. 25]
Notwithstanding any provisions of the general laws to the contrary, any
Animal Control Officer who takes cognizance of a violation of:
(1) This bylaw;
A.
§ 11-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 11-10
5:7
§ 11-11. "Kennel" defined; kennel licenses.
§ 11-12. Wildlife control.
Failure to license dogs (pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 137, and
amendments thereof) failure to acquire a kennel license (pursuant
to MGL c. 140, § 137-A – 137D, and amendments thereof); or
(2)
Failure to vaccinate dogs, cats or other animals that are required
to be vaccinated against rabies (pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 145-B,
and amendments thereof);
May issue or mail a notice of complaint of violation of the abovementioned
procedure to the owner or keeper. If the owner or
keeper of such dog(s), cat(s) or other animal as defined by MGL c.
140, § 145B, is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor
shall be held liable for any violation of the bylaw.
(3)
Any owner or keeper of a dog(s), cat(s) or other animal as defined
by MGL c. 140, § 145B, found in violation of the above-mentioned
procedure shall be subject to fines as established by the Board of
Selectmen and in accordance with Chapter 46, Article III, of the Barre
Code. If the owner or keeper of a dog or dogs or cat or cats is a
minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be held liable for any
violation of the bylaw.
B.
The procedure set forth above shall also include the provisions of MGL
c. 140, § 173-A, as amended.
C.
The definition of "kennel" shall be as per MGL c. 140, § 136A, and
amendments thereof.
A.
All kennel locations and any change in kennel locations are subject to
approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and licensed by the Town
Clerk in accordance with the Clerk's requirements. All kennels shall be
in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 137A-D. [Amended 6-17-2014 ATM,
Art. 18]
B.
Whenever there is a call for a problem involving wildlife, the Animal
Control Officer will respond and make an evaluation of the situation and
make a determination as to whether or not there is, in his/her opinion,
a threat to health or public safety.
A.
If it appears there may be a threat to public health or to the safety of
a person or persons, at the time, then the Animal Control Officer shall
exercise his authority and attempt to resolve the problem.
B.
If there is no apparent, immediate health or safety problem, then it shall
be the responsibility of the homeowner, landlord, or other person in
control of the property to remove the problem animal or to seek out a
private individual(s) who works in this area, to assist them, at their own
personal expense.
C.
§ 11-10 BARRE CODE § 11-12
5:8
§ 11-13. Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMPANION ANIMAL OR PET — Any dog or cat, and also any other
domesticated animal normally maintained in or near the household of the
owner or person who cares for such other domesticated animal. "Pet" or
"companion animal" shall not include a "farm animal" as defined in this
section.
DANGEROUS DOG —
(1) Any dog which, unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe
injury upon or kills a human being.
(2) Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a
potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been
notified of this determination, continues the behavior that caused it to
be listed as a potentially dangerous dog, or is found to be in violation
of orders placed upon it in a previous hearing.
(3) Any dog that has been used for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog
trained for dogfighting.
FARM ANIMAL — Any poultry, ungulate, species of cattle, sheep, swine,
goats, llamas, equine, or other fur-bearing animal which are raised for
commercial or subsistence purposes.
OWNER — Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest
in, or having control or custody of a dog. If the animal is owned by a person
under the age of 18, that person's custodial parents or legal guardian shall
be responsible for complying with all requirements of this bylaw.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG —
(1) Any dog which, unprovoked, chases or approaches a person in a
menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public or private property.
(2) Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals.
(3) Any dog which, unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the
prior thirty-six-month period, engages in any behavior that requires
a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the
person and the dog are off of the property of the owner of the dog.
If the problem involves the capture and disposal of a wild animal, there
will be a charge to the homeowner, landlord, or person in control of the
property. This fee will be established by the Board of Selectmen and in
accordance with Chapter 46, Article III of the Barre Code. [Amended
6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 25]
D.
§ 11-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 11-13
5:9
(4) Any dog which, unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the
prior thirty-six-month period has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted
injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the
property of the owner of the dog.
(5) Any dog which, unprovoked, bites a person causing a less than severe
injury.
SEVERE INJURY — Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic
surgery.
Exemptions:
No dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage
was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or
keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog, or has in the past been observed or reported to have teased,
tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned by law
enforcement agencies or law enforcement officers in the performance
of police work.
Procedure for determining a "potentially dangerous or dangerous" dog.
Based upon receipt of a written complaint by a citizen requesting a
determination that a dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous, or on
the initiative of an Animal Control Officer based on information received
by such Officer, the Board of Selectmen may make an investigation
and determination that a dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous.
The investigation and determination shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and shall be consistent with the procedures
delineated in MGL c.140, § 157.
When a dog is determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous, the
Board of Selectmen may order any or all of the following:
(a) Spaying or neutering within 30 days.
(b) Microchip identification, tattooing or other means of permanent
identification.
(c) Behavior training.
(d) Any other order concerning the keeping, restraint, removal from
the Town, humane euthanasia, or disposal of such dog, as may be
deemed necessary, in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 157.
Such orders may include:
§ 11-13 BARRE CODE § 11-13
5:10
Requirements at home for dogs that have been determined to be
potentially dangerous or dangerous: While on the owner's or keeper's
property, a dog that has been determined to be potentially dangerous
or dangerous may be ordered securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure of a type meeting standards
established by the Animal Control Officer, suitable to prevent the entry
of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such
pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 12 feet
by six feet high, with a solid floor to prevent the dog from digging out
and a top to prevent the dog from climbing out. If the pen has no solid
floor secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground
no less than two feet to prevent digging out. The enclosure must provide
the dog with adequate shelter from the elements of nature. The owner
shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children who
cannot read of the presence of a dangerous dog.
Requirements outside of the home for dogs that have been determined
to be potentially dangerous or dangerous:
While off of the owner's or keeper's premises, a dog that has been
determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous must be
restrained by a lead approved by the Animal Control Officer not
exceeding six feet in length and must be under the direct control of
a responsible, able-bodied adult. No dog designated as a potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog shall be permitted at public festivals,
carnivals, parades or similar events. The dog may be required while
at large to wear a muzzle designed to prevent the dog from biting.
The muzzle must prevent injury to the dog and must not interfere
with the dog's vision or respiration.
The owner or keeper of a dog that has been determined to be
potentially dangerous or dangerous must immediately notify the
Animal Control Officer if the dog (a) is loose or unconfined; (b) bites
a person or attacks another animal; (c) is sold, given away or dies;
(d) has been moved to another address, and the location of the new
address.
Penalties.
If said animal is found on property not owned or controlled its owner or
keeper, or is found to be not restrained in a secure area, or is found to
be in violation of any order issued by the Board of Selectmen, said dog
may be subject to further restriction, including an order of removal from
the Town of Barre or humane euthanasia.
Each day there exists a violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense.
A dog that has been determined to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous shall not be considered legally licensed, pursuant to MGL
c.140 §§ 137; 147 unless the owner is in full compliance with this
ordinance.
§ 11-14. Fees and penalties.
§ 11-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 11-14
5:11
Chapter 15
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 128. Zoning — See Ch. 140.
§ 15-1. Unregistered motor vehicle bylaw.
§ 15-2. Enforcement.
All licensing fees and fines and penalties shall be established by the
Board of Selectmen and in accordance with Chapter 46, Article III of
the Barre Code. [Amended 6-9-2008 ATM, Art. 23; 6-18-2013 ATM,
Art. 25]
A.
All fees collected by the Town Clerk will be deposited into the Town
Treasury in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 147 and amendments
thereof.
B.
Anyone renewing a dog license after the deadline date of June 1 must
pay a late licensing penalty as indicated above in addition to the cost of
the dog license.
C.
It shall be unlawful for the keeping of more than 10 unregistered motor
vehicles stored outside on any single premise. Farm and industrial
vehicles are excluded, except by a person otherwise governed under
the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws. Two of the 10
unregistered motor vehicles may be visible from a public way, eight of
these vehicles may not be visible from a public way or within 10 feet
from a property line.
A.
Any person storing any motor vehicles(s) in violation of this bylaw or
being in control of premises on which one or more vehicle(s) is/are
stored in violation of this section, who fails to remove any such motor
vehicles within 30 days after having received a certified written notice
from the Building Commissioner to do so, shall be penalized by a fine
not to exceed $25 per day starting on the 31st day and for every day
thereafter.
A.
Any person wishing to register a complaint must do so in writing to the
Office of the Building Commissioner.
B.
§ 11-14 BARRE CODE § 15-2
5:12
Chapter 18
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 84.
§ 15-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 15-2
5:13

ARTICLE I
Finance Committee
[Adopted 3-6-1954 ATM, Art. 35]
§ 18-1. Establishment; eligibility. [Amended 3-13-1978 ATM, Art. 4;
2-6-2012 STM, Art. 13]
There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of seven legal voters of the
Town who shall be appointed by the Moderator as hereafter provided. No
elected or appointed Town officer or Town employee shall be eligible to
serve on such Committee, except that a member of the Finance Committee
may be a member of the Capital Planning Committee, Landfill Study
Committee, or any other advisory committee that does not have a budget
reviewed by the Finance Committee.
§ 18-2. Appointment of members; term of office; records. [Amended
3-13-1978 ATM, Art. 4]
The Moderator of the Town Meeting shall, at the conclusion of the Annual
Town Meeting at which this amendment is adopted or at the first Annual
Town Meeting following adoption of this bylaw, if at a Special Town Meeting,
and each third year thereafter appoint three members of said Committee
for terms of three years. In all other years he shall appoint two members
for terms of three years. If this amendment is adopted at a Special Town
Meeting, the then-serving Finance Committee shall appoint a seventh
member to serve from that time until the next Annual Town Meeting.
The term of office of said member shall commence immediately upon
qualification and shall expire at the close or final adjournment of the annual
Town meeting at which their successors are appointed. Said Committee
shall choose its own officers, shall serve without pay, and shall cause to be
kept a true record of its proceedings.
§ 18-3. Filling of vacancies. [Amended 6-11-2007 ATM, Art. 19]
Whenever any vacancy shall occur in said Committee by resignation,
removal from Town, death, failing to qualify or otherwise, said vacancy shall
be filled by the Moderator.
§ 18-4. Referral of warrant articles.
To this Committee shall be referred all articles in any warrant for a Town
Meeting hereafter issued. The Selectmen, after drawing any warrant for a
Town Meeting, shall transmit immediately a copy thereof to each member
of the Finance Committee, and said Committee shall consider all such
articles. A public hearing may be held upon all articles unless a public
hearing by some other tribunal is required by law, and a notice of such
hearing shall be given by posting a copy thereof in at least four public
places in the Town. After due consideration of the subject matter in such
articles, said Committee shall report thereon to the Town Meeting such
recommendations as it deems best for the interests of the Town.
§ 18-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 18-5
5:15
§ 18-5. Examination of statements of expenditures; explanations
and suggestions.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee annually to consider the
expenditures of previous years and the estimated requirements for the
ensuing year of the several boards, officers and committees of the Town
as prepared by them in such form and detail as may be prescribed by said
Committee. Said Committee shall add to said statement of expenditures and
estimates another column giving the amounts which, in its opinion, should
be appropriated for the ensuing year and shall further add thereto such
explanations and suggestions relating to the proposed appropriations as it
may deem expedient and report thereon as provided in § 18-4.
§ 18-6. Annual report.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to make an annual report of its
doings with the recommendations relative to financial matters to be printed
with the annual reports of the other Town officers.
§ 18-5 BARRE CODE § 18-6
5:16
ARTICLE II
Civilian Law Enforcement Review and Advisory Board
[Adopted 6-17-1991 STM, Art. 7]
§ 18-7. Purpose; establishment.
§ 18-8. Membership; terms; compensation.
The purpose of this bylaw is three-fold:
To provide a vehicle by which any person may have any complaints
or concerns regarding law enforcement in Barre promptly reviewed
by an impartial and fair investigating body.
(1)
To protect the Police Department from unwarranted and unjustified
accusations concerning law enforcement practices.
(2)
To minimize the possibility of law suits being brought against the
Town of Barre concerning law enforcement procedures.
(3)
A.
To accomplish these objectives there is established a Civilian Law
Enforcement Review and Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as
The Board).
B.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint three regular members and two
alternate members from the Town of Barre. Both regular and alternate
members are to serve staggered terms. Alternate members may sit on
the Board in case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on
the part of any regular member or in the event of an unfilled vacancy
on the Board. Both regular and alternate members shall serve in a
voluntary unpaid capacity.
A.
Prior to appointing any person to the Board, the Board of Selectmen
shall advertise in a local newspaper for individual candidates who are
residents of Barre who desire appointment to the Board. The Selectmen
shall make every effort to ensure that persons appointed are qualified
to serve on the Board.
B.
The terms of members of the Board shall be three years. Members of
the Board may be removed only for just cause by written charges after
a public hearing.
C.
Members of the Board may not hold any other office in the Town of
Barre for which he or she is paid by the Town of Barre. No member of
the Police Department or any former member of the Police Department
who have served on the Police Department for the five preceding years
may serve on the Board.
D.
The Board shall elect a Chairman annually. The Board shall meet at the
call of the Chairman but shall meet at least once every six months. The
Board may elect a member to serve as Clerk. Meetings of the Board
shall be opened to the public except when the Board meets in executive
E.
§ 18-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 18-8
5:17
§ 18-9. Duties and power of the Board.
§ 18-10. Complaints.
§ 18-11. Resolution of complaints.
If a complaint is not resolved as a result of an initial investigation and
preliminary consultation with the Chief of Police as appropriate, the full
session in private as regulated by Massachusetts General Laws. All
meetings of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the Open
Meeting Law of Massachusetts.1 [Amended 2-6-2012 STM, Art. 7]
The Board shall submit a proposed annual budget to cover anticipated
expenses.
F.
Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services
but shall receive reasonable expenses incurred as a result of their
duties as members of the Board.
G.
The Board shall receive, investigate, and resolve any complaint
concerning the operation of the Police Department.
A.
The Board with the assistance of Town Counsel shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the
production of records and evidence.
B.
C. The Board is empowered to hire clerical help when needed.
After a thorough review of each complaint received, the Board will
make a written report detailing its handling and resolution of the
problem as the facts and circumstances may require, and send the
report to both the Board of Selectmen and to the Chief of Police.
D.
A complaint by a member of the public or a complaint by a police
officer may be filed with the Board. Copies of the complaint shall be
made available immediately to each member of the Board, and at the
Chairman's discretion, a copy may be sent to the Board of Selectmen
and to the Chief of Police.
A.
When a copy is sent to the Chief of Police, he shall promptly investigate
the complaint and file a report of findings with the Board within 15
days. Complaints filed with the Board shall be promptly investigated. If
the evidence does not exist to warrant a full investigation by the Board,
it may be summarily dismissed. The Board shall maintain a docket of
complaints and the disposition of each complaint, and this shall become
a part of the permanent record. The Board shall submit a report to be
included in the annual Town report. The Board shall issue a written
response to all complaints, and it shall deliver a copy of its response
and/or findings to all parties.
B.
1. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 18-8 BARRE CODE § 18-11
5:18
Board may convene to review and investigate the matter. The Board shall
within 30 days recommend to the Chief of Police and/or to the Board
of Selectmen any discipline that it deems appropriate to impose. The
recommendations of the Board are advisory. Any report of findings involving
a civilian complaint shall be made a matter of public record. In the event
the complaint is against the Police Department or any employee of the
Police Department, the person(s) shall be presumed innocent and shall not
forfeit any pay or seniority rights pending final action by the Board. All
pleadings filed and all hearings before the Board shall be public. Each party
has a right to counsel. The complainant's case may be presented by the
complainant or by the complainant's counsel. Any probative evidence may
be admitted.
§ 18-12. Special meetings; notice.
Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by any two members
of the Board upon personal notice being given to all members of the Board
or written notice being mailed to each member and received at least 48
hours prior to such meeting unless notice is waived by said members. In the
absence of an emergency any special meeting shall be posted in the office
of the Town Clerk at least 48 hours in advance of such meeting.
§ 18-13. Hearing by petition.
On the written petition by 10 or more residents of the Town of Barre filed
with the Board, the Board shall hold a special hearing for the purpose
of responding to said petition. Copies of the petition shall be delivered
to the Board of Selectmen. Notice of said hearing shall be given in the
same manner as provided for other hearings of the Board. The Board shall
conduct said hearing upon the subject matter within 30 days of the filing of
said petition with the Board.
§ 18-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 18-13
5:19

ARTICLE III
Postings, Record of Meetings
[Adopted 6-9-2003 ATM, Art. 32; amended in its entirety 6-20-2011
ATM, Art. 13]
§ 18-14. Conduct of meetings; minutes.
Every board, commission, committee or subcommittee established in the
Town of Barre shall conduct all meetings in accordance with the Open
Meeting Law of Massachusetts. Furthermore, the clerk of every board,
commission, committee or subcommittee shall file with the Town Clerk a
written copy of minutes from every posted meeting. Such minutes shall
be read at the beginning of or prior to each meeting and approved by
a majority of the board, commission, committee or subcommittee. Final
minutes shall be signed by the clerk of said board, commission, committee
or subcommittee, reflect the acceptance of the previous meeting minutes
and be filed with the Town Clerk within 10 days of acceptance. In addition,
these minutes shall be filed electronically, using a means determined by the
Town Clerk.
§ 18-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 18-14
5:21

ARTICLE IV
Agricultural Commission
[Adopted 6-12-2006 ATM, Art. 28]
§ 18-15. Intent.
To create an Agricultural Commission to address and represent agricultural
and forestry issues and interests in the Town of Barre.
§ 18-16. Mission.
The mission of the Commission shall be to:
§ 18-17. Duties and responsibilities of the Commission.
The duties and responsibilities of the Commission shall include, but not be
limited to:
§ 18-18. Membership.
The Commission shall consist of three members appointed by the Select
Board. At least two members shall be actively engaged in farming or
forestry related activities, with one of those members actively engaged in
the business of agriculture or forestry as his or her principal occupation.
The members shall serve staggered three-year terms each, with two of
Represent the Town's farming and forestry community internally and
externally;
A.
Encourage, promote and support the pursuit of farming and forestry in
the Town both as a business and as a community resource; and
B.
Promote the protection, preservation and economic use of farmland and
forestland within the Town.
C.
Serving as representatives, advocates, educators, facilitators and/or
mediators on farming and forestry issues both within the Town and
externally;
A.
Advising the Select Board, Conservation Commission, Board of
Assessors, Board of Health, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals
and other Town bodies on all matters pertaining to farming or forestry
activities in Town;
B.
Engaging in projects and activities, including educational programs and
community events, to promote the business, activities and traditions of
farming and forestry, as well as farm and forest land protection in Town;
C.
Developing warrant articles, policies and procedures advocating and
promoting agriculture and forestry; and
D.
E. Reporting to the Annual Town Report on its projects and activities.
§ 18-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 18-18
5:23
the initial members serving two-year terms and one of the initial members
serving a one-year term. Up to two voting alternates may be appointed by
the Select Board, each with a one-year term. Any vacancies shall be filled
by appointment by the Select Board, based on the recommendations of the
Commission, for the unexpired term of the vacancy in order to maintain a
staggered cycle of appointments.
§ 18-18 BARRE CODE § 18-18
5:24
Chapter 21
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Review of subdivision plans — See Ch. 303.
§ 21-1. Chapter II of State Sanitary Code.
The Town of Barre adopts Chapter II of the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR
400.00 - 419.00, Minimum Standards of Fitness for Human Habitation, as a
general bylaw.
§ 21-2. Electrical Code.
The Town of Barre adopts as a general bylaw the 1996 Massachusetts
Electrical Code as adopted by 527 CMR 12.00 with changes and
amendments as adopted from time to time.
§ 21-3. Stretch Energy Code. [Added 6-20-2011 ATM, Art. 16]
Definitions.
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) 2009 —
The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building code
created by the International Code Council. It is a model code created
by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by
many state and municipal governments in the United States for the
establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for
energy efficiency. Commencing on July 1, 2010, the baseline energy
conservation requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code
will default to IECC 2009 and Massachusetts amendments.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building
Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, the Stretch
Energy Code is the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
2009 with amendments contained herein.
A.
Purpose. The purpose of 780 CMR 120 AA is to provide a more energy
efficient alternative to the base energy code applicable to the relevant
sections of the building code for both new construction and existing
buildings.
B.
Applicability. The Stretch Energy Code applies to residential and
commercial buildings. Buildings not included in the scope of this code
shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as applicable.
C.
§ 18-18 ALARM SYSTEMS § 21-3
5:25
Chapter 25
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of bylaw
violations — See Ch. 67.
§ 25-1. Number to be provided for each building.
Street numbers shall be provided for each dwelling, industry and other
buildings in the Town of Barre.
§ 25-2. Materials and size of numbers.
The numbers shall be made of permanent, weatherproof materials, shall be
at least three inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the street or
roadway upon which the structure fronts.
§ 25-3. Placement.
The numbers shall be placed on each structure or a suitable support near
the main entrance to the structure so as to be visible.
§ 25-4. Assignment of numbers and filing by Street Listing
Committee.
The numbers shall be assigned to each structure by the Street Listing
Committee and be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 25-5. Responsibility of property owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner in the town to obtain and
display the appropriate street number within 90 days of the assignment of
numbers as provided in § 25-4.
§ 25-6. Enforcement authority.
This bylaw shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer through the
Department of Inspectional Services, Division of Code Enforcement.
Stretch Code. The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building
Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, including
any amendments or modifications thereto, is herein incorporated by
reference into this chapter.
D.
Enforcement. The Stretch Code shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector/Commissioner.
E.
§ 21-3 BARRE CODE § 25-7
5:26
§ 25-7. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with this bylaw shall subject the property owner to fine of
$25. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 33
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Surface water drainage control — See Ch.
112, Art. I.
Water — See Ch. 134.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw shall be:
§ 33-2. Responsibility of Water Purveyor; rules and regulations.
§ 33-3. Installation of backflow prevention device by owner;
discontinuance of water service for failure to comply.
The Water Commission shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result
of a survey of the premises, the Commission determines that an approved
backflow prevention device is required at the town's water service
connection or as in-plant protection on any customer's premises, the
To protect the public potable water supply served by the Barre Water
Commission from the possibility of contamination of pollution by
isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or
backsiphon into the public water system.
A.
To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between its customers in-plant potable water
system and nonpotable systems.
B.
To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
C.
As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public
Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking Water
Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the Water Purveyor has the primary
responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any
other substances from entering the public potable water system.
A.
B. Barre Water Commission Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted.
§ 25-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 33-3
5:27
Commission, or its delegated agent, shall issue a cross-connection violation
form to said customer to install approved backflow prevention devices.
The customer shall, within a time frame determined by the Commission,
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure
or refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device
or devices within the specified time frame shall constitute a ground for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been properly installed.
§ 33-4. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The method of preventing backflow through
the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
APPROVED — Accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable for the proposed
use.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE or DEVICES — A method to
prevent backflow approved by the Department for use in Massachusetts.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow device used
to prevent backsiphonage which is not designed for use under static line
pressure.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply of unknown or
questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the
supplier's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other
than the intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT —
A device having two independently operating check valves separated by
an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it to the
atmosphere, in which the check valves are force loaded to a normally closed
position and venting means is force loaded to a normally open position.
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other means
which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a
direction opposite to that which is intended.
BACKSIPHONAGE — A form of backflow due to reduced or subatmospheric
pressure within a water system.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising at least 35 feet, at its topmost
point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
COMMISSION — The Town of Barre Water Commission or the owner or
operator of a public water supply system.
§ 33-3 BARRE CODE § 33-4
5:28
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between a
distribution pipe of potable water from a public water system and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or other unapproved source.
CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATION FORM — A violation form designated by
the Department, Plumbing Inspectors and the Board of Health delineating
cross-connection violations found on the owner's premises and a procedure
for corrective action.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — A backflow preventing device which
incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shutoff valves at each end
and appurtenances for testing.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION — The location of approved backflow prevention
devices in a manner which provides simultaneous protection of the public
water system and the potable water system within the premises.
OWNER — Any person maintaining a cross-connection installation or
owning or occupying premises on which cross-connections can or do exist.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department which allows a crossconnection
installation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, trust,
partnership, the commonwealth, a municipality, district, or other
subdivision or instrumentality of the United States except that nothing
herein shall be construed to refer to or to include any American Indian tribe
or the United States Secretary of the Interior in his capacity as trustee of
Indian lands.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention device
designed to prevent only backsiphonage and which is designed for use
under static line pressure and which has necessary appurtenances for
testing.
REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An approved backflow
prevention device incorporating two more check valves, an automatically
operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff
valves, and necessary appurtenances for testing.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shutoff valves
and test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water
meter to act as a containment device.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY — The Department, its designer, or the local
Plumbing Inspector, authorized by MGL c. 142 and licensed by the Board
of State Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters, whichever is responsible
for the review and approval of the installation of an approved backflow
prevention device.
§ 33-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 33-5
5:29
§ 33-5. Compliance with program and regulations.
§ 33-6. Responsibilities of Commission and owners.
The Commission will operate an active cross-connection control
program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the
requirements of the State DEP's Cross-Connection Regulations and is
approved by the Department.
A.
The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible crossconnections
and shall follow the provisions of the Commission's
program and the Department regulations.
B.
Commission.
On new installations the Commission will provide on-site evaluation
and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of
backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, and notify the
owner of plan approval requirements by the appropriate reviewing
authority.
(1)
For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the
Commission will perform surveys of the premises and reviews of asbuilt
plans and issue a cross-connection violation form to the owner
detailing any corrective action required, the method of achieving
the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
The time period allowed shall depend upon the degree of hazard
involved.
(2)
The Commission will not allow any cross-connection to remain
unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which
a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to
ensure satisfactory operation.
(3)
If the Commission determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
(4)
The Commission shall have on its staff, or shall have a delegated
representative, who is a backflow prevention device tester certified
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(5)
The Commission will begin initial premises inspections to
determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following
the approval of this program by the Department, during calendar
year 1996. Initial focus will be on high-hazard industries and
commercial premises.
(6)
A.
Owner.
The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
(1)
B.
§ 33-5 BARRE CODE § 33-6
5:30
§ 33-7. Containment devices for unprotected cross-connections.
The Commission recognizes the threat to the public water system arising
from cross-connections. As such, the Commission, whereas it is responsible
for the quality of the public water supply, may require a containment
device on the water service entrance to any customer who, as a result of
unprotected cross-connections, could contaminate the public water supply
system.
§ 33-8. Increase in degree of hazard.
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Commission to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the
effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or results in a unreasonable
risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in
the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment,
any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced-pressure
The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining all
necessary approvals and permits for the maintenance of crossconnections
and installation of backflow prevention devices, and
applying annually for the renewal of each permit.
(2)
The owner shall have any device that fails an inspection or test
repaired by a licensed plumber.
(3)
The owner shall inform the Commission of any proposed or
modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connections
of which the owner is aware but has not been found by the
Commission.
(4)
The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the
device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing
to take place.
(5)
The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the Department and by the Commission.
(6)
The owner shall install only reduced-pressure backflow preventers
and double check valve assemblies approved by the Department.
(7)
The owner of any residential premises having a private well or
other private water source will not be allowed a physical
connection with the public water supply system.
(8)
The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, device testings, retesting in the case that the device fails
to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance
with Commission or Department requirements.
(9)
§ 33-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 33-8
5:31
backflow preventer, or a reduced-pressure backflow preventer must be
installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
§ 33-9. Periodic testing.
§ 33-10. Records and reports.
Reduced-pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by the
Commission.
A.
Periodic testing shall be performed by the Commission's certified tester
or his delegated representative, who shall be a certified tester.
B.
The testing shall be conducted during the Commission's regular
business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner,
may require additional charges to cover the increased costs to the
Commission.
C.
Reduced-pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies must be tested annually by the owner independent of the
semiannual test by the water supplier, and said test must be conducted
by a certified tester.
D.
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must be
repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are
necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be retested at
the owner's expense to ensure proper operation. High-hazard situations
will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer
fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations,
a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be
established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools or a
replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective
means of the owner ensuring that uninterrupted water service remains
during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when
the owner desires such continuity.
E.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection A in cases where there is a history of
test failures and the Commission feels that, due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests
will be born by the owner.
F.
Records. The Commission will initiate and maintain the following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3)
A.
B. Reports. The Commission will submit the following to the DEP:
§ 33-8 BARRE CODE § 33-10
5:32
Chapter 42
ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
§ 42-1. Evaluation prior to acquisition of property.
Prior to acquisition of any parcel of real estate for any purpose, whether
by purchase or gift, the Board of Selectmen may, in its discretion, require
that a so-called Chapter 21E and/or other environmental evaluation be
performed.
§ 42-2. Determination to be in writing; filing.
The determination of the Board of Selectmen shall be made in writing prior
to any Town Meeting vote to purchase or accept a gift of any such real
estate and will be filed with the Town Clerk and included in any such vote.
Chapter 44
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Commission — See Ch. 18, Art.
IV.
(1) Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connections.
(2) Initial listing of low-hazard cross-connections.
(3) Annual update lists of Items (1) and (2) above.
Annual summary of cross-connection inspections and surveys.
Addendum
(4)
§ 33-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 42-2
5:33

ARTICLE I
Right To Farm
[Adopted 10-22-2008 STM, Art. 7]
§ 44-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw/ordinance is to state with emphasis
the right to farm accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under
Article 97, of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations there
under including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9; Chapter 111; Section
125A and Chapter 128, Section 1A. We the citizens of Barre restate and
republish these rights pursuant to the Town's authority conferred by Article
89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, ("Home
Rule Amendment"). This general bylaw/ordinance encourages the pursuit
of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic opportunities, and
protects farmlands within the Town/City of Barre by allowing agricultural
uses and related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters
and local agencies. This bylaw/ordinance shall apply to all jurisdictional
areas within the Town of Barre.
§ 44-2. Definitions.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land,
or water bodies used for the primary purpose of agriculture, or accessory
thereto. The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
§ 44-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 44-2
5:35
• Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
dairying; production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural
commodities; growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest
land, and any other forestry or lumbering operations; raising of
livestock including horses; keeping of horses; and keeping and raising
of poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and
rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other
domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes,
including bees and fur-bearing animals. "Farming" shall encompass
activities including, but not limited to, the following:
• Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town; control of pests, including, but not limited
to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organisms of plants and
animals; application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides; conducting
agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities,
including agri-tourism, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm; processing,
slaughtering and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and
the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand including signage
thereto; maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management, or
sale of the agricultural products; and on-farm relocation of earth and
the clearing of ground for farming operations.
§ 44-3. Right to farm Declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town/City of
Barre. The above described agricultural activities may occur on holidays,
weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant
incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may
be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more
than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community, and
society in general. The benefits and protections of this bylaw/ordinance are
intended to apply exclusively to those agricultural and farming operations
and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural
practices. Moreover, nothing in this right to farm bylaw/ordinance shall
be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use
regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local
zoning law.
§ 44-4. Disclosure notification.
Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale contract is entered into,
or prior to the sale or exchange of real property if no purchase and sale
agreement exists, for the purchase or exchange of real property, or prior
to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other possessor interest in real
§ 44-2 BARRE CODE § 44-4
5:36
property, located in the Town of Barre, the landowner shall present the
buyer or occupant with a disclosure notification which states the following:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the
maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of
food, and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological
value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the
property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a community where
farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not
limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants
are also informed that the location of property within the Town may be
impacted by agricultural operations including the ability to access water
services for such property under certain circumstances."
A copy of the disclosure notification shall be given on a form prepared
by the Town Collector and shall be signed by the landowner prior to the
sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real property. A copy of
the disclosure notification must be filed with the Board of Selectmen or its
designee prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real
property. In addition to the above, a copy of this disclosure notification shall
be provided by the Town to landowners each fiscal year by report to the
Annual Report or Town website.
The Town of Barre shall cause signage to be posted and maintained on
major thoroughfares informing entering motorists that the Town of Barre is
a right to farm community, pending available funds.
§ 44-5. Resolution of disputes.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance with
the Select Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board of Health,
depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of the grievance
does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other available
remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
or Select Board may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the referring Town
authority within an agreed upon time frame. The Board of Health, except
in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, may forward a copy
of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendations to the Board of Health within an agreed upon time frame.
§ 44-6. Severability clause.
If any part of this bylaw/ordinance is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of
this bylaw/ordinance. The Town of Barre hereby declares the provisions of
this bylaw/ordinance to be severable.
§ 44-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 44-7
5:37
§ 44-7. Precedence.
In the event of conflict between this bylaw and all other Town regulations,
this bylaw shall take precedence. In the event of conflict between this
bylaw and federal or state law, federal or state law shall take precedence
respectively.
§ 44-7 BARRE CODE § 44-7
5:38
Chapter 46
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 44-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 44-7
5:39

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)2
§ 46-1. (Reserved)
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Tax Collector Fees, adopted 8-17-1981 STM, Art. 5, was
repealed 1-31-2011 STM, Art. 14, effective the earlier of 7-1-2011 or the date a Treasurer-
Collector is appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 46-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-1
5:41

ARTICLE II
Reporting and Accounting of Collected Fees
[Adopted 6-18-1983 ATM, Art. 31]
§ 46-2. Accounting to Town Accountant.
All fees collected by Town representatives on behalf of the Town of Barre
shall be systematically accounted for to the Town Accountant with
cooperation from these Town representatives.
§ 46-3. Deadline for submission of reports.
A report of all fees collected will be submitted to the Selectmen, Personnel
Board, and the Finance Committee by the 10th of each month for the
preceding month.
§ 46-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-3
5:43

ARTICLE III
Public Notice of Rates and Fees
[Adopted 5-14-1990 ATM, Art. 29]
§ 46-4. Notification of Townspeople.
The Townspeople shall be provided notice of any proposed rate or fee (or
increase therein).
§ 46-5. Public hearing required; notice.
Prior to any Town board, commission, committee, official or other Town
body establishing a rate or fee (or increase therein) to be imposed upon
residents or taxpayers of the Town, a public hearing shall be held. Notice of
the public hearing to be published at least one time not less than seven days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town.
§ 46-6. Construal of provisions.
This bylaw shall not interfere with the authority of such board, commission,
committee, official or Town body to establish or increase any such rate or
fee.
§ 46-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to ensure that notice be provided to the
residents and taxpayers prior to the establishment or increase of any such
rate or fee and an opportunity be provided for public input.
§ 46-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-7
5:45
Chapter 59
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 59-1. List of parties failing to pay taxes and fees.
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector, shall annually furnish to each
department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the
licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and
transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise,
hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay
any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges
for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 59-2. Denial, revocation or suspension of licenses and permits.
§ 59-3. Payment agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax
Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party
and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and
the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than 14 days after
said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation
or suspension of said license or permit to any party.
A.
The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or
suspension.
B.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such
license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced
in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license
denial, revocation or suspension.
C.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section
shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a
certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing
with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of
issuance of said certificate.
D.
§ 46-7 BARRE CODE § 59-3
5:46
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 59-4. Waiver of denial by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
§ 59-5. Exceptions.
This bylaw shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
§ 59-6. Criminal history checks. [Added 6-25-2012 ATM, Art. 17]
A. Open burning, MGL c. 48, § 13.
B. Bicycle permits, MGL c. 85, § 11A.
C. Sales of articles for charitable purposes, MGL c. 101, § 33.
D. Children work permits, MGL c. 149, § 69.
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, MGL c.140,
§ 21E.
E.
F. Dog licenses, MGL c. 140, § 137.
G. Fishing, hunting, trapping license, MGL c. 131, § 12.
H. Marriage licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28.
I. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits, MGL c. 140, § 181.
Criminal history check authorization.
The Police Department shall, as authorized by MGL c. 6, § 172B
1/2, conduct state and federal fingerprint-based criminal history
checks for individuals applying for the following licenses:
Hawking and peddling or other door-to-door salespeople
(police).
(a)
(b) Manager of alcoholic beverage license (Selectman).
(c) Owner or operator of public conveyance (Selectman).
(d) Dealer of secondhand articles (Selectman).
(e) Pawn dealers (Selectman, Police).
(1)
A.
§ 59-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-6
5:47
(f) Ice cream truck vendors (Selectman).
Fingerprinting.
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify
the individual fingerprinted that the fingerprints will be used
to check the individual's criminal history records. The Police
Chief shall periodically check with the Executive Office of
Public Safety and Security ("EOPSS") which has issued an
informational bulletin which explains the requirements for
Town bylaws and the procedures for obtaining criminal history
information, to see if there have been any updates to be sure
the Town remains in compliance.
(a)
Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fee, the
Police Department shall transmit the fingerprints it has
obtained pursuant to this bylaw to the Identification Section
of the Massachusetts State Police, the Massachusetts
Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS),
and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or the
successors of such agencies as may be necessary for the
purpose of conducting fingerprint-based state and national
criminal records background checks of license applicants
specified in this bylaw. The Town authorizes the Massachusetts
State Police, the Massachusetts Department of Criminal
Justice Information Systems (DCJIS), and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI), and their successors, as may be
applicable, to conduct fingerprint-based state and national
criminal record background checks, including of FBI records,
consistent with this bylaw. The Town authorizes the Police
Department to receive and utilize state and FBI records in
connection with such background checks, consistent with this
bylaw. The state and FBI criminal history will not be
disseminated to unauthorized entities.
(b)
Upon receipt of a report from the FBI or other appropriate
criminal justice agency, a record subject may request and
receive a copy of his/her criminal history record from the
Police Department. Should the record subject seek to amend or
correct his/her record, he/she must take appropriate action to
correct said record, which action currently includes contacting
the Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information
Services (DCJIS) for a state record or the FBI for records
from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. An applicant that
wants to challenge the accuracy or completeness of the record
shall be advised that the procedures to change, correct, or
update the record are set forth in 28 CFR 16.34. The Police
Department shall not utilize and/or transmit the results of the
fingerprint-based criminal record background check to any
licensing authority pursuant to this bylaw until it has taken
the steps detailed in this subsection. Municipal officials should
(c)
(2)
§ 59-6 BARRE CODE § 59-6
5:48
not deny an applicant the license based on information in the
record until the applicant has been afforded a reasonable time
to correct or complete the information, or has declined to do
so.
The Police Department shall communicate the results of
fingerprint-based criminal record background checks to the
appropriate governmental licensing authority within the Town
as listed. The Police Department shall indicate whether the
applicant has been convicted of, or is awaiting final
adjudication for, a crime that bears upon his or her suitability,
or any felony or misdemeanor that involved force or threat of
force, controlled substances or a sex-related offense.
(d)
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to promulgate
regulations for the implementation of the proposed bylaw, but
in doing so it is recommended that they consult with the Chief
of Police, Town Counsel and the Massachusetts Executive
Office of Public Safety and Security (or its successor agency)
to ensure that such regulations are consistent with the statute,
the FBI's requirements for access to the national database, and
other applicable state laws.
(e)
Use of criminal record by licensing authorities.
Licensing authorities of the Town shall utilize the results of
fingerprint-based criminal record background checks for the sole
purpose of determining the suitability of the subjects of the checks
in connection with the license applications specified in this bylaw.
A Town licensing authority may deny an application for a license
on the basis of the results of a fingerprint-based criminal record
background check if it determines that the results of the check
render the subject unsuitable for the proposed occupational
activity. The licensing authority shall consider all applicable laws,
regulations and Town policies bearing on an applicant's suitability
in making this determination.
(1)
The Town or any of its officers, departments, boards, committees
or other licensing authorities is hereby authorized to deny any
application for, including renewals and transfers thereof, for any
person who is determined unfit for the license, as determined by
the licensing authority, due to information obtained pursuant to
this bylaw.
(2)
B.
Fees.
The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of
conducting fingerprint-based criminal record background checks
shall be $0.
(1)
C.
§ 59-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-6
5:49
Chapter 63
MARIJUANA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 7.
Noncriminal disposition of violations — See
Ch. 67.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 80.
§ 63-1. Public use or consumption prohibited.
No person, whether in or upon a vehicle, motor vehicle, conveyance, or on
foot, shall burn, smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended) while in
or upon any area owned by or under the control of the Town, including, but
not limited to, any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs,
bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public
building, school, school grounds, cemetery, or parking lot; or in or upon any
place to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees.
§ 63-2. Seizure and disposal.
Any marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol burned, smoked, ingested, or
otherwise used or consumed in violation of this chapter shall be seized,
held, and disposed of in accordance with MGL c. 94C, § 47A.
§ 63-3. Information to be disclosed to enforcement officials.
Whoever is found in violation of this chapter shall, when requested by an
official authorized to enforce this chapter, state his true name and address
to said official.
The Town Treasurer shall periodically consult with Town Counsel
and the Department of Revenue, Division of Local Services
regarding the proper municipal accounting of those fees.
(2)
A portion of the fee, as specified in MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2, shall be
deposited into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust
Fund, and the remainder of the fee may be retained by the Town
for costs associated with the administration of the fingerprinting
system.
(3)
Effective date. This bylaw shall take effect September 1, 2012, so long
as the requirements of MGL c. 40, § 32 are satisfied.
D.
§ 59-6 BARRE CODE § 63-4
5:50
§ 63-4. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, enforcement by criminal indictment
or complaint pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21, or by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer.
§ 63-5. Violations and penalties.
The fine for a violation of this chapter shall be $300 for each offense. A
penalty imposed under this chapter shall be in addition to any civil penalty
imposed under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
Chapter 67
NONCRIMINAL DISPOSITION OF BYLAW VIOLATIONS
§ 67-1. Statutory authority.
The Town hereby adopts the following bylaw providing for the noncriminal
disposition of violations of any Town bylaw, or zoning bylaw, as authorized
by MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 67-2. Scope and authority.
This bylaw provides for a noncriminal disposition of a violation of a Town
bylaw, zoning bylaw, or any rule or regulation of any Town officer, board,
or department, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty. This
bylaw is enacted in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 67-3. Enforcing person. [Amended 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 44]
" Enforcing person" as used in this bylaw shall mean any regular police
officer of the Town of Barre, the Building Commissioner, Zoning Officer,
Local Inspector, Board of Health Officer, Board of Health Agent, Animal
Control Officer, Dog Officer, or any such other official as the Board of
Selectmen may from time to time designate, each with respect to violations
of bylaws, zoning bylaws, or rules and regulations within their respective
jurisdictions. If more than one Town department or official has jurisdiction
over a given matter any such Town department or official may be an
enforcing person with respect thereto. Each Town department or official
who is or may be an enforcing person is hereby given the authority to
adopt rules and regulations for the enforcement of this bylaw within the
respective areas of their jurisdiction.
§ 67-4. Notice to appear in court.
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of any bylaw, rule or
regulation may, as an alternative to instituting criminal proceedings, give
the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the Worcester
§ 63-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-4
5:51
Central District Court or such other court that may have jurisdiction for
complaints issued within the Town of Barre for a noncriminal disposition of
the violation, in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21-D. The provisions of § 21-D
are incorporated by reference herein.
§ 67-5. Proceedings not considered criminal.
Proceedings pursuant to this bylaw and § 21-D shall not be deemed to be
criminal proceedings.
§ 67-6. Noncriminal disposition of certain violations. [Amended
3-13-1995 STM, Art. 3; 6-10-1996 ATM, Arts. 49 and 59; 6-8-1998
ATM, Art. 42; 6-12-2000 ATM, Arts. 48 and 49; 6-17-2002 ATM, Art.
31; 6-9-2003 ATM, Art. 37; 6-14-2004 ATM, Arts. 35 and 44;
6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 18; 6-17-2014 ATM, Art. 19]
Violation of the following bylaw sections may be enforced in the manner
provided in MGL C. 40, § 21D. For the purpose of this bylaw, the specific
penalty which is to apply to a violation of each such bylaw section shall be as
listed below, and the municipal officers or employees whose titles are listed
shall be deemed to be enforcing officers for each such section.
Chapter Subject Fine Enforcement
Ch. 11,
Animals
Animal Control
Bylaw
1st offense: $0 Animal Control
Officer
2nd offense: $50
3rd offense: $60
4th offense or
more: $100
Ch. 21,
Building
Construction
Building,
plumbing,
electrical and gas
$100 per violation
per day
Building
Commissioner,
Inspector of
Buildings, Local
Inspector,
Inspector of Wires,
Inspector of
Plumbing and Gas
Ch. 25,
Buildings,
Numbering of
Building
numbering
$50 per offense Building
Commissioner,
Local Inspector,
and Zoning Official
Ch. 81 Littering 1st offense: $50
Subsequent
offenses: $100
Police, DPW, Board
of Health
Ch. 134, Water Restrictions on
water use
1st offense: $50
Each subsequent
offense: $100
Board of Water
Commissioners
§ 67-4 BARRE CODE § 67-6
5:52
Chapter Subject Fine Enforcement
Ch. 140,
Zoning
Zoning Bylaw $100 for each
violation for each
day
Building
Commissioner,
Local Inspector,
and Zoning Official
Ch. 201, Earth
Removal
Earth removal
regulations
$300 per day for
each day violation
continues
Building
Commissioner,
Local Inspector,
and Zoning Official
Ch. 304, Floor
Drains
Floor drain
regulations
1st offense: $200 Board of Health
Ch. 306,
Smoking
Public places 1st offense:
warning
Board of Health or
designee
2nd offense within
1 year: $100
3rd offense within
1 year: $200
4th or subsequent
offense within 1
year: $300
School property $25 Board of Health or
designee
Ch. 307,
Tobacco
Sale of tobacco 1st offense: $100
or suspension of
permit for 1 day
2nd offense within
2-year period:
$300 or
suspension of
permit for 30 days
Subsequent
offenses: $300 or
revocation of
tobacco permit
Minors possessing
or using tobacco
$25 or community
service
Not in Code Minimum
standards for
fitness for human
habitation
1st offense: $25 Health Officer or
Health Agent
2nd offense: $50
3rd offense: $100
§ 67-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-6
5:53
Chapter Subject Fine Enforcement
Subsequent
violation: $100
each day
Chapter 73
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Plumbing and Gas Code — See Ch.
21.
Noncriminal disposition of violations — See
Ch. 67.
§ 67-6 BARRE CODE § 67-6
5:54
ARTICLE I
Town Counsel
[Adopted 3-6-1954 ATM, Art. 34]
§ 73-1. Appointment.
The Selectmen shall annually at some time following the annual election of
Town officials appoint a member of the bar in good standing to serve as
Town Counsel for the term of one year from the first day of April following
and until a successor is appointed and enters upon the performance of his
duties.
§ 73-2. Vacancy in office; special counsel.
The Selectmen shall likewise fill any vacancy in said office for the unexpired
term, and may employ special counsel to assist the said Town Counsel in the
prosecution and defense of any and all claims, actions and proceedings to
which the Town is a party or in which the interests of the Town are or may
be involved whenever, in their judgment, necessity therefor arises.
§ 73-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-2
5:55

ARTICLE II
Inspector of Gas Piping and Appliances; Inspector of Plumbing
[Adopted 9-14-1964 STM, Art. 5]
§ 73-3. Hiring and duties of Inspector of Gas Piping and Appliances.
[Amended 6-17-2002 ATM, Art. 31; 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 45]
The Building Commissioner shall hire and the Selectmen shall approve an
Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances, who shall be either a licensed
Master or Journeyman Gasfitter or Master or Journeyman Plumber, whose
duty shall be the enforcement of rules and revaluation of CMR 248, the
Massachusetts State Gas Code.
§ 73-4. Hiring and duties of Inspector of Plumbing. [Added
6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 45]
The Building Commissioner shall hire and the Selectmen shall approve an
Inspector of Plumbing, who shall be either a licensed Master or Journeyman
Plumber, whose duty shall be the enforcement of rules and regulations of
CMR 248, the Massachusetts State Plumbing Code.
§ 73-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 73-4
5:57
Chapter 80
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Chs. 11 and 401.
§ 80-1. Animal regulations.
No person shall permit any goat, sheep, swine, horse, cow, or any other neat
cattle or fowl of any kind or description belonging to him or her, or under
his or her control, to go at large in any of the streets, lanes or avenues in
this town; but this bylaw shall not affect the right to use the lands within
the limits of the highway adjoining his or her deeded property.
§ 80-2. Disorderly conduct; writing obscenities in public places;
destruction of property; committing nuisances.
No person shall behave in a rude or disorderly manner, or use any indecent,
profane or insulting language in any of the public streets, or other public
places in the town, or near any dwelling house therein, or be or remain
on any sidewalk or near any doorstep, portico or other projection from
any such buildings to the annoyance of other persons. And no person shall
make any indecent figure nor write any indecent or obscene word or words
upon any building, structure or public place in this town, nor deface, break
or injure in any manner any fence, post, sign, street lantern or lamppost,
building, or structure, or commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk or any
other place resorted to by the public, or against any tree, shrub or structure
adjoining a sidewalk.
§ 80-3. Obstruction of free passage prohibited.
Three or more persons shall not continue to stand or lounge near to each
other on any sidewalk, street or street crossing, or in any public place in
this town, in such manner as to obstruct a free passageway for passengers,
or to discommode them in passing by, nor shall they conduct themselves in
a rude or disorderly manner.
§ 80-4. Ball playing; throwing stones.
No person shall play at ball or fly any kite or balloon or throw stones or
other missiles in or upon any public street in the center village of the town.
§ 80-5. Sledding.
No person shall coast, course or slide on any sled or sleigh in any of the
public streets without permission of the Selectmen, and in granting such
permission they shall designate such streets or parts of a street, and such
§ 73-4 BARRE CODE § 80-5
5:58
hours of the day or evening in which such sliding or coasting shall be
allowed.
§ 80-6. Fourth of July celebration.
In the observance of the anniversary of our national independence the bells
of the churches in the central village shall not be rung before sunrise on the
fourth day of July, or on the following day when the observance comes on
that day, nor after 8:00 in the evening of said days. And in such observance,
except by special permission of the Selectmen, no person shall during the
hours of either night fire any cannon or cannon cracker or other loud
explosive; nor shall anyone, in such observance, behave himself in a rude
and disorderly manner, or mutilate or deface or destroy any sign, sign post,
guideboard, or other structure.
§ 80-7. Violations and penalties.
Any citizen may and the Selectmen and Constables shall prosecute every
violation of the foregoing bylaws before any Trial Justice in the County of
Worcester or before any other court having jurisdiction, and each violation
of these bylaws shall, upon conviction of the party or parties violating them,
be punished by a fine of not less than $2 nor more than $20.
Chapter 81
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 80.
Recycling — See Ch. 302.
Woodwaste policy — See Ch. 309.
§ 81-1. Littering on public property prohibited.
No person shall place, throw, or deposit refuse or debris (including
recyclable and depositable material and containers), on a public roadway,
sidewalk, park, grounds, or school property.
§ 81-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this bylaw will be subject to a fine of up to $100.
Chapter 84
(RESERVED)
Chapter 90
§ 80-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 81-2
5:59
PROPERTY, SALE OF
§ 81-2 BARRE CODE § 81-2
5:60
ARTICLE I
Property Taken Under Tax Title Procedure
[Adopted 5-15-1982 ATM, Art. 5]
§ 90-1. Authority of Selectmen; posting of property.
The Selectmen are authorized to sell, after first giving notice of the time and
place by posting at least 14 days before the sale, property taken by the town
under the tax title procedure, provided that the Selectmen or whomever
they may authorize to hold public auction may reject any bid which they
deem inadequate.
§ 90-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 90-1
5:61

ARTICLE II
Obsolete Equipment and Property
[Adopted 5-15-1982 ATM, Art. 6; amended in its entirety 6-11-2007
ATM, Art. 21]
§ 90-2. Authority of Selectmen; notice of sale.
The Selectmen are authorized to sell at public auction or by bid, after first
giving notice of the time and place of sale in some convenient newspaper
or the Town website and Cable Access Channel, at least 14 days before the
sale, any old or obsolete equipment or personal property, provided that the
Selectmen or whomever they may authorize to hold such auction or sale
may reject any bid which they deem inadequate.
§ 90-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 90-2
5:63
Chapter 98
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 90-2 BARRE CODE § 90-2
5:64
ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 6-25-2012 ATM, Art. 16]
§ 98-1. Restriction established; exceptions; violations and penalties.
Prohibitions.
No sex offender designated as a Level 2 or Level 3 convicted
of a sex offense involving a child shall establish a permanent or
temporary residence in the Town of Barre within 1,000 feet of the
property on which any public or private school, elderly housing
facility, Town Library, park, playground, licensed day-care center,
or any other child-care facility is located.
(1)
It is unlawful to let, lease or rent any place, structure, or part
thereof or to cause other conveyance of real property, as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person who
is prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or
temporary residence pursuant to § 98-1A(1) above, if such place,
structure, or part thereof or other conveyance is located within
1,000 feet of any public or private school, elderly housing facility,
Town Library, park, playground, licensed day-care center, or any
other child-care facility.
(2)
It shall be unlawful for a Level 2 or 3 sex offender who has been
convicted of a sex offense involving a child to loiter within 150 feet
of a park.
(3)
A person classified as a Level 3 sex offender, who has been
convicted of a sex offense involving a child, is prohibited from
entering upon the premises of a school or day-care unless
previously authorized, in writing, by the school administration or
day care center owner.
(4)
A person classified as a Level 3 sex offender, for so long as such
person is so classified, is prohibited from entering upon the
premises of an elderly housing facility unless previously
authorized, in writing, by the on-site manager of the elderly
housing facility.
(5)
A.
Evidentiary matters; measurements. For purposes of determining the
minimum distance requirement, the measurement shall be measured
by following a straight line from the nearest property line of the
permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of any
public or private school, elderly housing facility, Town Library, park,
playground, licensed day-care center, or any other child-care facility.
B.
Exceptions. It shall not be a violation of this section if:
The registered sex offender established the permanent residence
prior to the effective date of this section, and:
(1)
C.
§ 98-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 98-1
5:65
Where the permanent residence was established by
purchasing the real property where the residence was
established; or
(a)
Such permanent residence was established via a valid, fixedterm,
written lease or rental agreement, executed prior to the
effective date of this section, whose term has not yet expired;
or
(b)
Any public or private school, park, playground, licensed daycare
center, or any other child-care facility was opened after
such offender established permanent residency.
(c)
The registered sex offender was a minor when the relevant crime
was committed and the offender was not convicted as an adult.
(2)
(3) The registered sex offender is a minor.
Penalties. Violations of § 98-1 of this Code will be treated under this
subsection.
Criminal complaint. Whoever violates any provision of § 98-1 is
subject to a criminal complaint filed by the Barre Police in the
East Brookfield District Court, or any other court of competent
jurisdiction, and shall be fined $300 for each violation.
(1)
Noncriminal disposition. Any violation of this section may, in the
discretion of the police officer who is the enforcing person, be
enforced in the manner provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D by the
issuance of a noncriminal complaint filed in the East Brookfield
District Court. The noncriminal fine for each such violation, if
not otherwise specified, shall be $100 for the first violation; $200
for the second violation; and $300 for any subsequent violation.
Property owners who violate § 98-1A(2) shall be subject to a fine of
$100 per violation.
(2)
Subsequent offense by a registered sex offender shall allow the
Police Chief or his/her designee to also make notification to the
offender's landlord, parole officer and/or probation officer, and the
Commonwealth's Sex Offender Registry Board that the sex offender
has violated a municipal bylaw/ordinance.
(3)
D.
Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the Barre Police Department. If
an officer reasonably believes that a sex offender who has been
convicted of a sex offense involving a child is in a park or loitering
within 150 feet of a park, in violation of this bylaw, the officer
shall require said sex offender to provide his/her name, address,
and telephone number. If it is established that the individual is a
sex offender who has been convicted of a sex offense involving a
(1)
E.
§ 98-1 BARRE CODE § 98-1
5:66
child, then the officer shall notify said sex offender that he/she is in
violation of this bylaw.
A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the Town
and maintained by the Barre Police Department. The Barre Police
shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be
available to the public at the Barre Police Department.
(2)
Forfeiture of exception for establishing residents.
If, after the effective date of this bylaw a conviction of another
sex offense is issued by a court against an adult criminal Level
3 sex offender, who was otherwise enjoying an exception to this
bylaw under § 98-1C, the adult criminal Level 3 sex offender shall
immediately forfeit the exception afforded by § 98-1C and be
required to comply with § 98-1A.
(1)
After a conviction of another sex offense as listed in § 98-1F(1), the
offender will be in violation of the bylaw and shall, within 60 days
of receipt of written notice of the sex offender's noncompliance
with this bylaw, move from said location to a new location, but
said location may not be within 1,000 feet of the Town Library or
any school, day-care center, park, elderly housing facility or place
of worship. It shall constitute a separate violation for each day
beyond the 60 days the sex offender continues to reside within
1,000 feet of the Town Library, or any school, day-care center, park,
elderly housing facility or place of worship. Furthermore it shall be
a separate violation each day that a sex offender shall move from
one location in the Town of Barre to another that is within 1,000
feet of the Town Library, any school, day-care center, park, elderly
housing facility or place of worship.
(2)
F.
Severability. If any portion of this section is deemed by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or
unenforceable, such judgment shall not impair or invalidate or render
unenforceable the remaining portion of this section.
G.
Definitions:
DAY-CARE CENTER — An establishment, whether public or private,
which provides care for children and is registered with and licensed
pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by the
Office of Child Care Services.
ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITY — A building or buildings on the same
lot containing four or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by
households having one or more members 55 years of age or older.
ESTABLISHING A RESIDENCE — To set up or bring into being a
dwelling place or an abode where a person sleeps, which may include
more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory, or by means of
purchasing real property or entering into a lease or rental agreement
H.
§ 98-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 98-1
5:67
for real property (including a renewal or extension of a prior
agreement, whether through written execution or automatic renewal).
LEVEL 2 OFFENDER — The designation given to a sex offender when it
has been determined that the individual's risk of re-offense is moderate
and the degree of dangerousness posed to the public is such that a
public safety interest is served by public access to sex offender registry
information.
LEVEL 3 OFFENDER — The designation given to a sex offender when
it has been determined that the individual's risk of re-offense is high
and the degree of dangerousness posed to the public is such that
a substantial public safety interest is served by active dissemination
(community notification) of sex offender registry information.
LOITER — Remaining in or around park property for more than 15
minutes.
PARK — Land owned or controlled by a unit of local government, and
located within the Town of Barre, that is designated by the unit of
local government for use solely or primarily for children's recreation,
including recreation areas but not limited to jogging trails, hiking trails,
water parks, swimming pools, soccer fields, baseball fields, football
fields, or any other field or improved area under the jurisdiction of a
unit of local government.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides,
lodges, or resides for five or more consecutive days or 14 or more days
in the aggregate during any calendar year.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A structure used for religious worship or
religious education purposes on land owned by, or held in trust for the
use of, any religious organization.
SCHOOL — Any public or private educational facility that provides
services to children in grades Kindergarten through 12.
SEX OFFENDER — As defined in MGL c. 6, § 178C, a person who
resides, works or attends an institution of higher learning in the
commonwealth and who has been convicted of a sex offense or who
has been adjudicated as a youthful offender or as a delinquent juvenile
by reason of a sex offense or a person released from incarceration
or parole or probation supervision or custody with the Department of
Youth Services for such a conviction or adjudication or a person who
has been adjudicated a sexually dangerous person under MGL c. 123A,
§ 14, as in force at the time of adjudication, or a person released from
civil commitment pursuant to MGL c. 123A, § 9A, whichever last occurs,
on or after August 1, 1981.
SEX OFFENDER REGISTRY — Means the collected information and
data that is received by the Criminal History Systems Board pursuant
to MGL c. 6, §§ 178C to 178P, inclusive, as such information and data
is modified or amended by the sex offender registry board or a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to said §§ 178C to 178P, inclusive.
§ 98-1 BARRE CODE § 98-1
5:68
SEX OFFENSE INVOLVING A CHILD — An indecent assault and battery
on a child under 14 under MGL c. 265, § 13B; rape of a child under 16
with force under MGL c. 265, § 22A; rape and abuse of a child under
MGL c. 265, § 23; assault of a child with intent to commit rape under
MGL c. 265, § 24B; kidnapping of a child under the age of 16 under
MGL c. 265, § 26; enticing a child under the age of 16 for purposes of
committing a crime under MGL c. 265, § 26C; inducing a minor into
prostitution under MGL c. 272, § 4A; living off or sharing earnings of a
minor prostitute under MGL c. 272, § 4B; posing or exhibiting a child
in the state of nudity under MGL c. 272, § 29A; dissemination of visual
material of a child in a state of nudity or sexual conduct under MGL c.
272, § 29B; unnatural and lascivious acts with a child under 16 under
MGL c. 272, § 35A; aggravated rape under MGL c. 277, § 39; and any
attempt to commit a violation of any of the aforementioned sections
pursuant to MGL c. 274, § 6 or a like violation of the laws of another
state, the United States military, territorial or Indian tribal authority.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides,
lodges, or resides for a period of less than five consecutive days or
14 days in the aggregate during any calendar year, which is not the
person's permanent address or place where the person routinely lives,
abides, lodges, or resides and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
TOWN LIBRARY — The structure in which the Barre Public Library is
located.
§ 98-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 98-1
5:69
Chapter 101
SLUDGE AND HAZARDOUS WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
Siting of commercial operations — See Ch.
305.
Floor drains — See Ch. 304.
§ 98-1 BARRE CODE § 98-1
5:70
ARTICLE I
From Any Source
[Adopted 6-30-1980 STM, Art. 8]
§ 101-1. Prohibition.
No sewerage sludge or hazardous wastes from any source shall be brought
into Barre for the purpose of disposal or processing.
§ 101-2. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for the violation of this bylaw shall be $200 for each violation,
or any penalties according to state law.
§ 101-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-2
5:71

ARTICLE II
Transport Into Town
[Adopted 12-29-1980 STM, Art. 8]
§ 101-3. Prohibition.
The importation, treatment, storage or disposal of sludge, including Zimpro
sludge, but specifically excluding sludge which is generated within the town
limits of Barre, or which qualifies as "hazardous waste" as defined in MGL c.
21c § 2, is hereby prohibited at facilities, including sanitary landfills, within
the Town of Barre.
§ 101-4. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violating this bylaw shall be $50 for each violation. A
violation shall occur each time any amount of sludge is transported into the
town limits and deposited or unloaded at a facility or sanitary landfill.
§ 101-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-4
5:73
Chapter 104
SOIL DISTURBANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 201.
§ 101-4 BARRE CODE § 101-4
5:74
ARTICLE I
Digging and Exploration on Town Property
[Adopted 6-20-2017 ATM, Art. 19]
§ 104-1. Permission required.
No person may dig or disturb the soil on any Town property, including but
not limited to commons, parks and cemeteries, that is owned or controlled
by the Town of Barre, without specific written permission from the body,
board, committee or commission that has control over the property; then
the Board of Selectmen may grant such permission.
§ 104-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DIG or DISTURB — To include, but not limited to, the intentional act of
penetrating the soil surface with any tool or instrument in order to locate
and remove an object. This includes use of a metal detector to locate a coin
or other object and use of a tool or instrument to remove said coin or object.
§ 104-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 104-2
5:75
Chapter 108
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 104-2 BARRE CODE § 104-2
5:76
ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 4-29-1985 STM, Art. 6]
§ 108-1. License required.
Prior to any excavation or commencement of any project involving work
within any public way within the Town of Barre the board, commission or
other public body or private individual or corporation involved shall make
application to the Highway Superintendent for a street opening license. A
copy of the form or such license and related documents are attached hereto
and incorporated as a part hereof.3
§ 108-2. Violations and penalties.
In the event any such excavation or work is commenced prior to obtaining
such permit, the person or entity involved shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $25 for each such offense. Each day such permit has not been
obtained shall be considered a separate offense.
3. Editor's Note: The documents are on file in the office of the Department of Public Works.
§ 108-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 108-2
5:77

ARTICLE II
Snow From Private Property
[Adopted 5-14-1990 ATM, Art. 28]
§ 108-3. Prohibited actions.
Plowing, pushing or removing snow from private property and placing said
snow onto or upon a public way is not permitted.
§ 108-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person plowing, pushing, or removing snow from private property and
placing said snow onto or upon a public way shall be subject to a fine of
$50. Each day snow is so placed onto or upon a pubic way shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 108-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 108-4
5:79
Chapter 112
SURFACE WATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 33.
Earth removal — See Ch. 201.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Floor drains — See Ch. 304.
§ 108-4 BARRE CODE § 108-4
5:80
ARTICLE I
Surface Water Drainage Control
[Adopted 3-18-1985 STM, Art. 6; amended in its entirety 6-12-2006
ATM, Art. 14]
§ 112-1. Definitions.
The following words used in this bylaw shall have the following meanings:
IMPROVEMENT — Includes, but not limited to, a driveway, a building, or
other structure. In addition includes alteration to the land.
PERMIT — Drainage permit.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, society, association, partnership or
individual.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Department of Public Works Superintendent.
WAY — Any way within the town, including but not limited to, a public way,
private way or way within a subdivision.
§ 112-2. Drainage permit required; release form.
Permit. No person shall construct an improvement on any land abutting
a way which may increase the volume of surface water draining from
the land onto the way unless the owner of the land has first obtained a
drainage permit from the Superintendent.
A.
Land lower than way. No person shall construct an improvement on
any land abutting a way, where the surface of the portion of said land
abutting said way is lower than the surface of the way, unless the owner
of the land shall first have:
(1) Obtained a drainage permit from the Superintendent; and
Delivered to the Superintendent an executed release on a form
approved by the Town Counsel suitable for recording in the
Worcester Registry of Deeds releasing the town from all claims for
damage to the land or improvement thereon resulting from surface
water drainage from the way onto the land.
(2)
B.
Land higher than way. No person shall construct an improvement on
any land abutting a way, where the surface of the portion of said land
abutting said way is higher than the surface of the way, unless the
owner of the land shall first have:
(1) Obtained a drainage permit from the Superintendent; and
Delivered to the Superintendent an executed release on a form
approved by the Town Counsel suitable for recording in the
Worcester Registry of Deeds holding the town harmless for all
claims for damage to the way or damage or injuries resulting from
surface water drainage from the land onto the way.
(2)
C.
§ 112-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 112-2
5:81
§ 112-3. Application and fees.
§ 112-4. Installation of facilities; notice prior to commencement of
construction.
Determination. The Superintendent shall determine whether the way is
higher than the land, or the land is higher than the way. It may be that
both situations exist thereby requiring both releases.
D.
Applications for drainage permits shall be made by the owner of the
land to the Superintendent.
A.
Each application shall include and be accompanied by the following
information and supporting documentation:
The complete name and residential address of the owner of the
land, together with a copy of the deed.
(1)
A plan of the land showing, among other features, each proposed
improvement, all existing structures and the abutting way. The
plan shall also indicate terrain features and elevations sufficient to
determine surface water flow.
(2)
(3) The complete address of the land.
Such other relevant information as may be required by the
Superintendent.
(4)
B.
Each application shall be accompanied by the sum of $100 for the
permit fee which the Superintendent shall pay over on receipt to the
Treasurer of Barre.
C.
A performance deposit of $2,000 to be deposited with the Treasurer
of Barre. In the event the Superintendent finds that the applicant is
not completing the work required pursuant to said permit, in a timely
fashion, funds may be withdrawn from said performance deposit to
complete the required work. Upon satisfactory completion of all work
required by the Superintendent pursuant to the permit any balance
remaining shall be refunded to applicant.
D.
An agreement to prepay for any engineering or consultant services
required by Superintendent to determine work, including drainage
facilities, to be required pursuant to the permit.
E.
The applicant of the land shall install such drainage facilities as the
Superintendent deems reasonably necessary to prevent an undue
volume of surface water draining from the land onto the way or from
the way onto the land, as the case may be. The permit shall contain a
description of the drainage facilities to be installed.
A.
The Building Department shall include the requirement to obtain a
drainage permit in any building packages issued.
B.
§ 112-2 BARRE CODE § 112-4
5:82
§ 112-5. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Public Works may adopt reasonable rules and
regulations, to carry out the purpose of this bylaw.
§ 112-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The owner shall give notice to the Superintendent and Building
Department prior to commencing the construction of an improvement.
C.
The Superintendent and Building Department shall enforce the
provisions of this bylaw.
A.
Any person who violates any provisions of this bylaw or of any permit
issued hereunder after written notice of such violation by the
Superintendent, or Building Department, to such person shall be liable
to a penalty of $50. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B.
§ 112-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 112-6
5:83

ARTICLE II
Drain Line Tie-In
[Adopted 6-12-1995 ATM, Art. 41]
§ 112-7. Permit and approval required.
No person, company or other entity shall make any connection to a surface
water drain, line culvert or catch basin, in or on any public way within the
town, no matter what the purpose may be, without first obtaining approval
and a permit from the Board of Selectmen.
§ 112-8. Fees and charges.
Each applicant shall pay a one-time application fee of $100 for such permit.
In addition the applicant shall pay the cost of such connection including
but not limited to any expense incurred regarding digging up, replacing or
resurfacing any town way involved.
§ 112-9. Hold-harmless agreement.
Each applicant shall provide the Board of Selectmen with a recordable
agreement holding the town harmless regarding any damage to the
applicant's property as a result of any overflow, backup or other incident
resulting from tie in.
§ 112-10. Tie-in without permit considered violation.
It shall be considered a violation of this bylaw in the event any tie in is made
without such permit.
§ 112-11. Violations and penalties.
Every violation of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $300. Each day the
offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 112-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 112-11
5:85
Chapter 119
TOWN MEETINGS
§ 112-11 BARRE CODE § 112-11
5:86
ARTICLE I
Quorum
[Adopted 3-6-1954 ATM, Art. 31; amended 5-20-1978 ATM, Art. 38]
§ 119-1. Number constituting quorum; adjournment.
Fifty voters present shall constitute a quorum; provided, however, that a
number less than a quorum may from time to time adjourn the same.
§ 119-2. Exception for election of officers.
This action shall not apply to such meetings as are devoted exclusively to
the election of Town officers.
§ 119-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-2
5:87

ARTICLE II
Election and Appropriations Meeting
[Adopted 4-26-1975 ATM, Art. 30; amended in its entirety
6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 24
§ 119-3. Call on separate warrants.
Pursuant to MGL c. 39, §§ 9 and 9A, as amended, the annual election
and appropriations meeting shall be called on separate warrants. The
election of Town officers and other matters to be determined by ballot
shall be held on the first Monday in April.
A.
All Town officers whose positions are elected by ballot must qualify by
taking an oath before the Town Clerk and completing any necessary
paperwork relating to the state conflict of interest and open meeting
laws within 30 days of the date of the election.
B.
§ 119-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-3
5:89

ARTICLE III
Annual Town Meeting
[Adopted 5-18-1987 ATM, Art. 26]
§ 119-4. Determination of date by Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine which day in May or June the
Annual Town Meeting shall be held.
§ 119-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-4
5:91

ARTICLE IV
Voting on Bylaws
[Adopted 5-20-1978 ATM, Art. 31]
§ 119-5. Affirmative vote required.
Any proposed bylaw which is submitted to any Town Meeting for approval
or any proposed amendment to any existing Town bylaw will require an
affirmative vote to be accepted as a bylaw of the Town of Barre.
§ 119-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-5
5:93

ARTICLE V
Rules of Procedure
[Adopted 3-13-1978 ATM, Art. 6]
§ 119-6. Adoption of rules.
The rules contained in Town Meeting Time: A Handbook of Parliamentary
Law by Richard B. Johnson, Moderator of Swampscott, Benjamin
Lincoln — A Committee of the Massachusetts Moderators' Association,
Copyright 1962 by Little, Brown and Company, Inc., shall be the
parliamentary rules of procedure governing all the Town Meetings in the
Town of Barre in all cases to which they are applicable, and in which they
are not inconsistent with the bylaws, if any, or the special rules of order, if
any, previously adopted by the Town of Barre in Town Meeting assembled.
§ 119-6.1. Ballot votes. [Added 11-23-2009 STM, Art. 10]
If requested by a vote of 10% or more of the voters then present and
voting at any Town Meeting, the vote that records the position of each
registered vote on a particular motion shall be by ballot vote. Request
for this ballot method of voting shall be made by a motion duly made
and seconded, at any time prior to the vote taken by the Moderator, and
shall not be debated, amended or reconsidered.
A.
In the event of a ballot vote, all voters will be directed by the Moderator
and/or the Town Clerk regarding the process to cast their ballot.
B.
§ 119-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-6.1
5:95

ARTICLE VI
Town Meeting Warrants
[Adopted 6-9-2008 ATM, Art. 25]
§ 119-7. Posting of warrants.
All warrants for Annual and Special Town Meetings shall be served, by
a Constable, on the inhabitants of the Town by having an attested copy
thereof posted at a minimum of five public places within the Town, with at
least one being in each precinct. The exact number and locations for such
postings shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen. All of the foregoing
to be accomplished a sufficient number of days prior to the Town Meeting
to satisfy Massachusetts General Laws.
The Board of Selectmen may, in addition, cause a brief notice of such Town
Meeting to be published in the Barre Gazette or such other newspaper with
normal circulation in the Town. The Board of Selectmen may also cause a
notice to be included in the Town's official web site.
§ 119-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-7
5:97
Chapter 122
TREES
§ 119-7 BARRE CODE § 119-7
5:98
ARTICLE I
Tree Warden
[At the Annual Town Election of 4-7-2008, the Town voted to have
the elected Tree Warden become an appointed Tree Warden.]
ALARM SYSTEMS § 119-7
5:99
Chapter 128
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 119-7 BARRE CODE § 119-7
5:100
ARTICLE I
Stop Signs and Speed Limits
[Adopted 3-6-1954 ATM, Art. 31]
§ 128-1. Power of Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the power to adopt regulations
concerning stop signs and speed limits.
§ 128-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 128-1
5:101

ARTICLE II
Winter Parking Ban
[Adopted 6-10-1996 ATM, Art. 42]
§ 128-2. When effective.
The winter parking ban goes into effect with the first snow/ice storm until
March 15 or later if snow or ice storms occur.4
§ 128-3. Parking prohibited. [Amended 6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 23]
There shall be no parking upon any roadway in such a manner as to impede
the removal of snow or ice either during or after a storm.
§ 128-4. Parking in business district.
There shall be no parking in any business district during periods of four
inches or more of snow.
§ 128-5. Available parking areas during storms. [Amended
6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 23]
Parking is available during storms at the Municipal Parking lot located off of
Mechanic Street, at 40 West Street and the Municipal Parking lot adjacent
to the South Barre Common on Main Street.
4. Editor’s Note: Former § 128-3, Streets designated, which immediately followed, was
repealed 6-18-2013 ATM, Art. 23. This article also renumbered former §§ 128-4 through
128-6 as §§ 128-3 through 128-5, respectively.
§ 128-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 128-5
5:103
Chapter 134
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of bylaw
violations — See Ch. 67.
§ 128-5 BARRE CODE § 128-5
5:104
ARTICLE I
Restrictions on Use
[Adopted 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 22]
§ 134-1. Authority.
The Town of Barre adopts this bylaw under its police powers to protect
public health and welfare and its powers under MGL c. 40, § 21 et seq.
And implements the town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to
MGL c. 41, § 69B. This bylaw also implements the Town of Barre's authority
under MGL c. 40, § 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply
emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 134-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restriction, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town of Barre or by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 134-3. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation trust, partnership or association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the town pursuant to § 134-4 of this bylaw.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection under
MGL c. 21G, § 15-17.
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — All public and private users
of the Town of Barre's public water system, irrespective of any person's
responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility.
§ 134-4. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
The Town of Barre, through its Board of Water Commissioners, may declare
a state of water supply conservation upon a determination by a majority
vote of the Board that a shortage of water exists and conservation measures
are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water
consumers. Public notice of state of water conservation shall be given under
§ 134-6 of this bylaw before it may be enforced.
§ 134-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 134-5
5:105
§ 134-5. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one
or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting
the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable
restriction, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public notice
required under § 134-6.
§ 134-6. Public notification of state water supply conservation;
notification of DEP.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed
by the Town of Barre as part of a state of water supply conservation shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation with the Town of Barre,
or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users
of water of the state of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed
under § 134-5 shall not be effective until such notification is provided.
Notification of state of water supply conservation shall also be
simultaneously provided to the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 134-7. Termination of state of water supply conservation: notice.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by a majority vote
of the Board of Water Commissioners, upon a determination that the water
supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of
a state of water supply conservation shall be given in the same manner
required by § 134-6.
§ 134-8. State of water supply emergency; compliance with DEP
orders.
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of
any order approved or issued by the Department intended to bring about an
end of the state of emergency.
Odd/even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with
odd-numbered addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a state
of water supply conservation and public notice thereof.
C.
D. Filling swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is
prohibited.
E.
§ 134-5 BARRE CODE § 134-9
5:106
§ 134-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this bylaw shall be liable to the Town of Barre in the
amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent violation
which shall inure to the town. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or
on complaint before the District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 134-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
§ 134-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 134-10
5:107
Chapter 140
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 21.
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Review of subdivision plans — See Ch. 303.
Sewer use and construction — See Chs. 304,
402 and 403.
Siting of commercial operations — See Ch.
305.
Wells — See Ch. 308.
§ 134-10 BARRE CODE § 134-10
5:108
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 140-1. Purpose stated.
To promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of its
inhabitants; to protect the community and to promote sound growth, the
Town of Barre is hereby divided into districts in which the use of land
and the construction, alteration, height, location and use of buildings and
structures are hereby regulated as provided under the authority of Chapter
40-A of the General Laws.
§ 140-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-1
5:109

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 140-2. Terms defined.
In this bylaw the following terms shall have the meanings described below:
ACCESSORY USE — A use which, in the Town of Barre, is customarily
subordinate or incidental to the principal use of land or buildings.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building designed as a dwelling for three or more
families.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling in which the family resident therein
provides eating and/or sleeping accommodations for not more than six
paying guests who use only the cooking facility ordinarily used by the
resident family.[Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
BUILDING — A roofed structure forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property, and permanently located on the land.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof designed for residential
occupancy on a year-round or seasonal basis, but not including apartment
house, boardinghouse, hotel or motel.
FARM — A parcel of land used principally for raising crops, or for the
raising of livestock and poultry, dairy cattle, plant or tree nurseries or for
greenhouses. Includes necessary personnel, structures, buildings, vehicles
and equipment, but not residential or commercial structures other than
those directly related to farm operation.
FRONTAGE — The dimension of a lot along the street that the lot abuts.
Said dimension is not necessarily a straight line.[Added 2-28-2005 STM,
Art. 4]
HOME OCCUPATION — One use customarily conducted within a dwelling,
such as dressmaking, teaching of not more than two students
simultaneously, office of medical doctor, dentist, attorney, architect or
certified public accountant, carried on by the owner/occupant thereof with
not more than two nonresident employees, provided that such use is
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes by the owner
and does not change the residential character thereof.[Amended
6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
JUNKYARD — Land or structures used commercially for collecting, storing
or selling wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for
collecting, dismantling, storing, salvaging or selling inoperative machinery
or vehicles or parts thereof.
LOT — A tract of land under separate ownership, occupied or intended to
be occupied by a principal building and the structures accessory to it and
including such open spaces as are required.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings on a single lot, detached or
in connected units, desired for transients and providing for accessory offstreet
parking facilities for each room or suite.
§ 140-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-2
5:111
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of a building or land, existing at the time of
the enactment or subsequent amendment of the Zoning Bylaw, which does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of recognized professionals, such as
a doctor, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer, artist, musician, designer, or
teacher, as distinguished from an office of a business nature.
SMALL SPECIALTY RETAIL BUSINESS — A use allowed in residential
districts with a special permit not to require more than two employees not
including the owner occupant, provided that such use is secondary to the
use of the dwelling for residential purposes by the owner and does not
change the residential character thereof.[Added 6-13-2005 ATM, Art. 28]
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — A structure that is designed, constructed and
intended to convert solar energy to electricity generated for residential or
commercial use. "Solar energy facility" shall include and not be limited
to: solar energy facilities, whether referred to as "solar energy facility,"
"photovoltaic facility," "solar photovoltaic system," or otherwise.[Added
6-21-2016 ATM, Art. 47]
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit approved by the special permit granting
authority as designated at § 140-30, for uses that require a special permit
in this bylaw, MGL c. 40A, § 9, and any other provision of MGL following
a public hearing process as required by MGL c. 40A, § 11, and any other
requirement of MGL.[Added 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6; amended
6-21-2016, Art. 44]
STREET — A public or private vehicular thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property and which, as defined,
includes the entire right-of-way. If no right-of-way has been established, it
shall be deemed to extend 25 feet on each side of the center of the traveled
way and parallel thereto.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter or for other purposes, shall include buildings,
framework, sheds, platforms, towers and the like.
TOURIST OR GUESTHOUSE — A dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided for paid transient guests.
TRAILER COURT or TRAILER PARK — A group of at least two trailers or
mobile homes.
TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME — A vehicle, with or without motive power,
used or intended to be used for human habitation or for office or business
use.
TRAVEL/CAMPING TYPE TRAILER — A vehicular, portable unit designed
for travel, camping or recreational use.[Added 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
USE — The purpose for which a building or land is arranged or intended, or
for which a building or tract of land is or may be occupied.
VARIANCE — Administrative permission to use land or structures for a use
prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations as provided under criteria
§ 140-2 BARRE CODE § 140-2
5:112
in other sections of this bylaw. Variances may be granted for relief from use
and/or area requirements of the bylaw.[Amended 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
§ 140-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-2
5:113

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 140-3. Zoning districts. [Amended 6-9-1997 ATM, Art. 49;
6-17-2002 ATM, Art. 31; 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43]
The Town of Barre is hereby divided into the following districts for the
purposes of this bylaw. (See table on page 140315 for detailed dimensional
requirements.)
Basic Lot Size
Residence Districts Area Frontage
R-80 Rural Residence 80,000 square feet 200 feet
R-20 Open Residence 20,000 square feet 120 feet
R-15 General Residence 15,000 square feet 110 feet
Business Districts
B-L Limited Business 30,000 square feet 130 feet
B-C Business and
Commercial
No minimum 100 feet
Industrial Districts
IND Industrial 40,000 square feet 130 feet
§ 140-4. Location of districts. [Amended 11-21-2005 STM, Art. 4;
6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 20]
§ 140-5. Interpretation of district boundaries.
The location and boundaries of these districts shall be as shown on the
Zoning Map of Barre dated May 4, 2009, being the most recent revision
of prior Town of Barre Zoning Maps, which shall be on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.6
A.
The additional information shown on the map is for informational
purposes only and is not to be used as reflecting any Town Meeting
action or approval as to the Town boundaries, road gates, roads,
discontinued roads, scenic roads, railroads, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts lands, cemeteries, mass Audubon land, landfill, water
bodies, streams, or public water supply wells.
B.
In order to determine the status of roads, within the Town, it would
require independent research.
C.
Where a right-of-way, street or watercourse is shown on the map as a
district boundary, the center line thereof is the actual boundary.
A.
5. Editor's Note: See 140 Attachment 1 included at the end of this chapter.
6. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the back of this volume.
§ 140-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-5
5:115
Where a district boundary is shown approximately parallel to a street,
it shall be deemed parallel to the exterior line of the right-of-way of the
street and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
B.
Where district boundary lines specifically follow private, public or
institutional property lines, said boundaries shall be considered to be
fixed as of the date said districts were established.
C.
§ 140-5 BARRE CODE § 140-5
5:116
ARTICLE IV
Use Regulations
§ 140-6. Compliance required.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be
constructed, altered or maintained and no building, structure or land shall
be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as indicated for the
district in which it is situated.
§ 140-7. Residence Districts.
Permitted uses.
(1) Single detached one-family dwelling.
Municipal, educational, religious or other nonprofit institutional
use.
(2)
Farm, provided that no barn or stable sheltering animals on such
farm be closer than 100 feet from property line, orchard,
greenhouse, tree nursery, truck garden or wood lot. May include
sale of agricultural or horticultural products primarily raised on
the premises. One or more signs with an aggregate total maximum
area of 32 square feet may be displayed during seasons when such
products are for sale.
(3)
Accessory uses, including the following, provided that they are
customarily incidental to a permitted main use on the same
premises and not detrimental to a residential neighborhood. Except
as indicated, there shall be no exterior indication of the accessory
use and no exterior display of merchandise. No more than two
persons not residents on the premises are to be employed. One
sign, not over four feet square in area, may be displayed.
Use of space in a dwelling for a customary home occupation,
office or studio maintained by resident occupants.
(a)
Use of property in connection with his trade by a resident
carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber or other artisan,
provided that no manufacturing or business requiring
substantially continuous employment shall be carried on and
that all storage of materials and equipment shall be within the
principal building or within suitable accessory buildings.
(b)
Renting space to lodgers, boarders or tourists, provided that
no separate cooking facilities are maintained, and provided
that no more than three rooms are rented. Accommodations
shall be limited to a maximum of six persons in addition to the
resident family.
(c)
(4)
(5) Single detached two-family dwellings (in R-80 District only).
A.
§ 140-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-7
5:117
One travel/camping type trailer for storage purposes and not to
be used as the principal residence on said property. [Added
5-21-1977 ATM, Art. 20]
(6)
Animals or birds as customary household pets may be kept in all
districts. [Added 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 7]
(7)
Livestock and poultry kept for the pleasure of residents are
permitted in R-80 Districts provided livestock do not exceed four
adult animals and poultry do not exceed 20 in number, if such
livestock are quartered a minimum of 50 feet from all property
lines, and such quarters provided for keeping of such livestock
are maintained at least 100 feet from any dwellings on adjacent
property. [Added 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 7]
(8)
Uses which may be allowed only by special permit, if the Planning
Board, after a public hearing and subject to appropriate regulations,
shall determine that the use contemplated is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this bylaw and will not be in conflict with
the public safety, convenience or welfare and will not be detrimental
to property values nor offensive to people in adjacent properties or
districts. The Planning Board may make the permit subject to general
or specific provisions set forth therein and further such permits may
also impose conditions, safeguards and limitation in time and use.
[Amended 5-21-1977 ATM, Art. 19; 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 7;
6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42; 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43; 6-13-2005 ATM,
Art. 28; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22; 11-26-2012 STM, Art. 18;
6-21-2016 ATM, Arts. 41, 42, and 46
Cemetery, golf course, riding stable, boat livery or camp for
children or adults (in R-80 District only).
(1)
(2) Nursing home, sanitarium, orphanage or similar use.
(3) Dog kennel or veterinary hospital (in R-80 District only).
Private school or college, kindergarten, trade or professional
school.
(4)
(5) Telephone exchange, hydro power facility, railroad or bus station.
Commercial raising of swine, goats or fur-bearing animals or
commercial slaughterhouses (in R-80 District only).
(6)
(7) Private club not conducted for profit.
Golf club, hunting or fishing area or other extensive outdoor
recreation use, whether or not conducted for profit. May include
commercial recreational area for camping, tents, cabins or
cottages, for seasonal or part-time occupancy only. Under these
provisions, such sites, facilities or buildings as are used or occupied
for limited periods for recreational purposes shall not be subject
to the lot area and yard requirements which pertain to residence
(8)
B.
§ 140-7 BARRE CODE § 140-7
5:118
districts. No recreational unit, building or site may be occupied,
whether on a temporary or permanent basis, during the period
from December 1, in any year, to April 1, of the following year,
except for supervisory or maintenance personnel, provided that
prior approval for any such occupancy has been obtained from the
Board of Health. Commercial uses shall be strictly limited to meet
the needs of persons using the land for camping purposes. Use of
land for such recreational uses shall be subject to the granting of
an appropriate license by the Board of Health under the provisions
of MGL c. 140, §§ 32A to 32E. Before the issuance of a permit, a
site plan showing all the camping or tenting areas, buildings, water
supply and sanitary facilities shall be presented.
Removal of gravel, loam, sand or rock for commercial purposes (in
R-80 District only).
(9)
Conversion of a one-family dwelling, existing at the time of the
adoption of this bylaw, into a two-family dwelling, provided that
the lot is at least 20,000 square feet in area and that all sewage
disposal and yard requirements can be met.
(10)
Antique or gift shop or small specialty retail business or retail sale
of products of home occupation, provided items for sale are not
displayed outdoors. Any limitations or conditions may be included
in the special permit as required to maintain the character of the
neighborhood.
(11)
Undertaker, provided that lot is at least 20,000 square feet in area
and that adequate off-street parking can be provided.
(12)
Mobile homes not situated in mobile home parks shall be allowed
to be placed upon the property only under the following
circumstances:
For use as a temporary dwelling by a person who intends to
construct or reconstruct his or her dwelling for a period of
time, not to exceed one year; an additional one-year extension
may be granted by the Planning Board.
(a)
By any contractor engaged in the construction of a major
building such as a school or office, for use as an office, but not
as a dwelling, for a period of time, not to exceed one year; an
additional one-year extension may be granted by the Planning
Board.
(b)
(13)
Apartment houses with adequate off-street parking facilities (but
not permissible in R-80 District).
(14)
(15)Single detached two-family dwellings (in R-80 District only).
(16)Sawmill operations and accessory uses (in R-80 District only).
§ 140-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-7
5:119
§ 140-8. Limited Business Districts.
As an accessory use, animals, birds, livestock or poultry in greater
numbers than as provided for in § 140-7A(8) above in the R-80
District or other residential districts may be allowed.
(17)
(18)Wind-powered generators.
Studio/or galleries for the instruction and practice of visual arts,
photography, sewing, ceramics, knitting, jewelry making, and other
similar arts and crafts related use and practice of musical
instruments and voice lessons provided that such and all work
is not detrimental to the neighborhood causing noise or undue
commotion only in R-15 Districts.
(19)
Permitted uses:
Any use permitted, or allowed by special permit, under § 140-7A
and B, except those listed at § 140-7B(3), (6), (9), (10), (13) and
(18). [Amended 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art.
22]
(1)
(2) Financial, medical, professional or business office.
Retail business, consumer service, newspaper or job printer. A
maximum of four employees may be engaged in repair or service
work (except automotive, vehicular or large farm equipment
maintenance) or in making articles to be sold at retail, on the
premises only.
(3)
(4) Hotel, motel or restaurant.
Signs or other advertising devices indicating the name of the firm
or goods or services available on the premises, provided such signs
or devices are located flat against a wall of the principal building
and do not exceed two square feet in total combined area per linear
foot of building frontage along the highway. One sign indicating
the name of the firm, and marquee which is an integral part of the
building. Total sign area may not exceed 100 square feet without
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 6-17-2002
ATM, Art. 31]
(5)
One sign or other advertising device of a freestanding nature
indicating the name of the firm or goods or services available on
the premises, provided that such sign or device is located at least
10 feet from the highway and does not exceed 25 square feet in
total area per business establishment.
(6)
A.
Uses which may be allowed only by special permit, if the Planning
Board, after a public hearing and subject to appropriate regulations,
shall determine that the use contemplated is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this bylaw and will not be in conflict with
B.
§ 140-7 BARRE CODE § 140-8
5:120
§ 140-9. Business and Commercial Districts.
the public safety, convenience or welfare and will not be detrimental
to property values nor offensive to people in adjacent properties or
districts. The Planning Board may make the permit subject to general
or specific provisions set forth therein and further such permits may
also impose conditions, safeguards and limitation in time and use.
[Amended 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22;
6-21-2016 ATM, Art. 45]
Automobile service or gasoline station, sales establishment or
repair garage.
(1)
Service of sales establishment for farm machinery or other heavy
equipment.
(2)
Contractor's yard or similar use. Adequate screening from public
ways will be required for such uses.
(3)
Sale or storage of feed, fuel, lumber or building supplies. Adequate
screening from public ways will be required for such uses.
(4)
(5) Place of amusement or assembly or club conducted for profit.
(6) Trucking depot or warehouse.
(7) Dog kennel or veterinary hospital.
(8) Wind-powered generators.
Permitted uses:
Any use permitted, or allowed by special permit, under § 140-8A
and B, except those listed at § 140-7B(3), (6), (9), (13) and (18),
and § 140-8B(5). [Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42; 6-14-2004
ATM, Art. 43; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22]
(1)
Any lawful sales, manufacturing or industrial use including
processing, fabrication, assembly or storage, except those listed in
§ 140-10B below. [Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
(2)
(3) General office use.
(4) Wholesale establishment.
(5) Signs or other advertising devices as permitted under § 140-8A.
A car wash and directly related activities. [Added 6-11-2007
ATM, Art. 27]
(6)
A.
Uses which may be allowed only by special permit, if the Planning
Board, after a public hearing and subject to appropriate regulations,
shall determine that the use contemplated is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this bylaw and will not be in conflict with
B.
§ 140-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-9
5:121
§ 140-10. Industrial Districts.
the public safety, convenience or welfare and will not be detrimental
to property values nor offensive to people in adjacent properties or
districts. The Planning Board may make the permit subject to general
or specific provisions set forth therein and further such permits may
also impose conditions, safeguards and limitation in time and use
[Amended 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22;
6-21-2016 ATM, Art. 45]
Activities conducted for scientific research or development or
related scientific production. [Amended 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
(1)
Light manufacturing or processing activity where the major portion
of the product is to be sold to the consumer on the premises.
(2)
Junkyard or outdoor storage of more than one unregistered
automobile or truck, provided they are not visible from the public
way.
(3)
(4) Place of amusement or assembly or club conducted for profit.
(5) Dog kennel or veterinary hospital.
(6) The rental of individual storage units.
(7) Wind-powered generators.
Permitted uses:
Any use permitted, or allowed by special permit, under § 140-9A
and B, except those listed at § 140-7B(3), (6), (9), (13) and (18),
and § 140-8B(5). [Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42; 6-14-2004
ATM, Art. 43; 6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22]
(1)
Any lawful sales, manufacturing or industrial use, including
processing, fabrication, assembly or storage, except those listed in
Subsection B below.
(2)
One or two signs or displays advertising the name of the firm or
goods or services available or produced on the premises and not
exceeding 200 square feet in total combined area, provided such
signs are not within 50 feet of the highway. The top of any sign
may be no higher than the height of the building with which it is
associated.
(3)
One or two signs or displays advertising the name of the firm or
goods or services available or produced on the premises and not
exceeding 40 square feet in total combined area, provided that
such sign or display is located at least 15 feet from the street.
(4)
A.
Uses which may be allowed only by special permit, if the Planning
Board, after a public hearing and subject to appropriate regulations,
B.
§ 140-9 BARRE CODE § 140-10
5:122
§ 140-10.1. 1 Solar energy facilities special permit and site plan
review. [Added 6-21-2016 ATM, Art. 48]
shall determine that the use contemplated is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this bylaw and will not be in conflict with
the public safety, convenience or welfare and will not be detrimental
to property values nor offensive to people in adjacent properties or
districts. The Planning Board may make the permit subject to general
or specific provisions set forth therein and further such permits may
also impose conditions, safeguards and limitation in time and use.
[Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42; 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43;
6-22-2009 ATM, Art. 22; 6-21-2016 ATM, Art. 45]
Industrial use where the product or process constitutes an
explosion or fire hazard of sufficient magnitude to be subject to
regulation (excluding regulations on power transmission, steam or
electrical) by any statute of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
or the federal government dealing specifically with such hazard
and such product or process.
(1)
Industrial use where the product or process constitutes a chemical
poison hazard of sufficient magnitude to be subject to regulation by
any statute of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal
government dealing specifically with such hazard and such product
or process.
(2)
(3) Dog kennel or veterinary hospital.
(4) Wind-powered generators.
Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to regulate the development of solar
energy facilities by providing standards for the placement, design,
construction, operation, monitoring, modification, and removal of
such facilities. The prime purpose shall be to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare. In considering a proposed facility, an
effort shall be made to minimize impacts on scenic, agricultural,
natural and historic resources of Barre. In addition the purpose
is to promote sound growth within the community. In the event a
facility is approved, a further purpose of this bylaw is to provide
adequate financial assurance for the timely decommissioning and
removal of such facilities, including the restoration of the site.
(1)
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority
for those installations that require a special permit. The Planning
Board shall consider the effect the proposed facility may have
upon the site, the neighborhood and the community as a whole.
In the event the proposed site is presently in agricultural use,
the continued agricultural use shall be encouraged. The Planning
Board may recommend that the facility be located on other portions
(2)
A.
§ 140-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-10.1
5:123
of the site where the soil does not have prime agricultural use
potential.
The initial term of any special permit will be 20 years, or such
other time as determined by the Planning Board. The permit may
be extended for up to five years. Any further extension shall require
a new application.
(3)
Applicability. This bylaw applies to all solar energy facilities, either
existing, or proposed, in the Town of Barre. In addition this bylaw
shall apply to any and all alterations, changes, improvements and
modifications, including, but not limited to, upgrades or physical
modifications, regardless of whether the modification materially alters
the type, configuration, or size of these facilities or related equipment.
The Planning Board shall follow the procedural requirements for
processing special permit applications as set forth in Massachusetts
General Laws, including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 9.
B.
Definitions and use regulations.
AGRICULTURAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY — A solar
photovoltaic system that is for the exclusive purpose of providing
electricity for a property that is primarily in agricultural use as defined
under MGL c. 40A, § 3. The electricity produced to be used solely for
the benefit of the agricultural property.
COMMERCIAL LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY — A commercial solar photovoltaic system
that is structurally mounted on the ground and has a minimum
nameplate output capacity of 250 kw DC. Only allowed by special
permit in the following districts: Limited Business, Business and
Commercial and Industrial.
COMMERCIAL ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY
— A commercial solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted
on the roof of a building zoned and actively used for an allowed
commercial use. Allowed as a matter of right in the following districts:
Limited Business, Business and Commercial and Industrial.
COMMERCIAL SMALL-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY — A commercial solar photovoltaic system
that is structurally mounted on the ground and has a nameplate output
capacity of less than 250 kw DC. Only allowed by special permit in
the following districts: Limited Business, Business and Commercial and
Industrial.
COMMERCIAL USE — Where the electricity generated by a solar
energy facility is produced, distributed and utilized for use on site or
sale or resale off site which allows a monetary gain directly or indirectly
to the owner of the property.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production equipment, such as solar energy facilities or
C.
§ 140-10.1 BARRE CODE § 140-10.1
5:124
solar photovoltaic facilities. The manufacturer typically specifies this
output with a "nameplate" on the equipment.
RESIDENTIAL GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
FACILITY — A residential solar photovoltaic system that is structurally
mounted on the ground where the electricity generated by the solar
facility is produced and solely utilized, on the residential site, by the
owner of the residential property. The output to not exceed 110% of the
residential unit's electrical consumption. Requires a special permit in
all districts.
RESIDENTIAL ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY —
A residential solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on
the roof of a residential structure where the electricity generated by
the solar facility is produced and solely utilized, on the residential site,
by the owner of the residential property. The output to not exceed 110%
of the residential unit's electrical consumption. Allowed as a matter of
right in all districts.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Where the electricity generated by a solar
energy facility is produced solely, on a residential site, for the use and
benefit of the owner of the residential property.
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY — A structure that is designed, constructed
and intended to convert solar energy to electricity generated for
residential or commercial use. In this bylaw "Solar Energy Facility"
shall include and the bylaw shall apply and not be limited to: solar
energy facilities, whether referred to as "Solar Energy Facility,"
"Photovoltaic Facility," "Solar Photovoltaic System," or otherwise.
Location/lot/siting preferences.
It is strongly recommended that proposals not select locations
that would result in significant loss of land and natural resources
such as farm and forest land. Preference is that rooftop siting(s)
and locations in industrial or commercial districts be used. As an
alternative vacant, previously disturbed land should be considered.
Placement of facilities in front yards will not be permitted without
specific approval of the Planning Board. For agricultural facilities
rooftops are preferable. In the event an agricultural facility does
not have adequate roof space, nonproductive, nonarable land
should be selected.
(1)
For large-scale ground-mounted facilities, a minimum lot size of
80,000 square feet is required, with minimum road frontage as
required by the Town's Zoning for the applicable zone. Further
to be the sole use on the lot involved with sole use of applicable
driveway access. The lot to be one contiguous parcel. No below
grade foundation(s) or structures shall be used without the specific
approval of the Planning Board. No material, including top soil,
may be removed from the site without prior specific approval of the
Planning Board.
(2)
D.
§ 140-10.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-10.1
5:125
Visual impact.
All solar energy facilities shall be positioned to provide a visual
buffer in order to reduce the visual impact the facility has upon all
abutting properties in residential use, whether occupied or not, or
potentially in residential use, or which have a view of the proposed
project, including houses across a street. In addition, a visual buffer
shall be provided for roadways which have a view of the proposed
project.
(1)
The applicant may incorporate methods to reduce the visual impact
such as earthen berms, vegetation and fencing/screening or
reducing the height of facility components. The retention of
existing natural growth is encouraged. The applicant shall indicate
any existing vegetation the applicant plans to remove or alter.
The required visual buffer will be on a case-by-case basis and site
specific at the discretion of the Planning Board. The documents
submitted pursuant to Subsection F(3) below will be used but will
not be the only source of information used by the Planning Board
regarding this matter.
(2)
E.
Site plan review procedure. A site plan review shall be conducted as a
part of the special permit process. Site plan documents: The applicant
shall submit plans and documents to the Planning Board, which shall be
the site plan review authority. The site plans shall show:
Property lines and physical features, including roads and
topographical contour lines for the project site. Also the applicant
shall indicate the location of existing, proposed or potential
agricultural uses.
(1)
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation
clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or
structures. A planting plan where a visual buffer is required shall
be presented.
(2)
Views of the site from all off-site abutting properties (and where
the site is abutting a street, from the street) indicating what will
be seen, prior to construction, immediately after construction is
completed with no plantings in place, after construction with all
plantings in place and at two, five and 10 years after construction
with all plantings still in place (indicating normal anticipated
growth). The view may be a sketch or computer generated from
photographs or drawings. The views should indicate both existing
conditions and proposed modifications with particular attention as
to how each modification is intended to reduce the visual impact
of the proposed facility. The Planning Board may request additional
views.
(3)
The Planning Board may require, as a part of the review, on-site
visits by the Planning Board during the application process. In
addition the Planning Board may require on-site visits during the
(4)
F.
§ 140-10.1 BARRE CODE § 140-10.1
5:126
construction phase and from time to time, as determined by the
Planning Board, following the date of completion. In the event the
Planning Board receives a signed written complaint, the Planning
Board will notify the applicant, owner and operator and schedule
an on-site visit to resolve the matter. The purpose of such visits
to be to confirm that the visual impact of the project has been
minimized. In the event that the Planning Board finds that further
steps are required to minimize the visual impact, the applicant,
owner and/or operator shall take such steps as are required by the
Planning Board, including replacing dead or unhealthy vegetation.
Special permit solar energy system plans and documents.
All applicants shall submit to the Planning Board the following
plans and documents that fully describe the nature of the proposed
solar energy system.
Plans and drawings of the solar facility signed and stamped by
a professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts
showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures or trees.
(a)
One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar facility,
associated components, and electrical interconnection
methods, with all National Electrical Code compliant
disconnects and over current devices.
(b)
Technical specifications of the major system components, such
as solar arrays, mounting system, transformers, and inverters.
The information shall include what materials are used in the
manufacture of the components.
(c)
The name, address, and contact information of the property
owner, applicant and proposed installer and operator.
(d)
Proof that the project site has the necessary frontage and area
to satisfy Town of Barre zoning requirements to qualify as a
separate lot. In addition proof that the site has sufficient area
to allow for installation and use of the proposed facility.
(e)
(f) An operation and maintenance plan.
General liability insurance; proof of $1,000,000 by occurrence;
$2,000,000 in aggregate; or $5,000,000 excess liability
(umbrella policy).
(g)
Agreement to make deposits to Barre Treasurer for financial
surety that satisfies Subsection N(4) of this bylaw.
(h)
List of all chemicals, including cleaners, that will be used
on the site whether to clean solar panels and equipment, or
otherwise.
(i)
(1)
G.
§ 140-10.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-10.1
5:127
No pesticides or defoliants may be used on the site without
prior approval of the Planning Board.
(j)
As a part of the application, small-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic facilities may submit a written request to waive
any of the above requirements, which may be granted at the
Planning Board's discretion.
(k)
Fees: The applicant shall pay the special permit and site plan
review fee as set forth in the Planning Board Fee Schedule at the
time of submission of the application. In addition, all engineering
fees, legal fees, publication fees, etc., incurred by the Planning
Board during the application process and site plan review shall be
paid for by the applicant, in full, prior to issuance of any permit.
(2)
Operation and maintenance plan: The applicant shall submit a plan
for the operation and maintenance of the solar facility, which shall
include measures for maintaining safe access, stormwater controls,
and general procedures for operating and maintaining the facility.
(3)
Utility notification: The applicant shall submit evidence that the
utility company has been informed of applicant's intent to install
a solar energy facility and that the utility company has favorably
responded, in writing, to the notice. Off-grid systems are exempt
from this requirement.
(4)
Procedures: The applicant shall submit five copies of the required
plans and documents. The applicant shall also submit the required
fee(s).
(5)
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with Massachusetts General Laws. The time for acting may
be extended upon written request of the applicant and/or Planning
Board. Such request shall not be unreasonably denied. The Planning
Board may waive or modify any condition as it determines in its sole
discretion. The Planning Board's final action may consist of either:
Approval of the site plan based on a determination that the
proposed project will constitute a suitable development. The
Planning Board shall include a finding that the proposal will be
neither detrimental nor offensive to the neighborhood. Further,
the Planning Board shall include a finding that there are no
modifications or changes required to protect the public health,
safety or welfare.
(1)
Disapproval of the site plan with an explanation of the reasons
for such disapproval including the elements of the proposal the
Planning Board finds are not capable of revision. The Planning
Board shall include a finding as to how the proposal is either
detrimental or offensive to the neighborhood. In addition or in the
alternative, the Planning Board shall include a finding that there
are no modifications or changes, the applicant could make to the
(2)
H.
§ 140-10.1 BARRE CODE § 140-10.1
5:128
proposal, that would modify the proposal in order that the public
health, safety or welfare would be protected. The Planning Board
may also include a finding as to the elements of the proposal
that are so deficient in important elements and intrusive on the
interests of the public that they warrant disapproval.
Approval of the site plan subject to such reasonable conditions,
modifications, and restrictions as the Planning Board may deem
necessary to insure that the proposal will be neither detrimental
nor offensive to the neighborhood. Further, the Planning Board
shall indicate that the conditions, modifications and or restrictions
will protect the public health, safety or welfare and that the project
will then constitute a suitable development and will not result in
substantial detriment to the neighborhood.
(3)
Dimension and density requirements.
Setbacks: All facilities shall have front, side and rear yard setbacks
of at least 50 feet, for any fencing that is required by the Planning
Board. Fencing shall be required to fully enclose the project. Solar
arrays and related equipment shall have front, side and rear
setbacks of a minimum of 100 feet. In the event a front, side or
rear lot line abuts one or more residences, that front, rear or side
setback shall be a minimum of 200 feet. Setback from a roadway
shall be at least 200 feet. A fifty-foot minimum setback shall be
used when the abutting parcel has the same owner and the same
proposed use. The Planning Board may allow a lesser setback along
a property line where, in its judgment, the proposed facility is not
likely to negatively affect an existing or permitted land use on
the abutting property. The Planning Board may require a greater
setback along a property line where, in its judgment, the proposed
facility is likely to negatively affect an existing or permitted land
use on the abutting property.
(1)
Appurtenant structures: All appurtenant structures, including, but
not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers,
and substations shall be subject to bylaws concerning bulk and
height, setbacks, parking, building coverage, and vegetative
screening to avoid adverse impacts on the neighborhood or
abutting properties.
(2)
I.
Design standards.
Lighting: Lighting shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes, and shall not be intrusive in any way on
abutting properties. Lighting shall incorporate full cutoff fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
(1)
Signage: The solar facility shall provide a sign that identifies the
operator and provides a twenty-four-hour emergency contact
phone number. Solar facilities shall not display any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or
(2)
J.
§ 140-10.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-10.1
5:129
operator of the facility. The site may have a secondary sign
providing educational information about the facility and the
benefits of renewable energy. Applicant to obtain permits for all
signs. Applicant shall provide ongoing and up to date educational
website information, in an acceptable format, for viewing at the
Town Library, schools and Town's website.
Fencing shall be black PVC coated and limited to a height of seven
feet. Barbed or razor wire shall be excluded from fencing.
(3)
Utility connections: The applicant shall place all utility connections
underground except in unique cases where the Planning Board
finds that soil conditions, topographic constraints, or utility
company requirements make underground connections unfeasible.
(4)
In the event the proposed site includes land that is active or
potentially active agricultural or forest land and applicant excludes
such land from the area to be used by the solar facility, the Planning
Board may consider reducing some of the set back requirements
in consideration of such exclusion. In the alternative, the Planning
Board may increase setbacks for any project that fails to make a
reasonable effort to exclude active or potentially active agricultural
or forest land from the site.
(5)
Building permit and building inspection: No solar photovoltaic
installation shall be constructed, installed, or modified without first
obtaining a building permit. The application for building permit must
be accompanied by the fee required for a building permit.
Exemptions: The following solar energy facilities are exempt from
Planning Board action under this bylaw but require a building
permit prior to installation. The Building Inspector shall review the
application for building permit to determine that the facility does
not impose an objectionable visual impact on abutting properties.
In the event the Building Inspector is not satisfied that the visual
impact is acceptable, he shall refer the application to the Planning
Board for review:
(a) Agricultural solar photovoltaic facility.
(b) Commercial roof-mounted solar photovoltaic facility.
(c) Residential roof-mounted solar photovoltaic facility.
(1)
The Planning Board shall conduct a site plan review, as to visual
impact. The Planning Board may require submission of such
documentation as it deems reasonable.
(2)
K.
Emergency services: The operator shall provide a copy of the operation
and maintenance plan, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire
Chief, Police Chief, EMS (emergency medical service). The operator
shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an
L.
§ 140-10.1 BARRE CODE § 140-10.1
5:130
emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the facility shall
be clearly marked. The premises shall identify a qualified contact
person available 24 hours per day/seven days per week to provide
assistance during an emergency; the operator shall change the contact
information immediately whenever a change in personnel occurs.
Monitoring and maintenance.
Maintenance: The operator shall maintain the facility in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. The
operator shall be responsible for maintaining adequate access for
emergency vehicles and maintenance equipment.
(1)
An operation and maintenance manual is to be filed annually with
the Planning Board confirming that the operation is ongoing and
has not been abandoned. The owner and operator to provide the
Planning Board with access to a computer/internet link in order
that the Planning Board may view real time operation data to
confirm ongoing operation.
(2)
Modifications: No modifications to the plans submitted with the
application and approved by the Planning Board may be made
without written approval by the Planning Board. All material
modifications to the facility proposed after issuance of the building
permit require approval of the Planning Board and Inspector of
Buildings.
(3)
The applicant shall comply with any and all federal, Massachusetts
or local requirements in existence at the time application is filed or
adopted after approval.
(4)
M.
Decommissioning, removal, restoration, abandonment.
Removal requirements: Any solar facility that has reached the end
of its useful life (estimated to be 20 years), has been abandoned
or has discontinued operation shall be physically removed from the
parcel within 150 days after the date of discontinued operations;
otherwise the Planning Board may proceed as set forth below. The
owner or operator shall include in the application the anticipated
date of discontinued operations together with plans for removal.
As an ongoing obligation the owner or operator shall notify the
Planning Board by certified mail, annually, as to the proposed date
of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
(1)
Decommissioning/removal/restoration: Decommissioning/removal/
restoration shall consist of at least the following:
Physical removal of the solar arrays, structures, equipment,
security barriers, and electrical transmission lines from the
site and from the Town of Barre.
(a)
(2)
N.
§ 140-10.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-10.1
5:131
The site to be restored as near as reasonably possible to its
condition prior to the commencement of construction.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner or
operator to leave landscaping or below-grade foundations in
order to minimize erosion and disruption of vegetation.
(c)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state and federal bylaws
(d)
Abandonment: Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the solar facility shall be considered abandoned when in the
Planning Board's discretion it fails to operate for more than six
months. If the solar facility is deemed abandoned by the Planning
Board, the Town shall give the owner and operator 30 days' written
notice to remove the facility. In the event that the owner and
operator have not completed the removal at the conclusion of
90 days from the date of written notice, the Town may proceed,
without taking any legal action, to enter the property to
decommission, physically remove the facility and restore the
property. The Town may recover any costs from the financial surety
provided by the applicant. In the event there are insufficient funds
to complete the decommissioning, removal and restoration, the
applicant, owner and operator (including such other parties or
entities as appropriate) shall be jointly and severally liable to pay
any excess costs incurred in order to do so.
(3)
Financial surety: As a part of the application, the applicant shall
provide the Planning Board with a fully inclusive estimate of the
costs associated with the decommissioning and removal of the
facility and site restoration. The estimate shall be prepared by a
qualified engineer selected by the Planning Board, and the cost of
the engineer preparing the estimate shall be paid by the applicant
prior to issuance of any permit. At or before the second anniversary
of the approval of the special permit, the applicant, owner or
operator shall deposit with the Barre Treasurer United States
funds in an amount equal to 25% of the estimated cost of
decommissioning, removal and site restoration. The applicant,
owner or operator shall deposit additional sums equal to 25% of
said estimate on the third, fourth and fifth anniversaries, resulting
in the Barre Treasurer having a sum equal to 100% of the estimate
on deposit by the fifth anniversary of the approval of the special
permit. On said fifth, and on the 10th, 15th and 20th anniversaries
(and 25th if appropriate), the applicant, owner or operator shall
provide the Planning Board with an updated estimate from the
same engineer (or such other engineer as may be selected by
the Planning Board), the cost to be paid by the applicant, owner
or operator. In addition the applicant, owner or operator shall
deposit any additional funds with the Barre Treasurer in order
(4)
§ 140-10.1 BARRE CODE § 140-10.1
5:132
§ 140-11. Prohibited uses in all districts.
that the funds on deposit are equal to 100% of the most recent
estimate. In the event that the funds on deposit exceed 100% of
the most recent estimate, the Planning Board shall authorize the
Barre Treasurer to release any excess to the applicant, owner and
operator. Such surety will not be required for municipal facilities
owned and operated by the Town.
Prior to execution and delivery of special permit.
Prior to the Planning Board signing and delivering any special
permit approved hereunder, the applicant shall deliver to the
Planning Board the following:
Written confirmation that the Conservation Commission has
reviewed the facility plan, inspected the site as to wetlands and
other issues within the Conservation Commission's jurisdiction
and approved the site for the work shown on the facility plan.
(a)
Written confirmation that the Barre Board of Health has
reviewed the facility plan and approved a site assignment for
the facility. Or in the alternative a vote indicating that the
Barre Board of Health has determined that a site assignment
is not required.
(b)
Written confirmation that the Barre Board of Assessors has
determined that the parcel(s) involved are not subject to
special real estate tax assessment such as Chapter 61, 61A or
61B. In the event the Board of Assessors has determined that
all or part of the parcel(s) are subject to special real estate tax
assessment, written confirmation shall be required from the
Barre Tax Collector of the payment of any rollback tax, or other
payment that is required to remove the parcel(s) from such
special real estate tax assessment status.
(c)
Written approval by the Barre Board of Health for the use of
all chemicals listed on the document submitted pursuant to
Subsection G(1)(i).
(d)
Evidence of payment for the engineer to prepare estimate of
cost of decommissioning [Subsection N(4)].
(e)
(1)
Any approval voted by the Planning Board prior to receipt of the
foregoing shall be provisional.
(2)
O.
Severability. In the event any section or portion of this bylaw is
determined to be invalid or unenforceable, such determination shall
not affect the validity and enforceability of the remaining sections and
portions of this bylaw.
P.
§ 140-10.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-11
5:133
§ 140-11.1. Temporary moratorium on recreational marijuana
establishments. [Added 6-20-2017 ATM, Art. 20]
The development or operation, on a single recorded lot, of more than
one of the principal uses described above is prohibited except where
the principal uses are clearly complementary to each other or except
as specifically provided in this bylaw. Retail stores with common walls
shall be considered to be complementary to each other.
A.
B. Trailer or mobile home park or court.
Dwelling unit in which more than 50% of the livable area is located in a
basement.
C.
Signs or other advertising devices which project over a way customarily
used for pedestrian or vehicular access, unless securely attached to a
marquee which is an integral part of the building.
D.
Signs, floodlights or other advertising devices which constitute a
hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic because of the intensity or
direction of their illumination.7
E.
Purpose. On November 8, 2016 the voters of the commonwealth
approved a law regulating the cultivation, processing, distribution,
possession, and use of marijuana for recreational purposes (new MGL.
c. 94G, Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not
Medically Prescribed). The law, which allows certain personal use and
possession of marijuana, took effect on December 15, 2016, and (as
amended on December 30, 2016: Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016)
requires a Cannabis Control Commission to issue regulations regarding
the licensing of commercial activities by March 15, 2018, and to begin
accepting applications for licenses on April 1, 2018. Currently under
the Zoning Bylaw, a nonmedical marijuana establishment (hereafter,
a "recreational marijuana establishment") as defined in MGL c. 94G,
§ 1, is not specifically addressed in the Zoning Bylaw. Regulations to
be promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission may provide
guidance on certain aspects of local regulation of recreational
marijuana establishments. The regulation of recreational marijuana
raises novel legal, planning, and public safety issues, and the Town
needs time to study and consider the regulation of recreational
marijuana establishments and address issues, as well as to address
the potential impact of the state regulations on local zoning and to
undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw
regarding regulation of recreational marijuana establishments. The
Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and
structures in the Town for recreational marijuana establishments so as
A.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section IVE6, which immediately followed this section, concerning a
moratorium on issuance of cell towers permits, which was adopted 6-12-2000 ATM, Art.
42, was repealed 11-13-2000 STM, Art. 4.
§ 140-11 BARRE CODE § 140-11.1
5:134
to allow sufficient time to address the effects of such structures and
uses in the Town and to enact bylaws in a consistent manner.
Definition. "Recreational marijuana establishment" shall mean a
"marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product
manufacturer, marijuana retailer, or any other type of licensed
marijuana-related business not including medical marijuana facilities as
defined by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts."
B.
Temporary moratorium. For the reasons set forth above and
notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw to the
contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use
of land or structures for a recreational marijuana establishment and
other uses related to recreational marijuana. The moratorium shall be
in effect through December 30, 2018, or until such time as the Town
adopts Zoning Bylaw amendments that regulate recreational marijuana
establishments, whichever occurs earlier. During the moratorium
period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the
potential impacts of recreational marijuana in Town, and to consider
the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding recreational
marijuana establishments, and shall consider adopting new zoning
bylaws in response to these new issues.
C.
§ 140-11.1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-11.1
5:135

ARTICLE V
Overlay Districts
§ 140-12. Floodplain District. [Added 9-5-1985 STM, Art. 2]
Purpose. The purpose of the Floodplain District is to protect human life
and property from the hazards of periodic flooding.
A.
District delineation.
The Floodplain District is delineated on Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), dated June 15, 1982, as Zones A, A1-30 to indicate the
one-hundred-year floodplain. The precise boundaries of the district
are defined by the one-hundred-year flood elevations shown on the
FIRM and further defined by the flood profiles contained in the
Flood Insurance Study, dated December 15, 1981.
(1)
The floodway boundaries are delineated on the Flood Boundary
Floodway Map (FBFM), and further defined by the Floodway Data
Tables contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
(2)
The Town and property owners may appeal the flood levels to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency by submitting evidence to
FEMA for review.
(3)
B.
Floodplain management.
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall
community program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage.
(1)
Flood control for the floodplain started in the early forties when a
flood channel was dug through the floodplain, parallel to the Ware
River, from South Barre to Barre Plains. The channel measured 100
feet wide, with banking of 20 feet or more, in height.
(2)
In 1958, the Barre Falls Dam was completed. A full-time engineer
resides at the dam and monitors the water flow each day.
(3)
Additional flood control measure can be effected by the
Metropolitan District Commission's Shaft No. 8, which intakes all
spring excess water. This water is sent either to the Quabbin
Reservoir or the Wachusetts Reservoir. The MDC monitors and
regulates the water flow daily.
(4)
About one mile south of the Intake Shaft is the White Valley Dam.
About two miles south of the Intake Shaft is the Barre Wool
Combing Company Dam, presently owned by a hydroelectric
company. Both dams check and harness water flow. The
hydroelectric company controls and monitors water flow daily.
(5)
C.
Requirements. In the one-hundred-year floodplain [as delineated by
the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)], the following are
D.
§ 140-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-12
5:137
§ 140-13. Wellhead Protection District. [Added 6-14-1999 ATM, Art.
44]
required: [Amended 5-14-1990 ATM, Art. 30; 5-20-1991 ATM, Art.
43]
(1) Proper anchoring of structures.
The use of construction materials and methods that will minimize
flood damage.
(2)
(3) Adequate drainage for new subdivisions.
The location and design of new or replacement utility systems to
prevent flood loss.
(4)
All new construction and substantial improvements to existing
structures in the FEMA-identified floodprone areas must be
elevated or floodproofed to the level of the base flood.
(5)
All encroachment and other development are allowed in the
floodplain upon certification by a registered professional engineer
provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the one-hundred-year flood.
(6)
In the event that a stream or watercourse is altered causing the
base flood elevations on the Barre Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) to be changed, notification of such alteration shall be
provided to NFIP Massachusetts Coordinator and Massachusetts
Division of Water Resources.
(7)
Clarifications.
This Zoning Bylaw does not apply retroactively to existing
structures in the floodplains.
(1)
This Zoning Bylaw acknowledges the Subdivision Control and
Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Barre, Massachusetts. This Zoning
Bylaw acknowledges all other pertinent state and federal laws.
(2)
(3) This Zoning Bylaw applies only to the floodplain areas.
The Building Inspector is to issue all permits for any construction
in the one-hundred-year flood areas.
(4)
The Floodplain District established herein is an overlay district.
The underlying uses are allowed provided that such uses meet the
additional requirements of this Zoning Bylaw.
(5)
E.
A. Purpose. The purposes of the Wellhead Protection District are:
§ 140-12 BARRE CODE § 140-13
5:138
To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town by
ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the
residents, institutions, and businesses of Barre.
(1)
To preserve and protect existing and potential sources of drinking
water supplies;
(2)
(3) To conserve the natural resources of the Town; and
To prevent temporary and permanent contamination of the
environment.
(4)
Scope of authority. The Wellhead Protection District is an overlay
district and shall be superimposed on other zoning districts established
by this bylaw. This overlay district shall apply to all new construction,
reconstruction or expansion of existing buildings, and new or expanded
uses. Applicable activities or uses which fall within the Wellhead
Protection District must additionally comply with the requirements of
this district. Uses that are prohibited in the underlying districts shall
not be permitted in the Wellhead Protection District.
B.
Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms are
defined below:
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock, sand or gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Materials or structures on, above or below
the ground that do not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate
directly in the soil.
INTERIM WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA (IWPA) — Where the Zone
II has not yet been delineated and approved by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), an interim wellhead
protection area shall consist of the area within a one-half-mile radius
(2,640 feet) measured from the well or wellfield for sources whose
approved pumping rate is 100,000 gpd or greater. Regulations applying
to a Zone II shall apply equally to an interim wellhead protection area.
MINING — The removal or relocation of geologic materials such as
topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores or bedrock.
POTENTIAL DRINKING WATER SOURCES — Areas which could
provide significant potable water in the future.
RECHARGE AREAS — Areas that collect precipitation or surface water
and carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas may include areas designated
as Zone I, Zone II or Zone III.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics posing a significant,
actual or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human
health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water
of the Town of Barre. Toxic or hazardous material include, without
limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy
C.
§ 140-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-13
5:139
metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids or alkalis, and all
substances defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and 21E
and 310CMR 30.00, and also include such products as solvents and
thinners in quantities greater than normal household use.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION DISTRICT — The zoning district defined to
overlay other zoning districts in the Town. The Wellhead Protection
District may include specifically designated recharge areas.
ZONE I — The protective radius required around a public water supply
well or wellfield. For purposes of this bylaw, the required radius is 400
feet.
ZONE II — That area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well
under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be
realistically anticipated (180 days of pumping at safe yield, with no
recharge from precipitation). It is bounded by the groundwater divides
which result from pumping the well and by the contact of the aquifer
with less permeable materials such as till or bedrock. In some cases,
streams or lakes may act as recharge boundaries. In all cases, Zone
II shall extend up gradient to its point of intersection with prevailing
hydro-geologic boundaries (a groundwater flow divide in contact with
till or bedrock, or a recharge boundary).
Establishment and delineation of Groundwater Protection District. The
Wellhead Protection District includes the Zone I and interim wellhead
protection area for the Barre municipal wells. These areas are
delineated on a map entitled "Wellhead Protection District." This map
is hereby made a part of the Zoning Bylaw and is on file in the office of
the Town Clerk.
D.
District boundary disputes.
If the location of the district boundary in relation to a particular
parcel is in doubt, resolution of boundary disputes shall be through
a special permit application to the Special Permit Granting
Authority (SPGA). Any application for a special permit for this
purpose shall be accompanied by adequate documentation.
(1)
The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land to show
where the bounds should be located. At the request of the owner(s)
the Town may engage a professional engineer, hydrologist,
geologist, or soil scientist to determine more accurately the
boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land,
and may charge the owner(s) for the cost of the investigation.
(2)
E.
Use regulations.
Permitted uses. Unless prohibited or restricted by the regulations
of the Wellhead Protection District or other state or local
regulations, uses or activities permitted in the underlying district
are controlled by the requirements of the underlying district.
(1)
F.
§ 140-13 BARRE CODE § 140-13
5:140
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the
Wellhead Protection District:
(a) Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310CMR 19.006.
Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in MGL c.
140B, § 1.
(b)
Landfills receiving only wastewater and/or septage residuals
including those approved by the Department pursuant to MGL
c. 21 §§ 26 through 53; MGL c. 83, §§ 6 and 7, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
(c)
Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous
waste subject to MGL c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.00, except the
following:
Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR
30.00;
[1]
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events
operated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390;
[2]
[3] Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A;
Water remediation treatment works approved by the Mass.
DEP for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface
waters;
[4]
(d)
Storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in MGL c.
21E, and liquid petroleum products, unless such storage is:
[1] Above ground level, and
[2] On an impervious surface, and
In aboveground containers within a building; or outdoors
in covered containers designed to hold either 10% of the
total possible storage capacity of all containers, or 110%
of the largest container's storage capacity, whichever is
greater.
[3]
(e)
Storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in
compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31.
(f)
Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage, including
loading areas, is within a structure designed to prevent the
generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.
(g)
Storage of animal manure, unless covered or contained in
accordance with the specifications of the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service.
(h)
(2)
§ 140-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-13
5:141
Earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand,
gravel, or any other earth material (including mining activities)
to within four feet of the historical high groundwater table as
determined from monitoring wells and historical water table
fluctuation data compiled by the United States Geological
Survey, except for excavations for building foundations, roads,
or utility works.
(i)
Nonsanitary treatment or disposal works subject to 314 CMR
5.00, except for the following:
The replacement or repair of an existing treatment works
that will not result in a design capacity greater than the
design capacity of the existing treatment works;
[1]
Treatment works approved by the Department designed
for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface water
and operating in compliance with 314 CMR 5.05(3) or
5.05(13);
[2]
[3] Publicly owned treatment works.
(j)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing deicing
chemicals if brought in from outside the district:
Storage of commercial fertilizers as defined in MGL c. 120,
§ 64, unless such storage is within a structure designed to
prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff
or leachate.
[1]
(k)
Uses and activities requiring a special permit. The following uses
and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of special
permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under such
conditions as it may require:
Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform
to the Wellhead Protection District.
(a)
Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, permitted in the underlying district
[except as prohibited under Subsection F(2)]. Such activities
shall require a special permit to prevent contamination of
groundwater.
(b)
Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2,500
square feet of any lot, whichever is greater. A system for
groundwater recharge must be provided which does not
degrade groundwater quality. For nonresidential uses,
recharge shall be by stormwater infiltration basins or similar
system covered with natural vegetation, and dry wells shall
be used only where other methods are infeasible. For all
(c)
(3)
§ 140-13 BARRE CODE § 140-13
5:142
nonresidential uses, all such basins and wells shall be
preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate
removal of contamination. Any and all recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner.
Procedures for issuance of special permits.
The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under this bylaw
shall be the Planning Board (the Board). A special permit shall be
granted if the Board determines, in conjunction with the Board
of Health, the Conservation Commission and DPW Superintendent
that the intent of the bylaw, as well as its specific criteria, are
met. The Board shall not grant a special permit under this section
unless the petitioner's application materials include, in the Board's
opinion, sufficiently detailed, definite and credible information to
support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this
section. The Board shall document the basis for any departures
from the recommendations of the other Town boards or agencies in
its decision.
(1)
Upon receipt of the special permit application, the Board shall
transmit one copy of the Board of Health, Conservation
Commission and DPW Superintendent for their written
recommendations. Failure to respond in writing within 35 days
shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said Board or
official. The necessary copies of the application shall be furnished
by the applicant.
(2)
The Board may grant the required special permit only upon finding
that the proposed use meets the following standards, those
specified in § 140-13F of this bylaw, and any regulations or
guidelines adopted by the Board. The proposed use must:
In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect
the existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is
available in the Wellhead Protection District;
(a)
Be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils,
topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related
natural characteristics of the site to be developed.
(b)
(3)
The Board may adopt regulations to govern design features of
projects. Such regulations shall be consistent with subdivision
regulations adopted by the Board.8
(4)
The applicant shall file 10 copies of a site plan and attachments.
The site plan shall meet the requirements for site plan review and
approval established by § 140-23D of this Zoning Bylaw. Additional
submittals shall include the following information where pertinent:
(5)
G.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 140-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-13
5:143
A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers,
fuels and other potentially hazardous material to be used or
stored on the premises in quantities greater than those
associated with normal household use.
(a)
For those activities using or storing such hazardous materials,
a hazardous materials management plan shall be prepared and
filed with the Hazardous Materials Coordinator, Fire Chief and
Board of Health. The plan shall include:
Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous
material or wastes to the environment due to spillage,
accidental damage, corrosion, leakage or vandalism,
including spill containment and cleanup procedures;
[1]
Provision for indoor, secured storage of hazardous
materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces;
[2]
Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Mass.
Hazardous Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30, including
obtaining an EPA identification number from Mass. DEP.
[3]
(b)
Proposed down-gradient location(s) for groundwater
monitoring well(s), should the Board deem the activity a
potential groundwater threat.
(c)
The Board shall hold a hearing, in conformity with the provisions of
MGL c. 40A, § 9, within 65 days after the filing of the application
and after the review by the Town boards, departments and
commissions. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
publication and posting and by first-class mailings to "parties
interest" as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 11. The decision of the Board
and any extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Board and Town Clerk within 90 days following the closing
of the public hearing. Failure of the Board to act within 90 days
shall be deemed as a granting of the permit. However, no work
shall commence until a certification is recorded as required.
(6)
Enforcement. Written notice of any violations of this section shall be
given by the Building Inspector to the responsible person as soon as
possible after detection of a violation or continuing violation. Notice
to the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed notice to the
responsible person. Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation
and may also identify the actions necessary to remove or remedy the
violation, measures required for avoiding future violations and schedule
of compliance. A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Board,
Board of Health, Conservation Commission and DPW Superintendent
and Water Department. The cost of containment, cleanup or other
action for compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the
premises.
H.
§ 140-13 BARRE CODE § 140-13
5:144
Severability. A determination that any portion or provision of this
overlay district is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or
provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously
issued thereunder.
I.
§ 140-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-13
5:145

ARTICLE VI
Dimensional Requirements
§ 140-14. Table of Dimensional Requirements.
No land shall hereafter be used, occupied or changed and no building
or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, moved or used unless it
complies with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw set forth in the Table
of Dimensional Requirements or is expressly excepted in this or other
sections.9
§ 140-15. Lots or parcels not meeting requirements.
A lot or parcel of land having an area or frontage of lesser amount than
required in this table shall be considered as meeting the requirements of
this article provided it was shown on a plan or described in a deed duly
recorded or registered at the time of the adoption or amendment of this
bylaw and did not, at the time, adjoin other land of the same owner available
for use in connection with such lot or parcel.
9. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 140-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-15
5:147

ARTICLE VII
General Regulations
§ 140-16. Nonconforming uses.
§ 140-17. Parking requirements.
The lawful use of any structure or land existing at the time of the
enactment or subsequent amendment of this bylaw may be continued
although such structure or use of land does not conform with the
provisions of the bylaw.
A.
A nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall not be changed to
another use, except on special permit from the Special Permit Granting
Authority. [Amended 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
B.
A nonconforming use which has been discontinued for two years shall
not be reestablished without a special permit from the Special Permit
Granting Authority. [Amended 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
C.
A nonconforming structure damaged by fire or other causes beyond
80% of its assessed valuation shall not be rebuilt except in conformity
with the bylaw, unless said work is completed within two years
following the damage.
D.
A nonconforming use which has been changed to a more restricted or
conforming use shall not revert to a nonconforming use.
E.
It is intended, under this bylaw, that suitable off-street motor vehicle
parking spaces shall be provided to meet the needs of all persons using
buildings or land. As a guide to what is suitable, the following will
apply:
Type of Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Medical offices 3 spaces per doctor
Apartments 1 space per dwelling unit
Public assembly 1 space per classroom and office
Retail stores 1 space per 150 square feet of floor area
Motel 1 space per room accommodation plus 1 space
per employee
Industrial 1 space per two employees
Restaurants and bars 1 space per 2-seat capacity
A.
Two hundred twenty-five square feet of net standing and maneuvering
area is the minimum required per space.
B.
This section shall apply to new buildings or uses of land, but shall not
apply to existing uses except where they are enlarged.
C.
§ 140-16 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-18
5:149
§ 140-18. Earth removal.
The removal of earth, including soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, stone or
other subsurface products, except water, from land in the Town of Barre is
prohibited except as follows:
§ 140-19. Wireless communication facilities. [Added 11-13-2000
STM, Art. 5]
Excavations required for the construction of structures for which all
permits have been issued, or for the installation of walks, driveways,
septic systems, swimming pools, landscaping or other accessory uses
to such buildings and expansions thereto, provided the quantity of
material removed shall not exceed that displaced by the portion of
the buildings or accessory use below finished grade. [Amended
6-14-1999 ATM, Art. 45]
A.
When a permit for earth removal has been granted by the Planning
Board after a public hearing has been held. Said permit shall require as
a condition that: [Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
(1) No loam be removed from the Town;
Each applicant shall file with the Planning Board a map or plan,
prepared at the expense of the applicant, showing present contours
and future contours of the area to be excavated.
(2)
A permit granted shall state the predetermined grade or grades to
which the site shall be brought at the completion of the operations,
and the amount of topsoil to be placed over the cuts.
(3)
B.
Objectives. This section permits the use of wireless communication
facilities within the Town, regulates their impacts, and accommodates
their location and use in a manner intended to:
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural, or manmade
resources of the Town,
(1)
(2) Protect property values,
Minimize any adverse impact on the residents of the Town (such
as, but not limited to, attractive nuisance, noise and falling objects)
with regard to the general safety, welfare and quality of life in the
community,
(3)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
wireless communications facilities,
(4)
Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of
time for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate or
modify wireless communication facilities,
(5)
A.
§ 140-18 BARRE CODE § 140-19
5:150
(6) Encourage the use of certain existing structures and towers,
Minimize the total number and height of towers located within the
community,
(7)
Require tower sharing and clustering of wireless communications
facilities where they reinforce the other objectives in this section,
and
(8)
(9) Be in compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Applicability.
The requirements of this section shall apply to all wireless
communications facilities, except where federal or state law or
regulations exempt certain users or uses from all or portions of the
provisions of this section.
(1)
No wireless communication facility shall be considered exempt
from this section by sharing a tower or other structure with such
exempt uses.
(2)
B.
Definitions. The following words, which are technical terms applying
to wireless communication facilities, shall have the meaning indicated
below.
ACT — The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
ADEQUATE COVERAGE — The geographic area in which the carrier
provides a level of service expected by the Federal Communications
Commission under its license or authority.
ANTENNA — A device by which electromagnetic waves are sent or
received (whether a dish, rod, mast, pole, set of wires, plate, panel, line,
cable or other arrangement serving such purpose).
AVAILABLE SPACE — The space on a tower or other structure to which
antennas of a wireless communication service provider are able to fit
structurally and are able to provide adequate coverage.
CAMOUFLAGED — A wireless service facility that is placed within an
existing or proposed structure disguised, painted, colored, or hidden
by a compatible part of an existing or proposed structure, or made to
resemble an architectural feature of the buildings or structure on which
it is placed.
CARRIER — A company, authorized by the FCC, that provides wireless
communications services.
CHANNEL — One of the assigned bands of radio frequencies as defined
in the Act, licensed to the service provider for wireless service use.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a single mount by more than one carrier
and/or several mounts on a building or structure by more than one
carrier. Each service on a co-location is a separate wireless service
facility.
C.
§ 140-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-19
5:151
COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT SHELTER — A structure designed
principally to enclose equipment used in connection with wireless
communication transmission, and/or reception.
CONCEALED — A wireless service facility within a building or other
structure, which is not visible from outside the structure.
DBM — A unit of measure of the power level of an electromagnetic
signal expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt.
FACILITY SITE — A lot or parcel, or any part thereof, which is owned
or leased by one or more personal communication wireless service
providers and upon which one or more wireless communication
facility(ies) and required landscaping are located.
FACILITY — Wireless communication facility.
MAJOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any significant
material change or proposed change to a facility, whether built or
permitted that will or has the potential to impact the Town,
neighborhood or adjacent properties, either with respect to appearance
of the site, noise, traffic or public safety.[Added 6-13-2005 ATM, Art.
29]
MINOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any minor
change whether material or administrative that does not have the
potential to impact the Town, neighborhood, or adjacent properties,
either with respect to appearance of the site, noise traffic or public
safety.[Added 6-13-2005 ATM, Art. 29]
MONITORING — The measurement, by the use of instruments away
from the antenna, of the electromagnetic radiation from a site as a
whole, or from individual wireless communication facilities, towers,
antennas, repeaters or associated power supplies and generators.
MONOPOLE — A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy-wire
anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal, or
a wooden pole with below-grade foundations.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — The electromagnetic
emissions from wireless service facilities.
REPEATER — A small receiver/relay transmitter of not more than 20
watts output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to
receive adequate coverage from the primary sending and receiving site
in a wireless communications network.
SPGA — The Special Permit Granting Authority.
TOWER — A structure or framework, or monopole, that is designed
to support wireless communications transmitting, receiving, and/or
relaying, antennas and/or equipment. Components of the wireless
communication facility used only to attach or support other elements
of that facility are excluded provided such components are relatively
less substantial than those other elements and do not materially affect
a dimension of that facility.
§ 140-19 BARRE CODE § 140-19
5:152
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES — Commercial mobile radio
services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services as defined in the Act.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — All equipment buildings,
and structures with which a wireless communication service carrier
broadcasts and receives the radio-frequency waves which carry their
services and all locations of said equipment or any part thereof.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity
licensed by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) to provide
wireless communication services to individuals, businesses or
institutions.
Location of facilities.
No wireless communications facility shall be erected, constructed
or installed without a special permit from the Planning Board;
wireless communication facilities shall be allowed in all zoning
districts by special permit.
(1)
Other sections of the Town of Barre bylaw notwithstanding,
wireless communication facilities may be allowed as an additional
use and/or structure on a lot which already has a principal use and/
or structure thereon.
(2)
D.
Criteria, priority for location of facilities.
Wireless communication facilities shall be located according to the
following priorities:
(a) Within an existing structure concealed,
(b) Within an existing structure and camouflaged,
Camouflaged on an existing structure, such as but not limited
to an existing electric transmission tower or an existing radio
antenna, a water tower, or building, and of compatible design,
(c)
Co-located with existing wireless communication service
facilities,
(d)
If adequately demonstrated to the SPGA in the special permit
process that each of the five types of locations is not feasible,
erection of a new facility which complies with the other
requirements of this section and where visual impact can be
minimized and mitigated.
(e)
(1)
Applicants shall demonstrate that they have investigated locations
higher in priority ranking than the one for which they are applying
and whether sites are available and, if applicable, under what
conditions.
(2)
E.
F. Dimensional screening and other site development requirements.
§ 140-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-19
5:153
Shelters and accessory buildings. Any communication equipment
shelter or accessory building shall be designed to be architecturally
similar and compatible with the surrounding area, or constructed
underground, or camouflaged by planting of an evergreen hedge
not less than 75% of the height of the structure at the time of
planting.
(1)
Setbacks.
Any new tower shall be set back at least 120% of the height of
the tower from each lot line and each residential dwelling of
the site on which the tower is located.
(a)
Any nonconcealed antenna shall be set back at least one time
the height of the antenna, as measured from the ground level,
from each lot line of the site on which the antenna is located.
However, if the antenna is being attached to an existing tower
whose setback is already approved either by right, by special
permit or by variance and, if the SPGA determines that the
addition of the antenna does not materially alter the basis
of that prior approval, then no new, independent, setback
requirement shall be created by the addition of the antenna.
(b)
In nonresidential districts the SPGA may grant a special permit
to allow a lesser setback if it makes a finding that such lesser
setback provides adequate safety, promotes co-location or
improves design, and will not negatively impact the
appearance and character of the neighborhood.
(c)
(2)
Security, signs. The area around the wireless communication
facility shall be completely secure from trespass or vandalism. A
sign not larger than one square foot shall be posted adjacent to
the entry gate indicating the name of the facility owner(s) and
a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number. Advertising on
any antenna, tower, fencing, accessory building or communication
equipment shelter is prohibited.
(3)
Lighting. Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration,
no exterior night lighting of towers or the wireless communication
facility is permitted except for manually operated emergency lights
for use when operating personnel are on site.
(4)
New towers. Any new freestanding tower shall be of a monopole
construction. New towers shall not exceed the minimum height
necessary to provide adequate coverage within the Town of Barre.
(5)
Height. The maximum height for an antenna is 10 feet and for a
tower is 190 feet unless the applicant demonstrates that a greater
height is required to allow for provision of service or unless the
Planning Board finds that co-location on said tower is practical and
preferable.
(6)
§ 140-19 BARRE CODE § 140-19
5:154
Vegetation.
Existing on-site vegetation shall be presented to the maximum
extent possible.
(a)
Vegetative screening shall be used to screen abutting
residential properties and roadways. Plants that fit in with the
surrounding natural vegetation shall be used.
(b)
(7)
Access and parking.
There shall be a maximum of one parking space for each tower
to be in connection with maintenance or the site and not to be
used for the storage of vehicles or other equipment.
(a)
The access road and parking area surface shall be constructed
of gravel or other nonbituminous material to maintain a rural
character.
(b)
(8)
Noise. The wireless communications facility shall not generate
noise in excess of 35 dB at the property line.
(9)
Connections. All network interconnections and utility connections
shall be via underground lines.
(10)
Acceptable antenna types. Only sector and whip-type antennas will
be accepted. No dish-type antennas will be allowed.
(11)
Tower coatings. The visual impact of new towers shall be minimized
by use of the appropriate paint or covering.
(12)
Justification of need.
Coverage area. The applicant shall provide a map of the geographic
area in which the proposed facility will provide adequate coverage.
(1)
Adequacy of other facility sites controlled by the applicant. The
applicant shall provide written documentation of any facility sites
in the Town and in abutting towns or cities in which it has a legal or
equitable interest, whether by ownership, leasehold, or otherwise.
Said documentation shall demonstrate that these facility sites do
not already provide, or do not have the potential to provide by site
adjustment, adequate coverage.
(2)
Capacity of existing facility sites. The applicant shall provide
written documentation that it has examined all facility sites located
in the Town and in abutting towns in which the applicant has no
legal or equitable interest to determine whether those existing
facility sites can be used to provide adequate coverage.
(3)
Adequate coverage through the least intrusive means. The
applicant shall provide written documentation including radio
propagation maps, that the proposed facility uses the least
(4)
G.
§ 140-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-19
5:155
intrusive means by which it can provide adequate coverage in
conjunction with all facility sites listed above.
Application, permits and special permits.
Special permit granting authority.
The Planning Board shall be the SPGA for permits under this
section.
(a)
The SPGA shall maintain a set of regulations that contain the
necessary policies, procedures and standards to implement the
provisions of this section.
(b)
(1)
Permits.
Each application for a permit must contain site plans with
sufficient detail that would enable the Town to determine
whether the proposed facility meets the requirements of
§ 140-23. Each applicant must include a Town-wide map
showing the locations of all existing wireless communication
facilities and proposed wireless communication facilities in the
Town and within three miles of the Town boundaries. Each
application must include a plan at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet showing all property lines, streets, landscape features,
and all buildings within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The
plan shall show the exact location of the proposed facilities
including antennas (designed maximum), equipment shelters,
security barriers, and parking. The plan shall show all
proposed changes to the existing property including grading,
vegetation removal and temporary and permanent roads and
driveways.
(a)
To demonstrate the visual impact of a proposed tower, the
applicant shall fly a three-foot diameter balloon or place a
crane at the proposed site at the maximum height of the
proposed tower. This demonstration shall be conducted on
a weekend day. The date and location of the demonstration
shall be advertised at least seven days, but not more that
21 days, before the demonstration in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town. Abutters shall be notified by certified
mail. Photographs of the demonstration showing the visual
impact of the proposed tower on abutting streets, adjacent
property and residential neighborhoods shall be submitted.
(b)
(2)
Fee. In addition to the Town special permit fees, the applicant shall
pay any cost of retaining professional services if such services are
deemed necessary by the Planning Board. The applicant may be
required to pay reasonable fees for professional review of, and
professional advice regarding, the applicant's proposal by a
professional or radio frequency engineer, attorney or other
(3)
H.
§ 140-19 BARRE CODE § 140-19
5:156
qualified professional. The applicant shall pay said fees regardless
of whether the application is approved.
Approval criteria.
A special permit shall be granted under this section only if the
SPGA shall find that the project is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this section of the Town of Barre Zoning
Bylaw and the SPGA's regulations. In addition, the SPGA shall
make all the applicable findings before granting the special
permit, as follows:
That the applicant is not already providing adequate
coverage or is unable to maintain adequate coverage
without the special permit,
[1]
That the applicant is not able to use existing facility sites
or higher priority sites either with or without the use of
repeaters to provide adequate coverage,
[2]
That the proposed wireless service facility minimizes any
adverse impact on historic resources, scenic views,
residential property values, natural or man-made
resources,
[3]
That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the
facilities,
[4]
That the facility shall comply with the appropriate FCC
regulations regarding emissions of electromagnetic
radiation and that the required monitoring program is in
place and shall be paid for by the applicant,
[5]
That the applicant has agreed to rent or lease available
space on any tower it controls within Barre or its
contiguous towns, under the terms of a fair-market lease,
without discrimination to other wireless service providers,
and
[6]
That there is a substantial gap in telecommunication
service and the proposal is the least intrusive means to fill
the gap.
[7]
(a)
If a special permit is granted, in addition to such terms and
conditions as may be authorized by this bylaw, the SPGA may
impose such additional conditions and safeguards as public
safety, welfare and convenience may require.
(b)
Any decision by the SPGA to deny a special permit under this
section shall be in conformance with the Act, in that it shall be
in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in
a written record.
(c)
(4)
§ 140-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-19
5:157
Term of permit.
Each special permit shall be valid for a fixed or conditional
period of time, not less than five years, as determined by the
Special Permit Granting Authority. At the end of the approved
time period, the facility shall be removed by the carrier or a
new special permit shall be required.
(a)
Any major modification of an existing facility or a permitted
proposed facility, as defined in this bylaw, will require a new
special permit application. Minimum liability insurance of
$1,000,000 is required. Minor modification may be approved
by the Planning Board without additional hearings. [Amended
6-13-2005 ATM, Art. 29]
(b)
All permitted and special permitted wireless communications
facility carriers shall periodically file a report with the Town,
every five years (or sooner if specified in the special permit),
on operational aspects of the facility including: power
consumption; power radiation; frequency transmission; the
number, location, and orientation of antennas; and types of
services provided.
(c)
(5)
Removal requirements. Any wireless communication facility that ceases
to operate for a period of one year shall be removed. Cease to operate
is defined as not performing the normal functions associated with the
wireless service facility and its equipment on a continuous and ongoing
basis for a period of one year. At the time of removal, the facility site
shall be restored such that all wireless communication facilities that
have ceased to operate are removed. If all facilities on a tower have
ceased to operate, the tower (including the foundation) shall also be
removed and the site shall be revegetated by the owner. Existing trees
shall only be removed if necessary to complete the required removal.
The applicant shall, as a condition of the special permit, provide a
financial surety or other form of financial guarantee acceptable to the
SPGA, to cover the cost of removal of the facility and the restoration of
the landscape, should the facility cease to operate.
I.
Severability clause. If any provision or section of this bylaw is
determined to be invalid or unconstitutional by any authority, every
other provision and section shall continue in full force and effect.
J.
§ 140-19 BARRE CODE § 140-19
5:158
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 140-20. Enforcement; rate of development.
This bylaw shall be enforced by the Building Inspector under the
authority of the Board of Selectmen.
A.
If the Building Inspector charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Bylaw is requested in writing to enforce the bylaw against any person
allegedly in violation of the same and the Building Inspector declines to
act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of
any action or refusal to act, and the reason therefor, within 14 days of
receipt of such request. [Added 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
B.
Rate of development. [Added 6-11-2007 ATM, Art. 18]
Purpose. The purposes of this subsection, Rate of development, are
to (a) promote orderly residential growth in the Town of Barre,
consistent with the rate of growth over the last 10 years (expressed
herein as building permits issued for new dwelling units); (b) phase
growth so that it will not unduly strain the community's ability
to plan for and provide basic public facilities and services; (c)
provide the Town and its boards and agencies the information
and reasonable time necessary to preserve and enhance existing
community character, safety, health, and the value of property; (d)
ensure the greatest degree of fairness and equal opportunity to all
in the distribution of available building permits, and (e) allow time
for the Town to initiate and complete a master planning process
and make associated revisions to its zoning bylaws, subdivision
control regulations, and other local land use laws.
(1)
General. Beginning on the date of the adoption of this bylaw,
building permits (hereinafter, "permits") for no more than 35 new
dwelling units shall be issued in calendar years 2007, 2008, 2009,
2010 and 2011. More than 35 permits may be issued in one year
if Subsection C(3)(e) below applies. For the purposes of this
subsection, a one-family structure shall constitute one dwelling
unit, a two-family structure (duplex) shall constitute two dwelling
units, an accessory apartment shall constitute one dwelling unit,
and a one-family structure with an accessory apartment shall
constitute two dwelling units.
(2)
Procedures. Any permits shall be issued in accordance with the
following procedures:
Any natural person, partnership, corporation, realty trust or
legal entity may apply for no more than two permits in any
given month. In the case of an application constituting greater
than two dwelling units, the aforesaid interval shall be two
months. For the purposes of this subsection, subsequent
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 140-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-20
5:159
applications in the same one-month or two-month period, as
the case may be, by any natural person, partnership,
corporation, realty trust or legal entity which in any way may
be construed as having a common ownership, interest or
control with previous applications in the same month or
months are prohibited, and shall be returned to the applicant.
Permits shall be issued on or before Friday (or, in case of
a holiday, on whatever day is the last day of the week that
the offices of the Building Inspector are open for business) of
each week by the Building Inspector (following approval by the
Building Inspector). The Building Inspector shall act on each
permit in order of submission. Any permit application that is
incomplete or inaccurate shall be returned to the applicant and
shall require a new submission.
(b)
From the first Friday in January through the 15th Friday of the
year, either no (0) permit if there are no approved applications
awaiting issuance, or two permits if there is one or more
approved applications awaiting issuance, shall be issued in
any given week. If all 35 permits have not been issued by
the 15th Friday of the year, the remaining permits shall be
issued for approved applications at the rate of one or more
per week until 35 permits are issued for that year. Should the
Building Inspector issue 29 permits and subsequently receive
a permit application for a two-family or multifamily structure,
the application shall be passed over and retained by the
Building Inspector. [See Subsection C(3)(g) below.] In
circumstances where Subsection C(3)(e) below, applies, there
may be more than 35 permits available for issuance.
(c)
The Building Inspector shall mark each application with the
time end the date of submission, and shall act on each
application in a timely manner. He/she shall issue approved
permits in accordance with the schedule in Subsection C(3)(c)
above. If the Building Inspector has more approved permits in
any given week, than he/she is authorized to issue, the Building
Inspector shall retain said permits to be issued in the order in
which the applications were submitted.
(d)
If any permit is deemed abandoned or invalid in the same
calendar year in which it was issued, then it shall be returned
and counted as an additional permit available for issuance
during that same calendar year. A permit which is deemed
abandoned or invalid in a calendar year different from the
year in which it was issued shall be returned and counted as
an additional permit to be issued during the calendar year in
which it is deemed abandoned or invalid only if 1) there were
more approved applications for permits then were issued in
the year when the said permit was issued, and 2) if there are
any intervening years between the calendar year of issuance
(e)
§ 140-20 BARRE CODE § 140-20
5:160
and calendar year in which said permit is deemed abandoned
or invalid, there were also more approved applications for
permits than were issued during all of those intervening years.
Permits not issued in any calendar year shall not be available
for issuance in any subsequent year.
(f)
By the first Friday of January during any calendar year in
which this subsection of this bylaw is in effect, the Building
Inspector shall determine whether or not each approved
application for which a permit has not been issued during the
previous calendar year shall be retained. Upon being informed
in writing by the applicant before said first Friday in January
that the applicant desires the application to remain in effect,
the Building Inspector shall continue to treat said application
as an approved but not issued application in accordance with
this section. All approved applications for which a permit has
not been issued, and for which the applicant has not informed
the Building Inspector in writing by the said first Friday in
January of the applicant's desire for the application to remain
in effect shall not be retained, and the application shall be
returned to the applicant.
(g)
The maximum number of permits to be issued for the
remainder of calendar year 2007 shall be 35. All provisions
of this subsection shall apply to said issuance except that the
period of permit issuance may commence on the first Friday
following adoption of this bylaw.
(h)
Affordable housing. Except as provided herein and upon a
determination by the Planning Board under a special permit,
dwelling units which meet special needs in affordable housing
provision shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.
Such special permit shall be granted if said dwelling units are
housing units that are eligible for inclusion in the Town's
"Subsidized Housing Inventory" for purposes of G.L. Chapter 40B
as determined by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development. Affordable dwelling units exempted
under this Subsection C(4) shall nevertheless be counted toward
the 35 permit yearly maximum established in Subsection C(2),
above.
(4)
Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to, nor
limit in any way, the granting of building or occupancy permits
required far enlargement restoration, rehabilitation, or
reconstruction of dwellings existing on lots as of the date of
passage of this bylaw.
(5)
Relation to real estate assessment. Any land owner denied the
issuance of an approved permit because of the provisions in
sections may appeal to the Board of Assessors, in conformity with
(6)
§ 140-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-20
5:161
§ 140-21. Building permit; application information.
No building permit shall be issued until the construction or alteration of
a building or structure, as proposed, shall comply in all respects with
the provisions of the bylaw or with a decision rendered by the Board of
Appeals. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a plan,
accurately drawn, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the exact location and size of all buildings or structures
already on the lot, the location of new buildings and structures to be
erected, the existing and intended use of each building or structure and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the execution
and enforcement of this bylaw.
§ 140-22. Certificate of occupancy.
No land shall be occupied or used, and no building or structure which
was erected or structurally altered after the first passage of applicable
provisions of this or any prior bylaw or any amendment thereto shall be
occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose unless a certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. Such certificate
shall state that the structure and use of structure and land comply in every
respect with the provisions of this bylaw in effect at the time of issuance.
§ 140-23. Board of Appeals.
the General taws of Massachusetts Chapter 59, Section 59, for a
determination as to the extent to which the temporary restriction
on development of such land shall affect the assessed valuation
placed on such land for purposes of real estate taxation, and for
abatement as determined to be appropriate.
Severability. If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the bylaw shall not be
effected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections or parts
of any section or sections of this bylaw shall not affect the validly
of the remainder of the Barre Zoning Bylaw.
(7)
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals, also known as "Zoning
Board of Appeals," of three members and two associate members to be
appointed by the Selectmen as provided in the General Laws, Chapter
40A. The Board of Appeals shall establish procedures consistent with
the provisions of this bylaw and with the provisions of Chapter 40A
or other applicable provisions of the General Laws, and shall file a
copy thereof with the Town Clerk. The Board of Appeals shall have the
following powers and duties: [Amended 6-17-2002 ATM, Art. 31]
Appeals. To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved
by reason of his inability to obtain a permit from the Building
Inspector under the provision of General Laws, Chapter 40A, or
by any officer or board of the Town of Barre or by any person
aggrieved by any order or decision of the Building Inspector in
(1)
A.
§ 140-20 BARRE CODE § 140-23
5:162
§ 140-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-12-2000 ATM, Art.
42]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section or provision of this
bylaw shall be fined not more than $300 for each offense. Each day that
willful violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 140-25. Amendment. [Amended 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
This bylaw may be amended from time to time in accordance with the
provisions of MGL, c. 40A, § 5.
§ 140-26. Repetitive petitions.
No proposed change in this bylaw which has been unfavorably acted upon
by the Town Meeting shall be considered on its merits by the Town Meeting
within two years after the date of such unfavorable action unless adoption
of the proposed change is recommended in the final report of the Planning
Board. No application for a special permit and no appeal or petition for a
variance which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Board of Appeals
shall be considered on its merits by said Board within two years after
the vote of such unfavorable action except with unanimous consent of the
Planning Board.
§ 140-27. Validity.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
violation of any provision of General Laws, Chapter 40A, or of this
bylaw.
Variances. A variance may be granted, after public hearing, by the
Zoning Board of Appeals where the Board finds that: [Amended
2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6]
Special circumstances relating to soil conditions, shape or
topography of the land or structures exist on the particular parcel,
and
(1)
These special circumstances specifically affect the particular
parcel involved and do not generally affect other parcels in the
same zoning district in which the parcel is located, and
(2)
A literal interpretation of the provisions of the zoning bylaw would
involve substantial hardship to the petitioner either financial or
otherwise, and
(3)
Desirable relief might be granted to the petitioner without
substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or
substantially derogating from the intent and purpose of the bylaw.
(4)
B.
§ 140-23 ALARM SYSTEMS § 140-28
5:163
§ 140-28. Other regulations.
This bylaw shall not interfere with or annul any other Town bylaw, rule,
regulation, or permit provided that, unless specifically excepted, where this
bylaw is more stringent, it shall control.
§ 140-29. (Reserved)
§ 140-30. Designation of Special Permit Granting Authority. [Added
2-26-1979 STM, Art. 7]
§ 140-31. Associate member of Planning Board. [Added 6-14-1999
ATM, Art. 47]
The Planning Board shall have an associate member to be elected annually
at the annual Town election for a term of one year pursuant to MGL c. 40A,
§ 9.
§ 140-32. Cost of legal notices. [Added 6-14-1999 ATM, Art. 47]
The cost of legal notices shall be borne by the applicant with a deposit
required from the applicant at time of application.
The Planning Board shall be designated as the Special Permit Granting
Authority.
A.
The Planning Board shall hear and decide applications for special
permits for exceptions as provided in this bylaw, subject to any general
or specific rules therein contained and subject to any appropriate
conditions and safeguards imposed by the Board. [Amended
6-12-2000 ATM, Art. 42]
B.
A special permit shall be issued only after a public hearing. Any
application for a special permit shall be forwarded by written
notification from the Special Permit Granting Authority to the Board
of Health, Conservation Commission, and Selectmen, who shall have
an opportunity, within 35 days of such notification, to report its
recommendations in writing to the Special Permit Granting Authority.
That a special permit shall lapse if substantial use of said permit has
not commenced within two years. [Added 2-26-1979 STM, Art. 6;
amended 6-13-2005 ATM, Art. 30]
C.
§ 140-28 BARRE CODE § 140-32
5:164
Chapter 201
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 21. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
§ 201-1. Permit information and documentation; renewal fee.
§ 201-2. Application submission requirements.
Any person who desires to remove and/or process earth products shall
submit a written application for a special permit to the Planning Board.
Each application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared
by a registered professional engineer or registered professional land
surveyor as follows:
Earth removal special permits shall include the following specific
information and supporting documentation:
(1) The location of the proposed excavation;
(2) The name and address of the property owner/mortgagee;
(3) The name and address of the applicant;
(4) A site plan as prescribed below;
A filing fee in the amount established by the Planning Board
sufficient to cover the costs of advertisement, notification to
abutters and review expenses;
(5)
A.
Renewal of the special permit shall require a fee established by the
Planning Board.
B.
A plan of the area from which removal is proposed and a strip at least
150 feet wide surrounding said area, showing all man-made features,
lot lines, names of abutters, zoning boundaries, vegetation cover, soil
characteristics and existing topography;
A.
A plan of the area showing the finished grade and treatment of the site
after the proposed completion of the excavation hereinafter called the
restoration plan;
B.
All adjacent roads, public or private, their elevations and established
grades;
C.
Natural features, including:
(1) All wetlands on the locus and their respective elevations;
D.
§ 140-32 ALARM SYSTEMS § 201-2
5:165
§ 201-3. Surety bond.
§ 201-4. Specifications.
(2) One-hundred-year floodplain boundaries, if within the site locus;
Water table elevations as determined by soil evaluation, test pits
and soil borings;
(3)
E. Existing and proposed contours at maximum ten-foot intervals;
The estimated quantity of materials to be removed and topsoil to be
stripped and replaced;
F.
G. Distance to all public water supply wells within 1/2 mile;
H. Stock pile areas and locations for stumps and slash.
Before approval of any plan, the Planning Board requires of the
applicant a surety bond or a deposit of money (which may take the form
of an assignment of a savings account assented to by the depository
bank) of $1,000 per acre or as calculated by using Richardson
Engineering Services Estimating Standards (latest edition) or R. S.
Means (latest edition) in order to ensure the fulfillment of the
requirements of this special permit and of the particular conditions.
Said bond or other security shall not be released until the applicant
has filed a written certificate stamped by the applicant's professional
engineer or professional land surveyor, which certifies that site
restoration has been completed in compliance with the special permit
and filed plan, and the Board has voted to accept.
A.
Supervisory expenses and any additional expenses incurred by the
Town of Barre as a result of any violation of this special permit by an
applicant and deemed necessary by the Planning Board to monitor the
applicant's performance shall be paid by the applicant.
B.
All trees shall be cut not bulldozed. Stumps and slash shall be removed
to specific locations within the excavation area as shown on the plans,
but not within 100 feet of any property line or public way. All trees,
brush and stumps shall be disposed of in accordance with state laws
and regulations and the Board of Health.
A.
B. Earth shall be removed to contours set forth in the approved site plan.
The active excavation area shall not exceed a total six acres at one time.
One hundred feet of natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on
undisturbed land for screening and noise reduction purposes. Where
no trees or natural vegetation are present, a berm or fencing may be
required for screening and noise reduction purposes.
C.
Restoration shall be carried on simultaneously with the excavation
so that no more than a maximum of six acres shall be excavated
(unrestored) at any time. Final restoration in accordance with the
D.
§ 201-2 BARRE CODE § 201-4
5:166
restoration plan is required to be completed within the special permit
time frame or within 60 days of cessation of operation whichever occurs
first.
All topsoil and subsoil stripped from operation areas shall be stockpiled
(not to be removed from the site) and used in restoring the area. Topsoil
and subsoil shall be spread over all disturbed areas to a minimum depth
of four inches and successfully seeded with a high quality perennial
grass seed. Areas where permanent erosion-controlling vegetation fails
to become established shall be required to be reseeded.
E.
The finished leveling and grading shall be indicated on the plans
submitted to the Planning Board for approval. If grading occurs below
the grade of any abutting and established way open to public or private
use, a minimum of a twenty-foot horizontal shelf must be left from
the edge of said way or from the property line of said way whichever
is greater before beginning sloping at a maximum of 3:1 (three-foot
horizontal to one-foot vertical).
F.
No area shall be excavated so as to cause accumulation of freestanding
water. Permanent drainage shall be provided in accordance with United
States Conservation Service Guidelines.
G.
No working slope shall be steeper than 2:1 (two-foot horizontal to
one-foot vertical); no finished slope shall be steeper than 3:1; 4:1 is
preferred for property at the original natural drainage points; and so
that the total discharge at peak flow and the area of drainage to any
one point is not increased.
H.
All access roads leading to public ways shall be treated with suitable
material (bituminous concrete pavement or crushed stone) for a
minimum distance of 100 feet so as to avoid tracking dust and mud
onto public ways. The operator shall be responsible for cleaning up any
spillage on public ways as it occurs.
I.
The Planning Board, Zoning Enforcement Officer or their agents
reserve the right to make visits (reasonable efforts should be made to
notify the owner) to the permit area for the purpose of inspection and/
or for conformance with the requirements and conditions of the permit.
J.
The permit may be issued for an initial period of up to five years and
may be extended up to five years, provided that the applicant has
conformed to the requirements and conditions of the permit. The Board
may revoke or suspend any permit which it has issued for good cause
following a hearing.
K.
L. The permit is nontransferable.
Hours of operation shall not extend beyond the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No Sunday or holiday hours are
permitted. There shall be no exceptions beyond these hours. However,
the Planning Board may further limit hours of operation if, after
M.
§ 201-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 201-4
5:167
§ 201-5. Limited earth removal special permit.
A limited earth removal special permit may be granted for a period of up
to one year with reduced requirements. The amount of earth removal is not
to exceed 500 cubic yards and the area of land disturbed cannot exceed 1/
2 acre. The requirement for bonding may be waived or reduced though the
applicant still is required to restore the area.
§ 201-6. Authority of Planning Board.
Adoption of these regulations by the Planning Board shall not diminish any
of the authority given to said Board by state statute, or by the bylaws or
Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Barre.
§ 201-7. Modification of regulations.
The Board reserves the right to modify any and all of the above regulations.
Chapter 202
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Surface water control — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
Review of subdivision plans — See Ch. 303.
Sewer construction standards — See Ch. 402.
weighing factors, including impact on traffic flow, safety, or that such
hours would be detrimental or offensive to the neighborhood, it
determines the public good will be served. Trucks may enter and leave
the premises only within said hours.
A gate must be installed at the entrance and be kept locked except
during hours of operation. Fencing may be required where slopes are
steeper than 2:1 (two-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical) for public
safety.
N.
§ 201-4 BARRE CODE § 201-7
5:168
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 202-1. Purpose. (MGL c. 41, § 81-M)
" The subdivision control law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting
the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the cities and
towns in which it is, or may hereafter be, put in effect by regulating the
laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the
several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring
sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks and open
areas. The powers of a planning board and of a board of appeal under the
subdivision control law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision
of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe
and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the
adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation
of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and
other emergencies; for insuring compliance with the applicable zoning
ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage,
drainage and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and
for coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the
public ways in the city or town in which it is located and with the ways in
neighboring subdivisions."
§ 202-2. Authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Barre by
MGL c. 41, § 81-Q, said Board hereby amends those rules and regulations
governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Barre which took effect on
the first day of March 1963. Such amended rules and regulations shall be
effective on and after the day of 18 May 1987.
§ 202-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-2
5:169

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 202-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations, the terms and words defined in the
Subdivision Control Law shall have the meaning given herein, unless a
contrary intention clearly appears in these definitions. The following other
terms and words are defined as follows:
APPLICANT — Person applying for approval of a plan hereunder, including
owner, agent or assigns of the owner.
ARTERIAL — A major street in the city's street system that serves as an
avenue for the circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the city and carries
high volumes of traffic.
BENCH MARK — Mark made in durable object of known position and
elevation as a reference point.
BOARD — The Planning Board of Barre.
CERTIFICATION/ENDORSEMENT BY THE PLANNING BOARD — As
applied to an instrument required or authorized by the Subdivision Control
Law to be recorded, shall mean certification/endorsement signed by a
majority of the members of the Board, or by any other person authorized
by it to certify/endorse, and named by a written statement to the register
of deeds and recorder of the Land Court, signed by a majority of the Board.
(MGL c. 41, § 81-L)
EASEMENT — A right in land acquired by public authority or other person
to use or control property for a utility or other purpose.
ENGINEER or SURVEYOR — Person registered by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts to perform professional civil engineering or land surveying
services.
LOT — Area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries used, or
available for use, as the site of one or more buildings. Areas endorsed by
the Board upon a plan as "not available for building purposes" shall not be
considered lots.
MINOR ROAD — A street whose sole function is to provide access to
abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve not more than nine
dwelling units and is expected or does handle up to 90 trips per day.
PRIMARY COLLECTOR — A street whose principal function is to carry
traffic between minor and secondary collector streets and arterial streets
but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties. It serves or
is designed to serve, directly or indirectly, more than 100 dwelling units and
is designed to be used or is used to carry more than 1,000 trips per day.
RECORDED — Recording in the Registry of Deeds for Worcester County
and, where registered land is affected, filing with the recorder of the Land
Court. (MGL c. 41, § 81-L)
§ 202-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-3
5:171
SECONDARY COLLECTOR — A street whose principal function is to provide
access to abutting properties but is also designed to be used to connect
minor roads with primary collector or arterial streets. Including residences
indirectly served through connecting streets, it serves or is designed to
serve at least 10 but not more than 100 dwelling units and is expected to or
does handle between 100 and 1,000 trips per day.
SIDEWALK — A way within the right-of-way of a street normally parallel to
the street designed primarily for pedestrian use.
SUBDIVISION — Division of a tract of land into two or more lots, including
resubdivision, provided that such division shall not be deemed to constitute
a subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law (MGL c. 41, §§ 81-K and
81-GG) if at the time it is made, every lot within the tract has frontage on
a public way, a way which the Town Clerk certifies as maintained and used
as a public way, a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed
in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in existence as
of March 1, 1963, meeting the standards of the Board as set out in § III-A,
3. (ref) Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required
by the Zoning Bylaw10 of the Town of Barre for erection of a building on
such lot. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or
changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot
so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of
land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision
Control Law went into effect in the city or town in which the land lies into
separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing, shall
not constitute a subdivision.
UTILITIES — Private or municipal services to be furnished within the
subdivision, including telephone, cable TV, electric light and power,
gaslines, sanitary sewers, water drains, water pipes and appurtenances.
WAY, PUBLIC — Any road which has been accepted as a public way
pursuant to MGL c.82, or any way established by court decree to be a public
way by dedication, prescription or otherwise.11
WAY IN EXISTENCE WHEN SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW BECAME
EFFECTIVE IN THE TOWN — For purposes of determining whether a
proposed division of lots is a subdivision, a way in existence as of March
1, 1963, shall not be deemed adequate by the Board except if it meets
standards in § 111-A, 3.(ref)
WAY MAINTAINED AND USED AS A PUBLIC WAY — For purposes of
determining whether a proposed division of lots is a subdivision, a way shall
be certified as used and maintained as a public way only if it meets the
standards of § III-A, 3.(ref)
§ 202-4. General requirements.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. A602, Road Lists.
§ 202-3 BARRE CODE § 202-4
5:172
§ 202-5. Effect of zoning at certain times. [Added 2-26-1979 STM,
Art. 6]
Land on a definitive plan, or preliminary plan followed within seven months
by a definitive plan, shall be governed by the zoning in effect at the time
of first submission, for five years from approval. The use of land on a plan
"approval not required" shall be governed by zoning in effect at the time of
filing for three years.
Basic requirement. No person shall make a subdivision within the
meaning of the Subdivision Control Law of any land within the town,
or proceed with the improvements or sale of lots in a subdivision,
or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services
therein, unless and until a plan has been endorsed "Planning Board
Approval Not Required," or a definitive plan of such subdivision has
been submitted to and approved by the Board.
A.
Effect of prior recording. The recording of a plan of subdivision within
the town in the Registry of Deeds of Worcester County prior to the
effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in the Town of Barre shall
not exempt the land within such subdivision from the application and
operation of these rules and regulations except as specifically exempt
by MGL c. 41, § 81-FF.
B.
Waivers. The Board may waive strict compliance with any of these rules
and regulations if it deems it in the public interest, and if written record
is kept of such waivers, and the reasons for them.
C.
§ 202-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-5
5:173

ARTICLE III
Procedure for Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 202-6. Plan believed not to require approval.
Submission.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land and
who believes that his plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law may submit his plan, a description of the
land and Application Form A12 to the Planning Board accompanied
by the necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require
approval.
(1)
The original plan and five copies shall be submitted by delivery at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board, or by certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the Board. If so mailed, the date of mailing shall
be the date of submission of the plan. In addition, written notice
of such submission using Application Form A shall be given by
the applicant to the Town Clerk by delivery, or by registered mail,
postage prepaid. If notice is given by delivery, the Town Clerk shall,
if requested, give a written receipt to the person who delivered
such notice.
(2)
A.
Upon submission of a Form A a filing fee is required. Refer to the
Appendix A for the fee.13
B.
Contents. The original of the drawn plan shall contain the following
information:
(1) Title, boundaries, North point, date and scale;
Name and address of record owner and engineer or surveyor, if
any;
(2)
Frontage and area of any remaining adjoining land owned by the
applicant;
(3)
Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signatures
of the members of the Board;
(4)
Sufficient data to determine existing lines of every street and way
line;
(5)
(6) Proposed lot boundaries, with areas of lots and lot frontage; and
Evidence that each building lot on the plan, or altered by it, meets
one of the following four criteria:
(7)
C.
12.Editor's Note: Application Form A is on file in the office of the Planning Board.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-6
5:175
Has all the frontage required under zoning on:
[1] A public way, or
A way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way;
[2]
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed earlier by
the Planning Board under this law;
[3]
A way existing before 18 May 1987, which the Board finds
adequate for the way's proposed use;
[4]
A way shown on a plan of a subdivision registered in the
Land Court prior to 18 May 1987.
[5]
(a)
Has been clearly marked on the plan to be either joined to and
made a part of an adjacent lot or "not a building lot"; or
(b)
(c) Constitutes an existing parcel with no new lot divisions.
Determination.
In determining whether an existing way is adequate to qualify a
subdivision plan not requiring approval of the Board, the Board
shall consider the following conditions, among others:
The right-of-way is to be at least 25 feet wide and of reasonable
horizontal alignment;
(a)
That the existing horizontal and vertical alignment of the
roadway provide safe visibility;
(b)
The roadway be constructed at least 18 feet wide, with at least
eight feet of gravel, and with adequate provisions for drainage;
(c)
If the road could ever service more than six dwelling units,
it be bituminous surfaced, or have provisions made for such
surfacing without cost to the town;
(d)
That provisions are made for public utilities without cost to the
town.
(e)
(1)
In determining whether a way has been used and maintained as a
public way, the Clerk shall submit to the Board written evidence
of public maintenance under vote of the town, and of continued
substantial use by the general public without permission of the
landowners along the way, continuous for at least 20 years.
Sporadic use, use by a few persons, or use by agreement of the
abutters shall not suffice.
(2)
D.
Board action.
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it
shall forthwith, without hearing and within 14 days of submission,
(1)
E.
§ 202-6 BARRE CODE § 202-6
5:176
§ 202-7. Preliminary plan.
endorse on the plan by a majority of the Board, or by a person
authorized by the Board, the words "Planning Board approval
under Subdivision Control Law not required." Such endorsement
shall not be withheld unless such plan shows a subdivision. Such
plan shall be returned to the applicant, and the Board shall notify
the Town Clerk of its action in writing.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law, it shall, within 14 days of submission
of said plan, give written notice of its determination to the Town
Clerk and to the applicant. Said plan shall be returned to the
applicant.
(2)
The applicant may then submit the plan as provided for by the
rules and regulations of the Board, or he may appeal from the
determination of the Board in the manner provided in MGL c. 41,
§ 81-BB.
(3)
If the Board fails to act upon the plan, or fails to notify the Town
Clerk and the applicant of its action within 14 days after its
submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and the Board
shall forthwith make such endorsement on said plan, and on its
failure to do so forthwith, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate
to the same effect. The plan bearing such endorsement or the plan
and such certificate, as the case may be, shall be delivered by the
Board, as in the case of the certificate, by the Town Clerk, to the
applicant.
(4)
Administration. One print of the plan shall be retained in the files of
the Planning Board and one print each shall go to the Town Clerk,
Selectmen, Assessors and Conservation Commission.
F.
General. A preliminary plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the
applicant to the Board of Health and to the Board for discussion and
approval by the Board. The submission of such a preliminary plan
will enable the subdivider, the Board, and other municipal agencies to
discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision before a definitive
plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a
preliminary plan be filed in every case.
A.
Submission. If such review and approval are desired, a properly
executed Application Form B14 shall be filed with the filing fee with the
preliminary plan submitted to the Board. The preliminary plan shall be
submitted by delivery at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board,
or by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the Board. If so mailed, the
date of mailing shall be the date of submission of the plan. In addition,
B.
14.Editor's Note: Application Form B is on file in the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-7
5:177
written notice of such submission using Application Form B shall be
given by the applicant to the Town Clerk by delivery or by certified mail,
postage prepaid. If notice is given by delivery, the Town Clerk shall,
if requested, give a written receipt to the person who delivered such
notice.
Contents. The preliminary plan shall be drawn on tracing paper 24
inches by 36 inches with pencil at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
and two prints shall be filed at the office of the Board. Said preliminary
plan shall show sufficient information about the subdivision to form a
clear basis for discussion of its problems and for the preparation of the
definitive plan. Such information shall include the following:
Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, boundaries, North
point, date, scale, legend and title "preliminary plan," and block for
approval;
(1)
Name and address of record owner or owners, applicant, engineer
or surveyor or other designer of the preliminary plan layout, with
professional stamp, if any;
(2)
Names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax list,
including names of owners of land separated from the subdivision
only by a street;
(3)
Existing or proposed lines of streets, sidewalks, ways, lots,
easements and public or common areas within the subdivision in a
general manner;
(4)
(5) Easements and rights-of-way appurtenant to the land;
Names, approximate location and widths of streets adjacent to the
subdivision;
(6)
Approximate boundary lines of all proposed lots or divisions of land
with their approximate areas and dimensions; lots to be numbered
in sequence;
(7)
Topography of the land in a general manner at contour interval
based on five-foot intervals, including major features such as
wooded areas, ditches, wetland water bodies;
(8)
Proposed system of drainage, including the location of all swamp,
marsh and lowland, water bodies, streams, open drains and
ditches, natural or man-made, and flowage rights, public and
private, adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision, in a general
manner;
(9)
Soil types based on the latest applicable report of the USDA Soil
Conservation Service.
(10)
Zoning classification of all land shown on the plan, including any
land lying within the floodplain.15
(11)
C.
§ 202-7 BARRE CODE § 202-7
5:178
§ 202-8. Definitive plan.
Action by Board.
The preliminary plan will be studied by the Board, and within
45 days after submission, the Board shall approve, approve with
modifications suggested by the Board, or agreed upon by the
person submitting the plan, or disapprove the preliminary plan.
A disapproval by the Board will be accompanied by a detailed
statement of reasons for the action.
(1)
Notice of its action must be given by the Board to the applicant and
the Town Clerk within 45 days of the date of submission.
(2)
D.
Relation of preliminary plan to definitive plan. Approval of a preliminary
plan does not constitute approval of a subdivision, and a preliminary
plan cannot be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. If a definitive plan
is duly submitted within seven months from the date of submission
of the preliminary plan, and if the definitive plan is duly approved
by the Board, the subdivision rules and regulations in effect at the
time of submission of the preliminary plan shall govern approval of the
definitive plan.
E.
Application procedure.
Any person who submits a definitive plan of a subdivision to the
Planning Board for approval shall file with the Board the following:
An original drawing of the definitive plan and at least five
contact prints thereof, dark line on white background.
(a)
(b) A properly executed Application Form C16.
A deposit per the fee schedule in Appendix A to cover the cost
of advertising, notices, and secretarial costs.17
(c)
Drainage calculations certified by the engineer who prepared
them;
(d)
A list of names and mailing addresses for all abutters as they
appear on the most recent local tax list, including property
owners on the opposite side of any streets abutting the
subdivision;
(e)
Five copies of the proposed street plans and profiles, and the
relationship to existing streets.
(f)
Upon submission of the definitive plan, a filing fee is required
by the Board. Refer to Appendix A for the fee.
(g)
(1)
A.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning, § 140-12.
16.Editor's Note: Application Form C is on file in the office of the Planning Board.
17.Editor's Note: The fees schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-8
5:179
Submit to the Town Clerk by delivery or certified mail:
A notice stating the date of definitive plan submission to the
Planning Board; and
(a)
(b) A copy of the completed Application Form C.
(2)
Submit to the Board of Health:
(a) Two copies of the definitive plan; and
(b) A copy of the completed Application Form C.
(3)
Contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer
or registered land surveyor, and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in an
indelible ink on Mylar. The plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 40
feet, or such other scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly
and adequately. Sheet sizes shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. If
multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision. The definitive plan shall contain the
following information:
(1) Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, legend, date and scale;
Name and address of record owner and of subdivider, stamp and
signature of registered land surveyor and any other professionals
engaged in the design, in each case certifying that elements of
the plan for which they are responsible have been prepared in
accordance with these regulations; additionally a revision block is
required in the title block;
(2)
Location and names of all abutters as they appear on the most
recent tax list, including property owners on the opposite side of
any streets abutting the subdivision;
(3)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements, and
public or common areas within the subdivision. The proposed
names of proposed streets shall be shown in pencil until they have
been approved by the Board;
(4)
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length of
every street and way line, lot line and boundary line, and to
establish these lines on the ground;
(5)
Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed;
(6)
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision;
(7)
(8) The area of each lot in square feet.
Lot numbers shown enclosed in a circle and street numbers
enclosed in a square;
(9)
B.
§ 202-8 BARRE CODE § 202-8
5:180
(10)Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds;
Reference identifying applicable street plans and profiles,
covenants, or other relevant documents, whether right-of-way is
recorded or not;
(11)
At two-foot contour intervals, existing topography and topography
resulting from development of streets, drainage, and other
required improvements;
(12)
Existing and proposed drainage facilities, and the route, for all
existing and proposed drainage discharging from the subdivision,
to the primary receiving watercourse or other body of water. Cross
sections of each drainage ditch or pond shall be included. If surface
water drains will discharge onto adjacent existing streets, or onto
adjacent properties not owned by the applicant, the applicant shall
clearly indicate what course the discharge will take, and shall
present to the Board evidence from his engineer that such
discharge is satisfactory;
(13)
Proposed layout of water supply and sewage disposal systems. Size
and location of existing and proposed water supply mains and their
appurtenances, hydrants, sewer pipes and their appurtenances
and/or sewage disposal systems, storm drains and their
appurtenances, and easements pertinent thereto, and curbs and
curb dimensions;
(14)
Location of base flood elevation if encountered within 100 feet of
the subdivision;
(15)
Suitable space for endorsement by the Planning Board, with spaces
for annotating date of approval and date of endorsement.
(16)
Major site features such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings,
large trees, rock out croppings, and wetlands.
(17)
(18)Zoning boundaries.
Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way applying to the
land and their purpose. (Requirements for assessments are later
discussed in Section IV.B.)(ref)
(19)
Approximate groundwater level and location and results of soil
percolation and other subsurface tests.
(20)
Street plans and profiles. For each street, there shall be a separate
plan at one inch equals 40 feet, and profile at one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal, one inch equals 40 feet vertical, elevations referenced to the
town datum, drawn in ink on polyester film, showing the following data.
One copy of this shall be submitted to the Town Highway Department.
C.
§ 202-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-8
5:181
The plan shall show bearings and distances, radii and arcs, central
angle and tangent distances on all curves with stationing on the
center line.
(1)
The profile shall show the existing ground on the center line in a
solid black line, the existing right side in a short dashed line, and
the existing left side in a long dashed line; the proposed grade shall
be shown in a heavy black line with the elevation shown at each
fifty-foot station, with the rate of grade indicated.
(2)
The grade of all streets intersecting the proposed streets shall be
shown for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of the
street center line.
(3)
The proposed drainage, catch basins, manholes, pipes and any
other drainage facilities shall be shown on both plan and profile.
(4)
Existing and proposed sidewalks, bikeways and walkways shall be
shown with widths and grade elevations.
(5)
All plans and profiles shall include a notation on each drawing that
the same is one of an indicated total number of sheets.
(6)
(7) Proposed sewers and manholes shall be shown in plan and profile.
Necessary construction details for curbings, sidewalks, roadways,
etc.
(8)
The proposed erosion and sediment control methods for handling
storm runoff water during construction.
(9)
As well, a prepared Environmental Impact Statement at the
applicant's expense, may be required if the Board deems it
necessary.
(10)
(11)Such additional information as the Board may deem necessary.
Review procedures.
Board of Health.
The Board of Health shall within 45 days of filing report to the
Planning Board in writing with signatures of a majority of its
members its approval or disapproval of the plan, as required by
MGL c. 41, § 81-U. If the Board of Health disapproves said plan,
it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots
shown on such plans cannot be used for building sites without
injury to the public health, and include such specific findings
and the reason therefor in such report and, where possible,
shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
Approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall then only be
given provided that the applicant documents having reviewed
his plan with the Board of Health, and only on condition that
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 202-8 BARRE CODE § 202-8
5:182
the lots or land as to which specific findings were made shall
not be built upon without prior consent of the Board of Health.
The Board shall endorse on the plan the lots or land on which
said conditions apply. In the event approval by the Board of
Health is by failure to make a report within 45 days, the
Planning Board shall note on the plan that health approval is
by failure to report.
Any lot so located that it cannot be served by a connection to
the municipal sewer system shall be provided with an on-site
system satisfactory to the Board of Health.
(b)
Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission within 45
days of the applicant's filing with the Planning Board shall review
the plan for applicability under the Wetlands Protection Act18 and
issue a set of conditions for said plan, if necessary.
(2)
Highway Department. The Highway Department within 45 days of
the applicant's filing with the Planning Board shall review the plan
and make recommendations if required.
(3)
Action by the Planning Board.
Public hearing. Before approval of the definitive plan is given, a
public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of such
hearing shall be given by the Board at the expense of the applicant
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Barre in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being
not less than 14 days before the day of such hearing. A copy of
said notice shall be mailed by the Board to the applicant and to all
owners of land abutting upon the subdivision as appearing in the
most recent tax list.
(1)
Decision.
Within 60 days of the public hearing, the Board will approve,
modify and approve, or disapprove the definitive subdivision
plan submitted. Criteria for action by the Board shall be the
following:
[1] Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions;
[2] Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements;
Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control
Law;
[3]
Conformity with the Board's design and construction
standards;
[4]
(a)
(2)
E.
18.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A.
§ 202-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-8
5:183
Conformance with the recommendations of the Board of
Health and Conservation Commission.
[5]
Following such action, the Board shall file a certificate of its
action with the Town Clerk, and shall send notice of its action
by registered mail to the applicant at his address stated in the
application.
(b)
Performance guarantee. Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed
on the original drawing of the definitive plan by the signature of the
person officially authorized by the Board, but not until the statutory
twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the
certificate of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk, and said
Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed. Before the
Board endorses its approval on the plan, the applicant shall provide
assurances as set out below:
Final approval with bonds or surety. The applicant shall either
file a surety company performance bond or a deposit of money or
negotiable securities in an amount determined by the Board to be
sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements
as shown on the definitive plan, and as specified in the rules and
regulations. Such bond or security, if filed or deposited, shall be
approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Counsel
and as to sureties by the Town Treasurer, and shall be contingent
on the completion of such improvements within two years of the
date of the bond. At the discretion of the Board, a time extension
may be granted for a period not to exceed one year, provided
that such an extension may be conditioned upon an increase in
the amount of such bond or security as determined by the Board
(further one-year extensions may also be granted at the Board's
discretion).
(1)
Final approval with covenant. Alternatively, the owner may execute
an appropriate covenant, which shall be recorded with the
subdivision plan, stipulating that no lot of the land shown on the
plan shall be sold, or buildings or other structures erected or
placed on, or application for a building permit made with respect
to, any such lot until:
The streets shown on the subdivision plan and the streets and
any sidewalks, bikeways, walkways or footpaths required by
the Board shown on the plans and profiles have been brought
to subgrade throughout in accordance with the requirements
of these rules and regulations, including the installation of
required catch basins, culverts and other drainage facilities.
(a)
Facilities for water in accordance with the requirement of the
Board of Water Commissioners have been installed throughout
the streets shown on the plan.
(b)
(2)
F.
§ 202-8 BARRE CODE § 202-8
5:184
The subdivision plan, bearing the Board's signed endorsement
thereon, and a signed copy of such agreement have been
recorded in the Registry of Deeds or with the Recorder of the
Land Court.
(c)
The approval shall be contingent on the completion of such
improvements within two years of the date of the covenant. At
the discretion of the Board, a time extension may be granted
for a period not to exceed one year. (Further one-year
extensions may also be granted at the discretion of the Board).
(d)
Nothing in this section shall be construed as a limitation on the
authority of the Board to condition its approval of any plan upon
the satisfaction of additional conditions, which shall be endorsed
on the plan or in a separate document to be recorded.
(3)
Following plan approval, endorsement, and recording, the
applicant shall provide the Board with five prints of the definitive
plan, and one copy of final covenants and restrictions, noting book,
page number, and date of recording for each; and five prints of the
street plan and profiles. One copy of the definitive plan shall be
transmitted to the Inspector of Buildings by the Planning Board.
(4)
Release of performance guarantee.
Upon completion of improvements required by this regulation, the
subdivider may request either partial or full release of his bond,
deposit or covenant, by sending a statement of completion and
request for release by registered mail to the Planning Board and
to the Town Clerk. Release will be granted only following written
approval by the Planning Board and any other town officials
concerned with the work performed. Copies of release from
covenants or agreements regarding building or use and occupancy
permits shall be sent by the Planning Board to the Inspector of
Buildings, the Town Clerk and the subdivider.
(1)
Partial release. The Board may grant partial release from such
security for partial completion of improvements, provided that the
completed portion provides a reasonable system for circulation
and utilities pending completion of the rest, and provided that
appropriate arrangements have been made for later disposition of
such interim facilities as temporary turnarounds.
(2)
Escrow. The applicant may propose as an alternative an agreement
whereby a lender retains sufficient funds for the completion of
ways and utilities as provided for by MGL c. 41, § 81U, Paragraph
9.
(3)
Refusal of release. If the Planning Board determines that said
construction or installation has not been completed, it shall specify
in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and to the
Town Clerk the details wherein said construction and installation
(4)
G.
§ 202-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-8
5:185
fails to comply with the requirements of the regulation. Failure
of the Board to notify the applicant within 45 days after receipt
by the Town Clerk of a request for release shall terminate all
obligations under a bond, and any deposit shall be returned and
any covenant shall become void. The Town Clerk shall issue a
certificate releasing all interests should the Board fail to act within
such 45 days.
Recision. Failure of the developer to comply with the construction
schedule incorporated into the performance agreement, or to
comply with the subdivision rules and regulations, or any
unauthorized departure from any agreements made or plans
submitted and approved, shall constitute reason for the Planning
Board to consider recision of such approval, in accordance with the
requirements and procedures of MGL c. 41, § 81-W.
(5)
Certificate of completion. Upon final completion of the construction of
ways, and the installation of municipal services in accordance with the
subdivision rules and regulations, approval, conditions, and approved
plans, the Board shall issue a certificate of completion which may
be recorded. Such certificate shall not be issued until the developer
satisfies the following conditions:
Ownership of ways and easements.
The subdivider shall retain title to the fee of each street,
path, or easement in or appurtenant to the subdivision until
conveyed to the town. Prior to final release of security, the
developer shall submit all necessary documentation for street
acceptance, including plans in form acceptable to the Registry
of Deeds, legal description, easements, list of owners and
mortgages of lots having rights in the street, and any grants of
rights necessary.
(a)
Approval by the Board of a definitive subdivision plan shall not
constitute the laying out or acceptance by the Town of any
streets, bikeways, or footpaths within a subdivision.
(b)
(1)
As-built plans.
Upon completion of construction, and before release of the
performance guarantee, the subdivider shall have prepared
and submitted as-built plans at the same scale as the street
plans, which shall indicate the actual location of all the
following:
[1] Street lines;
[2] Traveled way edges;
[3] Path locations;
[4] Permanent monuments;
(a)
(2)
H.
§ 202-8 BARRE CODE § 202-8
5:186
[5] Location and inverts of the required utilities and drainage;
Locations of any other underground utilities, such as
electricity, telephone lines and street lighting.
[6]
The accuracy of such as-built plans shall be certified by a
registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer
retained by the subdivider.
(b)
§ 202-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-8
5:187

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 202-9. Minimum standards; waiver.
All standards in these regulations shall be considered minimum standards,
and may be varied from or waived where the Board considers that alternate
conditions will serve substantially the same objective. A written explanation
of all waivers shall be maintained in the files, with the reasons therefor.
§ 202-10. Streets.
Location and alignment.
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the
opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel. Due
consideration shall also be given to the following features:
(a) Volume of cut and fill;
Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed,
especially if within 200 feet of a river, wetland or water body,
or in areas having a slope of more than 15%;
(b)
(c) Extent of waterways or wetlands altered or relocated;
Dimensions of paved areas (including streets) except as
necessary for safety and convenience, especially in aquifer/
recharge areas;
(d)
Use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets providing
house frontages;
(e)
(f) Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape;
Maintenance within the subdivision of runoff and vegetative
cover equivalent to conditions before development.
(g)
(1)
The proposed streets shall conform to the Master Plan as adopted
by the Board.
(2)
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
projection of streets, or for access to adjoining property which is
not yet subdivided.
(3)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips shall be in the public interest.
(4)
Access to arterial street. Intersections of collector and residential
streets with arterial streets will not normally be allowed at
intervals of less than 450 feet. Subdivisions of 50 or more lots will
be required to have more than one access to an existing arterial
(5)
A.
§ 202-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-10
5:189
street or to a proposed arterial street which is to be built in
conjunction with the proposed subdivision.
Street jogs. Street jogs in arterial and collector streets with centerline
offsets of less than 500 feet shall not be allowed. Street jogs in
minor roads with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet should be
avoided.
(6)
The minimum center-line radii of curved streets shall be 100 feet
for minor roads. One hundred and fifty feet shall be required for
collector streets.
(7)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than
60°.
(8)
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded or cut back
to provide for a curb radius of not less than 25 feet.
(9)
Visibility from center line of a street shall never be less than 200
feet or as dedicated by a posted speed limit.
(10)
Access through another municipality. In case access to a
subdivision crosses land in another municipality, the Board may
require certification by the appropriate officials that such access
is in accordance with the zoning and subdivision requirements of
such municipality, and that a legally adequate performance bond
has been duly posted, and that such access is adequately improved
to handle prospective traffic. As well, lot lines should be laid out so
as not to crowd municipal boundary lines.
(11)
Streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets
and shall be at least 200 feet apart at intersection with collector.
(12)
Width.
The minimum width for two-way, paved residential streets shall be
as follows:
Streets
Street Pavement
Width Right-of-Way Width
Minor roads and
streets
20 feet 40 feet
Secondary collector 26 feet 50 feet
Primary collector 36 feet 50 feet
Arterial As per State
Highway
Department design
standards
As per State Highway
design standards
(1)
B.
§ 202-10 BARRE CODE § 202-10
5:190
§ 202-11. Easements.
Greater width shall be required by the Board when deemed
necessary for present and future vehicular travel or on-street
parking.
(2)
The minimum width may be reduced if approved by the Town
Planning Board for the following reasons:
The reduction in width is complemented by enforceable
parking regulations for streets where widths are reduced.
On culs-de-sac and lanes with no on-street parking, the
width may be reduced to 18 feet.
[1]
On a secondary street with on-street parking permitted on
one side only, the width may be reduced to 24 feet.
[2]
On a collector with no on-street parking, the width may be
reduced to 26 feet.
[3]
(a)
Reductions which are a part of an overall drainage plan to
reduce the impervious surfaces in the subdivision and reduce
runoff from the parcel shall be permitted if plans for safety,
parking, pedestrian circulation and other factors are deemed
adequate by the Planning Board to accommodate the
requested reductions.
(b)
(3)
The minimum one-way width for each direction of a paired system
shall be 18 feet. The minimum width for a one-way loop street shall
be 18 feet.
(4)
Grade. Grades of streets shall not be less than 1%. Grades shall not be
more than 6.0% for primary collector streets, nor more than 12.0% for
secondary collector streets, minor roads or streets.
C.
Dead-end streets/culs-de-sac.
The length of a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet unless a greater
length is deemed desirable by the Planning Board because of
topography or other local conditions;
(1)
Every dead-end street shall have a turnaround designed to
accommodate vehicles. A circular turnaround shall have an outside
roadway diameter of at least 100 feet, and a property line diameter
of 130 feet.
(2)
D.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the Board may require that there be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to
B.
§ 202-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-11
5:191
§ 202-12. Open spaces.
The Board may require the plan to show a park or parks, suitably located
for playground or recreation purposes, or for providing light and air. The
park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land
being subdivided, and to the prospective uses of such land, and shall be at
least equal to one acre of land for each 20 single-family dwelling units or
fraction thereof shown on the plan, but not less than 6% of the gross area
of the subdivision. Each area reserved for such purpose shall be of suitable
area, dimensions, topography and natural character for the purpose of a
park and/or playground. The area or areas shall be so located as to serve
adequately all parts of the subdivision as approved by the Board. The Board
may require that the area or areas reserved shall be located and laid out so
as to be used in conjunction with similar areas of adjoining subdivisions or
of probable subdivisions.
§ 202-13. Protection of natural features.
All natural features, such as trees, wooded areas, watercourses, scenic
points and historic spots, shall be preserved as much as possible. Any
clearance, backfilling, cutting, thinning or other disturbance to trees six
inches or over in diameter, measured four feet above finished ground level
(dbh), located within the unpaved portions of the right-of-way, or other
natural vegetation shall be prohibited unless deemed proper by the Board
after a site inspection. Any such proposed clearance shall be shown on the
plan, and written reasons therefor may be requested by the Board. Tree
wells or retaining walls shall be of such design to meet the standards as set
forth in the Tree Experts Manual, or some similar publication.
conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary
purposes. In no case shall the width be less than 20 feet, or the side
slope be steeper than two horizontal, or one vertical.
Access easements or parcels to adjacent property shall be provided,
if required by the Board, for use by emergency vehicles and for the
benefit of the town. They shall be a minimum width of 20 feet. Bikeways
or walkways may satisfy this requirement.
C.
Slopes adjacent to roadways, natural or man-made, may be placed
within easements on individual properties rather than acquired as
rights-of-way.
D.
Lots shall be prepared and graded consistent with drainage into the
subdivision, and in such manner that development of one shall not
cause detrimental drainage on another or on areas outside the
subdivision, to the extent permitted by law. If provision is necessary to
carry drainage to or across a lot, an easement or drainage right-of-way
of a minimum width of 20 feet and proper slope shall be provided.
E.
§ 202-11 BARRE CODE § 202-14
5:192
§ 202-14. Sediment control.
In order to reduce erosion accompanying the installation of ways, utilities
and drainage, and the resultant pollution of streams, wetlands and natural
drainage areas, the applicant shall submit a sediment control plan,
including control methods such as berms, dikes, detention ponds, mulching
and temporary sodding.
§ 202-15. Street drainage.
Street drainage utilizing curbs and gutters shall be designed to keep
the velocity of the flow of water in the gutter below levels which are
hazardous to pedestrian safety.
A.
Storm drains, culverts, and related facilities shall be designed to permit
the unimpeded flow of all natural watercourses, to ensure adequate
drainage at all low points along streets, to control erosion, and to
intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area being drained. To the
maximum extent feasible, stormwater shall be recharged rather than
piped to surface water.
B.
New drainage systems shall be properly connected to any existing
drains in adjacent streets or easements which may exist. Where no
adequate drainage system exists, or where it is inadequate, it shall be
the responsibility of the subdivider to extend his system outside the
subdivision in a manner specified or approved by the Board to dispose
properly of all the drainage from the proposed subdivision.
C.
When the subdivision causes a requirement for drainage improvements
outside its area, the subdivider shall be required to secure the
necessary approvals and provide such improvements in the public
interest.
D.
Where the adjacent property is not subdivided, adequate provision
shall be made for the extension of the drainage system beyond the
boundaries of the subdivision, and for it to carry the additional load that
may be placed on the system. This shall be done by providing drains of
adequate size and at proper slopes as specified by the Planning Board
in order to permit their extension to the boundaries, and the proper
connection of those of future subdivisions in the adjacent area.
E.
Storm drains and culverts shall be a minimum of 12 inches inside
diameter, and shall be greater when required by the Board. The proper
drain size may be calculated by using Manning's Formula with a
kutter's "n" value of .013 for concrete pipe and .024 for corrugated
metal pipe.
F.
All storm drains shall be reinforced concrete of adequate strength
except that in off-street locations bituminous coated, galvanized,
corrugated metal pipe or pipe arch may be used if approved by the
G.
§ 202-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-15
5:193
Board. Concrete pipe shall conform to the State of Massachusetts'
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, as amended.
Water velocities in pipes and gutters shall be between two and 10 feet
per second, and not more than five feet per second on ground surfaces.
All undeveloped tributary areas shall be assumed to be fully developed
in accordance with the Zoning Bylaw.19 Consideration will be given to
flatter slopes if adequate provisions are made for cleaning the pipes. All
plans having drains with slopes which will produce pipe velocities less
than two feet per second, flowing full, shall be accompanied by a letter
stating the reason for the flat slope. The letter shall have a space for
approval by the Planning Board or its agent, and the drain shall not be
constructed until the letter has been approved.
H.
Catch basins shall be installed on both sides of the roadway on
continuous grades at intervals not to exceed 300 feet, at low points and
sags in the roadway, near the corners of the roadway at intersecting
streets, and at other locations as required by the Board. Such catch
basins shall be provided with granite headers with storm inlets. Drain
pipes may extend through an adjacent catch basin and, thereafter,
through manholes to the point of discharge, with a manhole being
required at every change in direction, slope or diameter in the drain
pipes. All catch basins, except for the first two, shall discharge into the
drain through a manhole. Any catch basins and manholes used shall be
at least six feet deep and four feet in diameter (inside measurements),
with a thirty-inch or greater sump below pipe invert, and shall be
constructed of concrete blocks or precast concrete units. Manhole
covers and grates shall be in conformance with Massachusetts DPW
Specifications, designed and placed so as to cause no hazard to
bicycles.
I.
Inlets shall have an adequate waterway opening to pass the design
storm with not more than 0.2 feet of surcharge. Grates and frames shall
be cast iron suitable for the loads which can occur either during the
construction or afterward. Inlets shall be constructed either of brick
and mortar with eight-inch-thick walls, precast segmental concrete
blocks not less than six-inch-thick mortared in place, or of precast pipe
sections. Inlets shall be set on a base of either poured concrete eight
inches in thickness, or precast segmental base blocks not less than four
inches in thickness. Inlets shall be used in off-street locations, and the
grate frame shall be mortared in position with the top 0.2 feet below
the grade of the finished ground surface. Side openings may be used in
lieu of a grate if the quantity of runoff exceeds the capacity of a grate of
reasonable size, as approved by the Planning Board or its agent. Inlets
shall be 4.0 feet inside diameter below the corbelling, and shall not be
used on drains greater than 30 inches in diameter. A shaped invert is
not required, but the bottom of the inlet shall be finished at the same
grade as the lowest pipe invert. At inlets where the outlet pipe is larger
J.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
§ 202-15 BARRE CODE § 202-15
5:194
§ 202-16. Curbing.
§ 202-17. Utilities and municipal services.
than the inlet pipe, the crown of the outlet pipe shall be at the same
elevation or lower than the crown of the inlet pipe.
A design analysis shall be submitted with each definitive plan submitted
for approval. The design analysis shall include at least the following
information:
Storm drainage system. The data shall include consideration of
the entire watershed, and the calculations used in designing the
drainage system including area calculations, intensity of rainfall,
coefficient of runoff, time of concentration, discharge, pipe
coefficients of roughness and quantity and velocity of flow under
design conditions.
(1)
Storm sewers shall be based on a ten-year frequency storm,
retention basins on twenty-five-year, and culverts shall be based on
a fifty-year frequency storm, with consideration given to damage
avoidance for a one-hundred-year storm.
(2)
Any areas designated as drainage areas shall be tested for
adequate percolation.
(3)
K.
Retention basins or other means shall be provided to control the rate
of runoff at the property lines from a twenty-five-year storm after
development to the predevelopment level.
L.
Curbing shall be installed as required by the Planning Board, and
may consist of granite bituminous concrete, Portland cement or other
materials, depending upon factors of safety, convenience and cost.
A.
Curbs and gutters.
Curbs and gutters will be required when they are:
Necessary to handle runoff for the section of the roadway to
which they are applied.
(a)
Necessary for the maintenance of the pavement and the
prevention of pavement edge reveling.
(b)
(c) Necessary for safety.
(1)
Curb and gutter may be eliminated along certain roadways when
drainage is provided in swales which are designed to reduce the
rate of runoff, restore and/or supply needed water to vegetation in
the street right-of-way.
(2)
B.
Where adjacent property is not subdivided, or where all the property of
the applicant is not being subdivided at the same time, and the expense
A.
§ 202-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-17
5:195
§ 202-18. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems.
is deemed reasonable by the Board, provision shall be made for the
extension of the utility system by continuing the mains the full length
of streets and to the exterior limits of the subdivision at such grade
and size which will, in the opinion of the Board, permit their proper
extension at a later date.
Sanitary sewers.
No portion of sewerage system shall be approved if a requires a
connection to municipal system over land of other owners unless
appropriate easements are first obtained.
(1)
The calculations used in designing the sewerage system including
the method of estimating average flows (including infiltration
allowances), the peaking factor used, the hydraulic design of the
system including quantity and velocity of flow under both average
and peak flow conditions shall be included.
(2)
Sanitary sewers, including all appurtenances, shall be designed to
serve as many lots in a subdivision as possible, and to provide
connection to municipal sewerage system, as approved by the
Sewer Commissioners.
(3)
Minimum sewer pipe size shall be eight inches, and sanitary sewers
shall be such as to ensure the flow of not less than two feet
per second, nor more than 10 feet per second, except that house
connections shall be at least six inches in diameter and shall pitch
up towards the lot at least 3/16 inches per foot.
(4)
(5) Manholes shall be no more than 300 feet apart.
B.
Water supply.
Water mains, laterals and appurtenances shall be of the size,
material and location as directed by the Water Commissioners.
(1)
Hydrants, with valves of a type approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department and the Water Commissioners, shall be installed on all
water mains at a spacing of not more than 500 feet. In addition,
there shall be a hydrant or blowoff and valve placed at the end of
every water main, as directed by the Chief of the Fire Department
or the Water Commissioners.
(2)
C.
D. Streetlighting shall be installed as required by the Board.
Fire alarm boxes shall be installed as directed by the Chief of the Fire
Department. The applicant shall furnish and install the necessary ducts,
fire alarm boxes, and electric cable.
E.
Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the roadway(s) providing direct
access to:
A.
§ 202-17 BARRE CODE § 202-18
5:196
§ 202-19. Compliance with zoning.
Lots, buildings and structures involved in subdivision shall comply with the
Town Zoning Bylaw20 then in effect as varied thereunder.
(1) Commercial/retail facilities;
(2) Schools;
(3) Public recreational facilities; and
Elsewhere in accordance with the pedestrian circulation system as
necessary.
(4)
Sidewalks may also be eliminated along one or both sides of a primary
street if the subdivision provides an alternative pedestrian circulation
system. Ordinarily, one sidewalk will be required.
B.
Pedestrian-vehicular separation shall be considered where possible.
Design solutions which achieve this separation shall receive priority
consideration. Planting strips shall be a minimum of two feet.
C.
Walkways connecting existing trails should be created wherever
reasonable, and developed in new locations.
D.
Paths or sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way.
However, horizontal alignment may be varied to minimize disturbance
of land vegetation. If necessary, a sidewalk easement shall be obtained
when the sidewalk goes outside the minimum street right-of-way.
E.
Sidewalks shall be pitched or sloped towards the roadway to maximize
runoff of water.
F.
G. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
Sidewalks shall have a maximum grade of 6%, and a minimum grade of
.5%.
H.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
§ 202-18 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-19
5:197

ARTICLE V
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivision
§ 202-20. Street and roadway.
Excavation, clearing. The entire areas within each right-of-way or
easement for future extension, and as far beyond as necessary to
provide firm support or protection for the street, shall be cleared and
excavated and/or filled as necessary, and graded as shown on the
approved definitive plans. All loam and other yielding material shall be
removed from the roadway area of each street or way.
A.
Municipal services.
All drains, public utilities, water mains and sewers including
individual service laterals shall be installed and the roadway
inspected as provided in these rules and regulations prior to any
further construction of the roadway. Water service to be inspected
by the Water Department, and public sewer service to be inspected
by the Sewer Department. These specifications are a minimum and
do not preclude the contractor from taking additional measures
as necessary for safety and the completion of a satisfactory
installation.
Excavation. The trench for the pipe shall be excavated to the
required line and grade including earth boulders and ledge.
Trenches for storm drains shall be no wider than the outside
diameter of the pipe plus 16 inches for pipes through 18 inches
nominal diameter, and the outside diameter plus 24 inches for
pipe larger than 18 inches. This trench width shall apply from
the top of the pipe to the bottom of the trench. Above the top of
the pipe, the trench may be as necessary to properly install the
pipe. Trenches with side slopes steeper than the natural angle
of repose of the soil shall be sheeted in an approved manner,
as necessary, to avoid cave-ins and sloughing. All excavations
shall be properly barricaded and lighted at night where they
are closed to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Said barricade
will be at least four feet high and solid so that a child cannot
pass through it. All objects placed by the contractor near said
barricade that could be used to break such barricade shall
be removed or locked. Before any pipe is placed in a newly
constructed fill, the contractor shall, as directed, place the
filling two feet above the top grade of the pipe after which
the pipe trench may be excavated. If any cross pipes, conduits,
drains or other unforeseen obstacles are encountered in the
excavation which cannot be relocated, the drain shall be
redesigned to avoid the obstruction in a manner suitable to the
Planning Board or its agent. Possible obstructions to the line
shall be investigated prior to the construction of the drain in
its immediate vicinity.
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 202-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-20
5:199
Bedding. Trenches may be excavated with a flat bottom, but
the full length of the pipe, except the bell, must rest upon
undisturbed soil except as hereinafter specified. Where
trenches have been over-excavated, a selected earth or gravel
foundation, thoroughly compacted, shall be provided for
proper pipe bedding. Soil, which is considered to be unstable
by the Planning Board or its agent, shall be removed to a
depth of not less than two feet below the bottom of the pipe
and replaced with compacted sand and gravel to the bottom
of the pipe. Unstable soil or other excavated material shall be
disposed of off site as directed by the Planning Board or its
agent.
(b)
Pipe laying. Pipe shall be laid starting with the downstream
end. Grade board or other approved devices shall be provided
to ensure that the pipe is laid true to line and grade. Reference
bench marks shall be clearly marked to enable the inspector
to quickly check the grade and invert elevations. The joints
of all pipes shall be filled with mortar composed of one part
Portland cement to three parts clean, sharp sand. Lime may be
added up to 25% of the cement and enough water to make a
workable mix. The downstream pipe shall be laid with groove
or bell and facing upstream in the proper position, and a dab
of mortar shall be placed in the bell or groove. The spigot or
tongue end shall be placed in the bell or groove, such that the
inverts match, and the peripheral space shall be filled with stiff
mortar. All mortar squeezed out on the inside of the pipe shall
be removed before it sets.
(c)
Backfilling. After the pipe has been laid and inspected, the
trench shall be backfilled. The space under the pipe haunches
shall be carefully filled with selected material, free from stones
or frozen earth, and compacted carefully to prevent the pipe
from moving. The layer of backfill up to 12 inches over the
top of the pipe shall also be of selected material free from
stones and frozen earth, well compacted. The remainder of the
trench shall be backfilled in twelve-inch layers except as noted
below, and each layer shall be fully compacted in an approved
manner. Under roads or other traffic areas, the trench shall
be backfilled in six-inch layers with each layer compacted to
the density of the surrounding soil. Pavement and base course
materials removed during the excavation process shall be
replaced with pavement and base course to match those
removed. When, in the opinion of the Planning Board or its
agent, the excavation is deep enough to warrant it, temporary
pavement shall be provided as directed. Trenches not in
pavement shall be left in a mounded condition as directed by
the Planning Board or its agent.
(d)
§ 202-20 BARRE CODE § 202-20
5:200
Security bars shall be provided at the entrance to all culverts or
open pipe drains over 18 inches in diameter. The grate shall be
constructed of steel bars not less than 1/2 inch diameter welded
together to provide a grate not smaller than the pipe opening. The
vertical bars shall be placed with two-inch clear openings between
them, and the horizontal bars shall be placed 12 inches on center.
The grate shall be installed not closer than one pipe diameter
upstream from the entrance in a manner approved by the Planning
Board or its agent. A suitable sketch of the grate and method of
installation shall be submitted for approval with the plans for the
drains and appurtenances.
(2)
Concrete or field stone masonry headwalls or "flared end" pipe
sections with riprap shall be provided at both ends of culverts and
discharge ends of storm drains.
(3)
The discharge ends of all drains with flowing full velocities of four
feet per second or more shall be protected with a riprap apron
of a width not less than three times the nominal diameter of the
pipe. The riprap apron shall extend for a distance of not less than
10 times the nominal pipe diameter from the end of the discharge
pipe. The riprap for exit velocities of 10 feet per second or less
shall be composed of a layer of stones 12 inches in thickness or
more, placed upon a bed of sand and gravel six inches in thickness.
The stones shall be sized so that not less than 60% shall have one
dimension 12 inches or more. The stones, after being laid, shall
be carefully chinked by hand to make a reasonably smooth and
shaped surface. Exit velocities greater than 10 feet per second are
not permitted.
(Second
Inspection)
(4)
Subbase. At least eight inches of good, clean bank gravel with no stones
larger than six inches in diameter shall be placed and rolled with at
least a ten-ton roller. The surface shall be wet during rolling to bind the
material. Thereafter, the roadway shall receive a layer of select gravel
of at least 4 1/2 inches in thickness, free of all stone over 1 1/2 inches in
diameter and free from loam or other foreign material. This layer shall
also be wet and rolled with said roller. Prior to any further construction,
the roadway shall be inspected as provided in the rules and regulations.
Bank gravel. Bank gravel shall consist of inert material that is hard
durable stone and coarse sand free from loam and clay and having
no stones larger than six inches. The grading of the material shall
conform to the following:
Passing 1/2-inch sieve 50-85% maximum
Passing No. 4 sieve 40-75% maximum
Passing No. 40 sieve 10-35% maximum
(1)
C.
§ 202-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-20
5:201
Passing No. 200 sieve 0-10% maximum
Select gravel. Material gravel base course material shall consist
of approved, hard, durable stone and course sand, bank-run or
blended, practically free from loam and clay, uniformly graded
and containing no stone having any dimension greater than 1 1/
2 inches. When spread and rolled, it shall form a firm foundation.
The grading of the material shall conform to the following
requirements:
Passing 3/8-inch sieve 70% maximum
Passing No. 10 sieve 50% maximum
Passing No. 200 sieve 5% maximum
(Third Inspection)
(2)
Pavement. The roadway shall be paved to a thickness of 2 1/2 inches
measured after compaction with two coats of Class One bituminous
concrete pavement, Type I-1 or F-1. The aggregate shall be composed,
mixed and laid hot in two courses as specified in the "Massachusetts
Public Works Specifications Section 460 for Class I Bituminous
Concrete Pavement" as specifically set forth in Sections 460.20 to
460.82, or as amended. Upon completion of the surface treatment,
said roadway shall be again inspected as provided in these rules and
regulations.
(Fourth
Inspection)
D.
Finish center line. The center of said traveled way shall coincide with
the center of the full right-of-way insofar as possible, and in no event
shall it vary by more than four feet in either direction (except as
necessary to "blend" with existing paving).
E.
Curbing.
Curbing is required on both sides of all roadways and shall be one
of the types specified under Subsection F(2) below, except that
granite or precast concrete curbing shall be used for:
(a) All finished grades over 6%.
(b) All headers for catch basins.
All street intersections on the curve and extending six feet
tangential from the point of tangency along the side of each
roadway.
(c)
(1)
Approved types of curbing:
(a) Vertical or sloped granite curb.
(b) Precast concrete curb.
(2)
F.
§ 202-20 BARRE CODE § 202-20
5:202
§ 202-21. Sidewalks and grass plots.
(c) Cape Cod Berm.
Specifications for curbing, workmanship and method of setting
shall conform to the requirements of these rules and regulations
and to the requirements of the Town Highway Department.
(3)
Street signs. The developer shall furnish and erect necessary street
signs to designate the name of each street in his development, said
signs to conform with those used by the town. Street names shall be
approved by the Planning Board to prevent duplication, and to provide
names in keeping with the character of the town.
G.
Streetlights.
Streetlights shall be installed at each intersection, unless waived
by the Board in writing.
(1)
Street lights may be required and shall be located at such other
intervals as required by the Board in the grass plot, and shall be
installed in accord with procedures recommended by the Town of
Barre and the electric company.
(2)
H.
Preparation.
All materials shall be removed for the full width of the sidewalk to
subgrade eight inches below the finished grade as shown on cross
section; and all soft spots and other undesirable material below
such subgrade shall be replaced with a good binding material and
rolled. This excavated area then shall be filled with six inches of a
good quality gravel, and rolled with a pitch toward the curb of not
less than 1/4 inch, nor greater than 3/8 inch to the foot.
(1)
Sidewalks shall be paved with two inches of compacted butuminous
concrete; provided, however, that if a concrete surface is desired,
specifications of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works
shall be complied with.
(2)
A.
Slopes behind sidewalks.
The area in back of the sidewalk shall be sloped at the rate of three
to one (maximum) to a point where it precisely coincides with the
finished grade of abutting lots.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided, all cut bankings shall be planted
with a low-growing shrub or vine, covered with wood chip or bank
mulch to a minimum depth of six inches, or seeded with a deeprooted
perennial grass to prevent erosion.
(2)
Wherever the approved street grade differs from the grade of
adjacent land, or where otherwise necessary for public safety, the
developer shall be required to erect retaining walls and guardrail
(3)
B.
§ 202-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-21
5:203
§ 202-22. Utilities.
§ 202-23. Monuments.
fences, or provide slopes no steeper than two feet horizontal to
one foot vertical in fill, 1 1/2 feet horizontal to one foot vertical in
cut to ensure proper protection and lateral support. Such walls,
fences and slopes shall be subject to the Board's approval as to
location, design and dimensions, and shall be constructed in a
manner satisfactory to the Board.
Grass plots.
A grass plot shall be provided on each side of all roadways between
the edge of the roadway and the sidewalk.
(1)
No utility poles shall be placed within the grass plot so as to be
closer than two feet from the edge of the roadway.
(2)
The top six inches of grass plots and side slopes (cut or fill) shall
be good quality loam as approved by the Engineer, and shall be
screened, raked and rolled with a hand roller to finished grade. The
loam shall be seeded with a deep-rooted perennial grass applied in
sufficient quantity to assure adequate coverage, and rolled when
the loam is moist, or be covered with wood chip or bark mulch to a
minimum depth of six inches.
(3)
Street trees, not less than 12 feet in height and of a species
approved by the Tree Warden, shall be planted on each side of
every street in the subdivision wherever, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, existing woodlands or individual trees are not
retained. Trees shall be located outside the exterior roadway lines
and at such distance therefrom and spaced as the Planning Board
shall specify in accordance with general practice in the town.
(4)
C.
All required utilities, exclusive of transformers, shall be placed
underground at the time of initial construction. Required utilities may
include water, sewer, storm drainage, telephone, electricity, gas, wiring
for streetlights, fire alarm systems and cable TV less otherwise
specified by the Board.
A.
Connections for sewer, drain, water, gas, oil, electric and telephone
service from the main structure in the way to the exterior line of the
way shall be constructed for each lot whether or not there is a building
thereon, except that the Board may waive such requirement, in whole
or in part, in the case of a lot to be used for a park, playground, or
for any other purpose for which, in the opinion of the Board, such
connections shall not be required. The location of all said service
connections shall be accurately located on as-built plans as applicable,
unless otherwise specified by the Board.
B.
§ 202-21 BARRE CODE § 202-23
5:204
§ 202-24. Cleaning up.
The entire area must be so as to leave a neat and orderly appearance free
from debris and other objectionable materials.
(Fifth
Inspection)
§ 202-25. Road salt.
The Board may limit the use of deicing chemicals on ways located over
aquifer and recharge areas for existing or potential drinking water supplies,
or where runoff may affect drinking water reservoirs or wells.
§ 202-26. Acceptable alternatives.
If in the opinion of the applicant, proven and superior products and methods
exist for the construction of roads and utilities, he may use them in the
subdivision but with Board approval. A technical review, by a consulting
engineer, of the alternatives may be required, and the expense will be billed
to the applicant.
Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of
change in direction or curvature of streets and at other points where,
in the opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary. Such
monuments shall be at least four inches by four inches reinforced
concrete of granite posts, and must extend from 3 1/2 feet below
finished grade to not more than six inches above ground unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the Board in writing.
A.
No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction which
would destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
B.
§ 202-23 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-26
5:205

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 202-27. Inspections.
Purpose. All work performed as a consequence of these rules and
regulations shall be subject to the review of the Board which shall
approve and accept, or disapprove and reject, each phase or portion
of such work, and at completion shall recommend the acceptance of
all work or disapproval of the work with reasons therefor. The Board
may employ a registered professional engineer to act as its agent in
the inspection of the work to ensure compliance with these rules and
regulations, and to report to the Board his recommendations as to
approval or disapproval of the work. Such engineer will make certain
inspections as prescribed herein in order to check the adequacy of the
work at various stages prior to such work being covered by subsequent
work. However, the Board, its engineer, and such other persons as the
Board may designate shall have the right to inspect the work at any
time.
A.
Access. The applicant will provide safe and convenient access to all
parts of the subdivision, for the purposes of inspection, to
representatives of the Board or other town agencies and boards.
B.
Notification.
After approval of the definitive plan, the Board will notify the
applicant of the name and address of the engineer designated as its
representative to perform the inspections as required herein, and
otherwise act as the Board's agent to ensure compliance with these
rules and regulations. The applicant shall keep the engineer fully
informed as to the status and progress of the work, and shall notify
the engineer directly (by mail or in person by telephone) at least 48
hours in advance that the work has progressed to a stage that an
inspection is required.
(1)
In the event that the engineer is unable for 48 hours after the work
is ready to make such inspection or examination, the applicant shall
notify the Chairman or Clerk of the Board to such effect, who will
designate an alternate to make such inspection, and shall so notify
the applicant.
(2)
In the event the engineer makes an inspection of the work at the
time designated and finds that such work is not at the proper stage
of completion, or that the work has been covered or otherwise
obscured, the engineer shall notify the applicant and the Board as
to the additional steps the applicant shall take to complete the work
to the point required, or to the extent the work shall be uncovered
or exposed to full view. The applicant shall notify the engineer
again when the work is ready as prescribed in Subsection C(1) and
(2) above.
(3)
C.
§ 202-27 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-27
5:207
The applicant shall notify all applicable town agencies and boards
when prepared for other inspections not within the jurisdiction of
the Planning Board. Such inspections shall include waterline and
sewer line tests and inspections.
(4)
Inspection schedule. Inspection shall be for the following purposes:
Inspection Timing Purpose
One Prepared site Open
trenches
Correct materials Proper
site preparation
Two Installed drains, water
mains, sewers and
utilities Open trenches
Correct installation of
lines
Three After compaction of
roadway before paving
For correct placement of
fill and compacting
Four After street construction For correct construction of
pavement, curb, and
sidewalk
Five After cleaning up For installation of grass
plots, street signs, and for
cleaning up
D.
Disapproval. All work which has been disapproved, or is not acceptable
to the Board, shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected
to the point of complying with the requirements of the Board for
acceptance. Any work which has been covered by subsequent work
prior to acceptance, or is otherwise not available or obscured to the
point of rendering inspection of the work difficult, shall be considered
to be not acceptable to the Board. Such subsequent guarantee shall
depend upon the acceptance of all work prescribed herein and on the
definitive plan, and as directed by the Board.
E.
Inspection deposit and fee.
(1) Fees. For fee schedule see Appendix A.21
Deposit. Prior to the return to the applicant of the definitive plan as
approved and endorsed, the applicant shall deposit a fee with the
Board equal to $1 for each foot of roadway to be constructed or any
part thereof. Such fee shall cover inspections of all construction.
(2)
Return of deposit. Upon satisfactory completion of all
improvements the Board shall refund to the applicant any deposit
remaining; however, the Board reserves the right to retain a
suitable portion of the deposit to correct hidden faults for up to two
years, or until accepted at a Town Meeting.
(3)
F.
21.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-27 BARRE CODE § 202-28
5:208
§ 202-28. Permission to proceed.
Prior to the issuance of the first building permit for a dwelling in a
subdivision, the Planning Board will give the Building Inspector a letter
stating that all affairs are in order, and the applicant may proceed building.
§ 202-29. Variation.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may
be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 202-30. Matters not covered.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, §§ 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive.
§ 202-28 ALARM SYSTEMS § 202-30
5:209
Chapter 203
WIND-ENERGY FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
Earth removal — See Ch. 201.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Review of subdivision plans — See Ch. 303.
§ 202-30 BARRE CODE § 202-30
5:210
ARTICLE I
Regulations for Construction and Operation; Special Permits
[Adopted 2-2-2010]
§ 203-1. Purpose; applicability; special permit required.
Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to provide:
The procedure and requirements for obtaining a special permit for
the construction and operation of wind-energy facilities;
(1)
Standards for the placement, design, construction, monitoring,
modification and removal of wind-energy facilities that address
public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic
resources of the Town; and
(2)
(3) Adequate financial assurance for removal of discontinued facilities.
A.
Applicability. This regulation applies to all wind-energy facilities
proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this regulation,
and to modifications of existing wind-energy facilities that materially
alter the type, configuration, or size of such facilities or other related
equipment.
B.
Special permit.
A special permit is required for all small wind-energy facilities,
large wind-energy facilities and utility-scale wind-energy facilities
in all zoning districts. The special permit may be issued by the
Planning Board.
(1)
A special permit may be granted if the Planning Board (Special
Permit Granting Authority) finds in writing that:
(a) The specific site is an appropriate location for such use;
The wind-energy facility will not pose a hazard to persons,
animals, buildings or vehicles;
(b)
The wind-energy facility will not create a nuisance or
otherwise adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood;
(c)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
proper operation and maintenance of the use;
(d)
(e) The proposed design is adequate and appropriate for the site.
(2)
The Special Permit Granting Authority may impose reasonable
conditions, safeguards and limitations on time and use and may
require the applicant to implement reasonable measures to
mitigate or eliminate potential adverse impacts caused by
construction and/or use of the wind-energy facility.
(3)
C.
§ 203-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-2
5:211
§ 203-2. Definitions.
As used in this Regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING-INTEGRATED WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — A wind-energy
facility permanently mounted on a building or other structure. This
definition applies to wind turbines of any capacity that are designed to be
operated in direct contact with a building.
BYLAW — The Town of Barre Zoning Bylaw.22
HEIGHT — The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade to
the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height.
LARGE WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — A wind-energy facility with a rated
nameplate capacity of greater than 100 kW/0.1 MW.
ON-SITE WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — A large wind-energy facility located
at a commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional, or public facility that
will generate electricity primarily for on-site use.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production equipment. This output is typically specified by the
manufacturer with a nameplate on the equipment.
SHADOW FLICKER — Shadow flicker is caused by sunlight passing through
the swept area of the wind turbine's blades, creating a stroboscopic effect.
SITE (or PROJECT SITE) — The lot or lots on which a wind-energy facility is
located, together with all mandatory setback areas, if any, extending beyond
the boundaries of such lot or lots.
SMALL WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — A wind-energy facility with a rated
nameplate capacity of not more than 100 kW/ 0.1 MW.
UTILITY-SCALE WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — A commercial wind-energy
facility, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be
sold to the wholesale electricity markets.
WIND-ENERGY FACILITY — All equipment, machinery and structures
utilized on a single site in connection with the conversion of wind to
electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, transmission, storage,
collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and
access roads, and one or more wind turbines.
WIND MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL TOWER — A temporary
tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction. A
meteorological tower is used to determine how much wind power a site can
be expected to generate.
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more
blades.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
§ 203-2 BARRE CODE § 203-3
5:212
§ 203-3. Requirements for construction and operation.
The following requirements are common to all wind-energy facilities and
must be followed in addition to the technology or class-specific
requirements. All wind-energy facilities shall be constructed and operated
in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and environmental
impacts.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all wind-energy facilities shall be consistent with
all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not
limited to all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical,
communications and Federal Aviation Administration aviation
requirements. Prior to approval of a special permit, the applicant shall
obtain a building permit from the appropriate authority.
A.
Proof of liability insurance. The applicant shall be required to provide
evidence of liability insurance in an amount and for a duration sufficient
to cover loss or damage to persons and property occasioned by the
construction and use of any wind-energy facility, including negligence
and acts of God.
B.
Site control. The applicant shall submit proof of control of the project
site sufficient to allow for installation and use of the proposed windenergy
facility. Documentation shall include proof of control over
setback areas and adequate access to the wind-energy facility from
a public way. Control shall include the legal authority to prevent the
use or construction of any structure for human habitation within the
setback areas.
C.
Utility notification. No wind-energy facility shall be installed until
evidence has been given that the applicable utility company has been
informed of its customer's intent to install such facility, and has
approved such installation as necessary. Off-grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
D.
Utility connections. To the extent reasonably possible, depending on
soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and the requirements
of the utility provider, utility connections from the wind-energy facility
shall be located underground. Electrical transformers for utility
interconnections may be above the ground if required by the utility
provider.
E.
Accessory structures. All structures accessory to a wind-energy facility,
including, but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with
each other and shall be contained within the turbine tower whenever
technically and economically feasible. Whenever reasonable, such
structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or located in
an underground vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual
impacts.
F.
§ 203-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-3
5:213
§ 203-4. Siting standards.
§ 203-5. Design standards.
Meteorological towers (met towers). Met towers shall be permitted
under the same standards applicable to small wind-energy facilities,
except that a permit for a temporary met tower shall be valid for only
three years.
G.
Setbacks.
Wind turbines shall be set back a distance equal to 120% of the
total height of the wind turbine from all inhabited structures,
overhead utility lines, public or private ways or access easements,
property boundaries and other wind turbines. No wind-energy
facility may be installed in a front yard or between a way or access
easement and the front of an inhabited building.
(1)
The Special Permit Granting Authority may reduce the minimum
setback distance as appropriate, based on site-specific
considerations, or written consent of the affected abutter(s), if
the project satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special
permit.
(2)
A.
Height.
The height of wind-energy facilities in all zoning districts will be
limited to the setback requirement for wind turbines or 300 feet,
whichever is less.
(1)
The Special Permit Granting Authority may allow wind-energy
facilities of greater height than set forth herein only upon the
applicant's demonstration that such greater height is necessary for
operation of the facility, and the facility satisfies all other criteria
for the granting of a special permit.
(2)
B.
Multiple turbines. A wind-energy facility may have multiple turbines.
Each turbine on a site must meet all requirements applicable to the
type of wind-energy facility approved for the site.
C.
Appearance, color and finish. The wind generator and tower shall
remain painted or finished with the nonreflective color or finish that
was originally applied by the manufacturer, unless approved otherwise
in the special permit. Federal Aviation Administration safety
considerations concerning color and appearance must be adhered to as
applicable.
A.
Lighting and signage.
Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration. Lighting of other parts of the
wind-energy facility, such as appurtenant structures, shall be
(1)
B.
§ 203-3 BARRE CODE § 203-5
5:214
§ 203-6. Safety, aesthetic and environmental standards.
limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and
shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
Signage. Signage on the wind-energy facility shall comply with the
requirements of the Town's sign regulations and shall be limited to
that necessary to reasonably identify the owner and manufacturer,
provide twenty-four-hour emergency contact information, and
warn of any danger.
(2)
Advertising. Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer and/or operator of the wind-energy facility.
(3)
Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project
summary, an electrical schematic, and plot or site plan to the local
emergency services entity, as designated by the Special Permit
Granting Authority. Upon request, the applicant shall cooperate with
local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan.
All means of disconnecting the wind-energy facility shall be clearly
indicated on the materials provided, and marked on each wind-energy
facility. The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public, police, fire, emergency
medical services and Zoning Enforcement Officer to contact throughout
the life of the facility.
A.
Unauthorized access. Wind turbines or other structures that are part of
a wind-energy facility shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access.
For instance, the tower shall be designed and installed so as to not
provide step bolts or other climbing means readily accessible to the
public for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground. Electrical
equipment shall be locked where possible.
B.
Shadow flicker. Wind-energy facilities shall be sited in a manner that
minimizes shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden
of proving that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses.
C.
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the wind-energy facility
and is otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances.
D.
Noise.
The wind-energy facility shall conform to the provisions of the
Department of Environmental Protection's Division of Air Quality
Noise Regulations (310 CMR 7.10).
(1)
E.
§ 203-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-6
5:215
§ 203-7. Maintenance; discontinuance and removal; permit
expiration.
A wind-energy facility will be considered to be in violation of these
regulations if it increases the broadband sound level by more than
10 dB(A) above ambient, or produces a pure tone condition: when
any octave band center frequency sound-pressure level exceeds
the two adjacent center frequency sound-pressure levels by three
decibels or more. These criteria are measured both at the property
line and at the nearest inhabited structure. "Ambient" is defined
as the background A-weighted sound level that is exceeded 90% of
the time measured during equipment operating hours. An analysis
prepared by a qualified engineer shall be presented to demonstrate
compliance with these noise standards if required by the Special
Permit Granting Authority incidental to its consideration of a
special permit application.
(2)
Facility conditions. The applicant shall maintain the wind-energy
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures.
Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire
Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The project owner shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the wind-energy facility and
adequate access to the facility from a public way, and the cost of
repairing any damage occurring as a result of operation and
construction.
A.
Discontinuance and removal.
Any wind-energy facility not used for a period of 18 months or
more without written permission from the Special Permit Granting
Authority, or that has reached the end of its useful life, shall be
considered discontinued, and shall be removed. When an applicant
intends to decommission and/or remove a wind-energy facility, the
applicant shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer and Building
Inspector by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued
operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall
physically remove the wind-energy facility no more than 150 days
after the date of discontinued operations. At the time of removal,
the affected portion of the site shall be restored as near as possible
to the state it was in before the facility was constructed, unless
put to another legally authorized, active use. Decommissioning and
removal shall consist of:
Physical removal of all wind turbines, structures, equipment,
security barriers and transmission lines from the site;
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local and state waste disposal regulations;
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 203-6 BARRE CODE § 203-7
5:216
§ 203-8. Application documentation requirements; financial surety;
independent consultants.
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may allow
the owner to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
(c)
Upon request, the applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer demonstrating continued use of the windenergy
facility. Failure to provide such evidence within 30 days of
a written request from the Zoning Enforcement Officer addressed
to the contact address provided and maintained by the applicant as
required above shall be conclusive evidence that the wind-energy
facility has been discontinued.
(2)
If the applicant fails to remove the wind-energy facility in
accordance with the requirements of this section, the Town shall
have the right, to the extent it is otherwise duly authorized by law,
to enter the property and remove the facility at the expense of the
facility owner and the owner(s) of the site on which the facility is
located.
(3)
Expiration. A special permit shall automatically expire if:
The wind-energy facility is not installed and functioning within 24
months from the date the permit is issued; or
(1)
(2) The wind-energy facility is discontinued.
C.
Wind-energy systems permit submission requirements. An application
for a wind-energy facility special permit shall be accompanied by
detailed documentation referenced in § 203-8B below and shall also
meet the submission requirements set forth in § 203-8B(3).
A.
General required documents.
A plot plan showing:
Property lines and physical dimensions of the wind-energy
facility site;
(a)
Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
site;
(b)
Location of the proposed wind-energy facility tower(s),
foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment;
(c)
Public and private ways and access easements contiguous with
or passing through the site;
(d)
(e) Overhead utility lines on the site;
(1)
B.
§ 203-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-8
5:217
(f) Location and approximate height of tree cover on the site.
Technical documentation:
Wind-energy facility technical specifications, including
manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower
type (freestanding or guyed);
(a)
(b) Tower blueprint or drawing signed by a professional engineer;
Electrical diagram detailing wind turbine, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods including
all National Electrical Code compliant disconnect and overcurrent
devices;
(c)
Foundations for towers less than or equal to 100 feet must
have blueprints or drawings signed by a professional engineer;
(d)
Foundations for towers greater than 100 feet must have
blueprints or drawings signed by a professional engineer
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
(e)
(f) A maintenance plan.
(2)
General:
Documentation of the legal right to use the wind-energy facility
site;
(a)
The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the applicant;
(b)
Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant,
as well as all co-applicants or property owners.
(c)
(3)
Additional submission requirements for large- and utility-scale windenergy
facilities.
Location map. The applicant shall submit to the Special Permit
Granting Authority a copy of a portion of the most recent United
States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000,
showing the proposed wind-energy facility site, including turbine
sites, and the area within at least two miles from the facility. Zoning
district designation for the subject parcel should be included;
however, a copy of a Zoning Map with the parcel identified is
suitable.
(1)
Site plan. A one-inch-equals-two-hundred-feet plan of the proposed
wind-energy facility site, with contour intervals of no more than 10
feet, showing the following:
Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within
300 feet;
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 203-8 BARRE CODE § 203-8
5:218
Outline of all existing structures, including purpose (e.g.,
residence, garage, etc.), on the site parcel and all adjacent
parcels within 500 feet. Include distances from the windenergy
facility to each structure shown;
(b)
Location of all roads and access easements, public and private,
on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within the setback
distance of 1.2 times the blade-tip height, and proposed roads
or driveways, either temporary or permanent;
(c)
Existing areas of tree cover, and average height of trees within
the setback distance of 1.2 times the blade-tip height;
(d)
Proposed location and design of the wind-energy facility,
including all turbines, ground equipment, appurtenant
structures, transmission infrastructure, access, fencing,
exterior lighting, etc.;
(e)
(f) Location of view representations, as defined herein.
View representations for large- and utility-scale wind-energy
facilities. The applicant shall provide, upon the request of the
Special Permit Granting Authority, up to three view representations
for large wind-energy facilities and four view representations for
utility-scale wind-energy facilities. View representations shall be
in color and shall include actual preconstruction photographs and
accurate post-construction simulations of the height and breadth
of the wind facility (e.g., superimpositions of the wind facility onto
photographs of existing views) as taken or seen from fixed points
selected by the Special Permit Granting Authority within populated
areas or on public ways within a two-mile radius of the proposed
wind-energy facility. Such fixed points shall include the nearest
building with a view of the wind-energy facility. All view
representations will include existing and proposed structures, plus
tree coverage, and shall further include a description of the
technical procedures followed in producing the view
representation (distances, angles, lens, etc.).
(3)
Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a plan
for maintenance of site access and stormwater drainage facilities
serving the site, as well as general procedures for operational
maintenance of the wind-energy facility.
(4)
Compliance documents. The applicant will provide with the
application:
(a) Proof of adequate financial surety, as set forth below;
(b) Proof of liability insurance;
Certification of height approval from the Federal Aviation
Administration, as required;
(c)
(5)
§ 203-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-8
5:219
Evidence of existing site sound levels and maximum sound
levels for the proposed wind-energy facility demonstrating
compliance with this regulation.
(d)
Required supporting documentation for building-integrated windenergy
facilities. A special permit application for a buildingintegrated
wind-energy facility shall include:
Analysis and design documents, completed by a licensed
structural engineer, demonstrating that the proposed building
is structurally sufficient to support the permanent installation
of the proposed building-integrated wind-energy facility. At a
minimum, the analysis should address vibration, wind load,
and ice load;
(a)
Elevation drawings of the building with building-integrated
wind-energy facility installed, viewed from north, south, east,
and west;
(b)
Building schematic detailing point(s) of connection and
associated supports for the building-integrated wind-energy
facility;
(c)
Schematic of attachment method for connecting the buildingintegrated
wind-energy facility to the building;
(d)
Specification sheets for wind turbine and all related
components (inverters, controllers, disconnects, etc.);
(e)
Electrical diagram detailing wind turbine, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods and
showing all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects
and over-current devices.
(f)
(6)
Landscape plan for utility-scale projects. A special permit
application for a utility-scale project shall include a plan indicating
all proposed changes to the landscape of the site, including
temporary or permanent roads or driveways, grading, vegetation
clearing and planting, exterior lighting other than Federal Aviation
Administration lights, screening vegetation or structures. Lighting
shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and
except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration be
directed downward with full cut-off fixtures to reduce light
pollution.
(7)
Financial surety for large wind-energy and utility-scale projects.
An applicant for a large wind-energy or utility-scale wind-energy
facility special permit must provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal
in the event the Town must remove the facility, of an amount and
form determined to be reasonable by the Special Permit Granting
Authority. Such surety will not be required for municipally owned
(8)
§ 203-8 BARRE CODE § 203-8
5:220
or state-owned facilities. Provision and continued maintenance of
the bond shall be a condition of the special permit. The applicant
shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall
include a mechanism for cost-of-living adjustment.
Independent consultants.
Upon submission of an application for a wind-energy facility special
permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority may engage, at the
applicant's cost, professional and technical consultants, including
legal counsel, to assist the Authority with its review of the
application, in accordance with the requirements of MGL c. 44,
§ 53G.
(1)
The applicant shall pay to the Special Permit Granting Authority
an initial deposit of $500 for small wind-energy facilities, $1,000
for large wind-energy facilities and $1,500 for utility-scale windenergy
facilities for such review at the time of submission of the
permit application, which shall be deposited into a special account
established by the Town Treasurer under MGL c. 44, § 53G. The
balance of this account shall at no time be less than 1/2 the initial
deposit, and the applicant shall deposit with the Treasurer such
additional funds as are required to restore the account to the
amount of the initial deposit upon notice from the Special Permit
Granting Authority, by first-class mail, that the amount on deposit
has been decreased by the expenditures described herein to an
amount at or below 1/2 of the initial deposit. If the applicant fails to
restore the account balance and the balance is insufficient to pay
incurred professional and technical review fees, the Special Permit
Granting Authority shall send the invoice directly to the applicant
for immediate payment. Failure to comply with this section shall
be good grounds for denying the special permit application. Upon
approval of the special permit application, any excess amount in
the account attributable to that project, including any interest
accrued, shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant's
successor in interest.
(2)
D.
§ 203-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 203-8
5:221
Chapter 204
(RESERVED)
Chapter 205
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 205-1. Planning Board fee schedule.
Type Cost
ANR plan $100 plus $25 additional/buildable
lot
Determination $75
Earth/Gravel $250
Kennel, noncommercial $100
Kennel, commercial $200
Solar energy facility, residential $200 plus $3/kw dc
Solar energy facility – business/
commercial/industrial
$200 plus $3/kw dc
Stonewall break – scenic road $100 per opening
Subdivision – See "Subdivision of Land," Chapter 202, Appendix A
Wind powered generator $200 plus $3/kw dc
Wireless communication facilities/
cell tower
$250
Any other not listed $100
Chapter 301
MASSAGE AND MUSCULAR THERAPY
§ 301-1. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of MGL, c. 111, § 31, and c. 140, §§ 51 through 53,
the Board of Health of the Town of Barre hereby establishes the following
terms, conditions, rules, and regulations for the practice of massage and
muscular therapy.
§ 301-2. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — The room or group of rooms, office, building, place of
business, or premises where massage is practiced.
§ 203-8 BARRE CODE § 301-2
5:222
MASSAGE AND/OR MUSCULAR THERAPIST — Any person who has been
trained in and practices the art of massage and muscular therapy.
MASSAGE AND/OR MUSCULAR THERAPY — A method or technique of
treating the body by rubbing, kneading or the like, by manual or mechanical
means, to stimulate circulation, increase suppleness, or for the purpose of
invigoration, pleasure, or for purported health treatment.
§ 301-3. Exceptions and exclusions.
§ 301-4. Licensing.
These regulations shall not apply to the following individuals while
engaged in the regular performance of the duties of their respective
professions:
Physicians, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who
are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
School athletic trainers acting within the scope of their
employment at educational facilities and those facilities are
excluded from licensing.
(2)
Nurses who are registered or licensed under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(3)
Barbers and beauticians who are duly registered under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except that this exemption
shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair
of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes.
(4)
Any person licensed to practice massage by any city or town in the
commonwealth may, at the request of a physician, attend patients
in the Town of Barre without taking out an additional license,
provided the Board of Health has been notified in writing.
(5)
A.
B. These regulations shall not apply to medical facilities.
No person shall practice massage and muscular therapy for commercial
purposes within the Town of Barre without a current license to do so
from the Board of Health.
A.
An applicant for a license to practice massage and muscular therapy
must:
Submit a completed application to the Barre Board of Health,
containing all information therein requested.
(1)
Submit a certified copy of:
Proof of graduation from a school of massage therapy,
approved by the American Massage Therapy Association and
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 301-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 301-4
5:223
§ 301-5. Massage therapy establishment requirements.
Every establishment used for the purpose of performing massage and/
or muscular therapy shall operate under the following requirements and
guidelines:
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Education; or
Proof of graduation from a school of massage therapy, which
requires at least 500 hours and at least six months of
instruction and practical training, certified by the Board of
Education in the state in which the school is located.
(b)
(c) A certificate of basic CPR and first aid training.
Submit a copy of the results of a physical examination, performed
within one year prior to application, which includes a statement
that the applicant is free of communicable disease.
(3)
The Board of Health shall evaluate each individual application prior to
the issuance of any license to practice massage and muscular therapy.
Any statements made by the applicant to the Board at any public
meeting may also be considered in the evaluation of that application.
C.
The fee for an individual license to practice massage and muscular
therapy shall be established annually by the Board of Health.
D.
E. No application shall be accepted from a minor.
All massage and muscular therapy licenses shall expire on May 31 of
each year.
F.
Any individual holding a current license to practice massage and/or
muscular therapy shall notify the Board of Health of any change in
name or address.
G.
Each establishment must be in compliance with all zoning bylaws and
requirements in the Town of Barre.23
A.
Each massage therapist practicing on the premises must hold a current
certificate of registration in massage and muscular therapy in the Town
of Barre.
B.
All rooms used for the purpose of massage and/or muscular therapy
shall be well lighted, well ventilated, and properly heated.
C.
No room used for the purpose of massage and/or muscular therapy
shall be used as a bedroom; provided, however, that this section shall
not be construed to prevent the massage of any person in his/her own
home or at any medical facility used for the treatment of the sick.
D.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
§ 301-4 BARRE CODE § 301-5
5:224
§ 301-6. Denial of application for license or renewal; hearing.
Any person or establishment whose application for a license or license
renewal is denied may, within ten days of said denial, request in writing, a
hearing upon the cause or causes of said denial. The Board of Health may
set a time and place for said hearing within a reasonable time, not to exceed
14 days.
§ 301-7. Suspension/revocation of license.
There shall be a safe, adequate supply of hot and cold running water at
all times.
E.
Every room used for the purpose of massage and/or muscular therapy
shall be kept clean at all times, as shall all furniture and equipment
therein.
F.
Every room used for the purpose of massage and/or muscular therapy
shall be so located to afford adequate fire protection and means of
escape in case of fire.
G.
All robes, sheets, towels, etc., which may come in direct contact with
the body shall be properly cleaned.
H.
All instruments and devices, as well as hands, utilized in performing
massage and/or muscular therapy shall not be used on more than one
patron unless they have been sterilized, disinfected, and/or sanitized
using approved methods.
I.
The establishment shall be open to the officer or agent of the Board
of Health for the purpose of conducting reasonable, unscheduled
inspections to observe and enforce compliance with these regulations.
J.
The establishment is not to be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., unless specifically authorized in writing by the Board of
Health.
K.
If food is served, the establishment must be in compliance with Article X
of the State Sanitary Code, and a food service permit must be obtained
from the Board of Health.
L.
No person shall treat or be treated if afflicted with a communicable
disease. However, they may treat or be treated when a written
statement is received from a physician.
M.
The hands of every person practicing massage shall be thoroughly
cleaned by washing with soap and hot water immediately before and
after treating a patron.
N.
No license granted under these regulations, whether for individual
practitioners or for establishments, may be suspended or revoked
without a hearing.
A.
§ 301-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 301-7
5:225
§ 301-8. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provisions of these regulations shall be subject to
fines in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 53, as amended.
§ 301-9. Severability.
If any portion of these regulations is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provisions and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Chapter 302
RECYCLING
§ 302-1. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the policymaking authority vested in the Board of Health
by MGL c. 111, § 31, and in keeping with the Massachusetts Solid Waste
Master Plan, the following regulations are hereby adopted.
§ 302-2. Separation of recyclables required.
Such license may be suspended or revoked if, after a hearing, the Barre
Board of Health finds that there is satisfactory proof that the license
has:
(1) Made a material false statement on the application form.
Violated or permitted a violation of any of these regulations or of
any conditions of the license.
(2)
(3) Violated or permitted a violation of any law of the commonwealth.
B.
In an effort to protect the town's environment and its resources, and
to better preserve the capacity of our local solid waste facility, all
residents, schools, and businesses within the Town of Barre shall
separate recyclable items, as designated below, from nonrecyclable
waste.
Paper and cardboard.
(a) Newspaper.
(b) Mixed/office paper.
(c) Boxboard (cereal boxes, paper towel rolls, etc.)
(d) Corrugated cardboard.
(e) Brown paper bags.
(f) Magazines.
(1)
A.
§ 301-7 BARRE CODE § 302-2
5:226
§ 302-3. Licensed rubbish hauler required.
Residents contracting for curbside rubbish removal must do so with a solid
waste hauler who holds a valid rubbish hauler's permit from the Board of
Health.
(g) Telephone and paperback books.
Mixed containers.
(a) All plastic bottles.
(b) All plastic jars/tubs.
(c) All plastic microwave trays/containers.
(d) Aluminum cans.
(e) Tin/steel cans.
(f) Aluminum foil.
(g) Milk and juice cartons (tent tops).
(h) Drink boxes.
(i) Glass bottles/jars.
(2)
White goods. White metal goods including, but not limited to:
(a) Washing machines.
(b) Dryers.
(c) Hot water heaters.
(d) Stoves.
(3)
Scrap metal.
(a) Boilers.
(b) Radiators.
(c) Copper pipe.
(4)
(5) Leaves and yard waste.
(6) Tires.
(7) Lead acid batteries.
These materials shall be separated by category, as listed above, and
deposited in designated containers at the recycling facility.
B.
§ 302-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 302-4
5:227
§ 302-4. Enforcement; revocation of landfill permit.
This regulation shall be administered and enforced by the Board of Health
and its agents. Violators of this regulation may face revocation of their
landfill permit. Any person whose landfill permit has been revoked as a
result of violation of this regulation may request a hearing before the Board
of Health for reinstatement of their permit, which the Board may allow at
its discretion.
Chapter 303
REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Sewer construction standards — See Ch. 402.
§ 303-1. Statutory authority.
The Board of Health, Town of Barre, Massachusetts, has adopted the
following regulations on May 24, 1988, to govern review of subdivision
plans filed in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81U.
§ 303-2. Filing requirements.
The filing of subdivision plans with the Board of Health shall be
simultaneous with the filing of the plans with the Town Clerk. The following
requirements must be included:
Accurate locations of wetlands, brooks, streams, and surface water
bodies must be shown in conformance with the current Title 5. (Septic
system must be 100 feet from a wetland.)
A.
High water level and percolation tests on each of the proposed lots
must satisfy the Board of Health that the area in general and each
lot in the proposed subdivision is composed of soil, the water level
and ground permeability of which are adequate for waste and sewage
purposes.
B.
For a preliminary plan, the Board requires that two percolation and two
soil evaluations be conducted on 50% of the proposed lots. These tests
must be distributed on a representative basis across the subdivision
in order to assure a reasonable estimate of the ability of the soils to
handle a subdivision. Lacking a representative testing site distribution,
the Board will recommend the denial of the preliminary plan.
C.
For a definitive plan, the Board will require two soil evaluations and
two percolation tests carried out on each and every lot proposed for the
D.
§ 302-4 BARRE CODE § 303-2
5:228
Chapter 304
FLOOR DRAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Surface water control — See Ch. 112.
Sewer construction standards — See Ch. 402.
§ 304-1. Scope of authority.
The Town of Barre Board of Health adopts the following regulation pursuant
to authorization granted by MGL c. 111 §§ 31 and 122. The regulation
shall apply, as specified herein, to all applicable facilities, existing and new,
within the Town of Barre.
§ 304-2. Purpose of regulation.
subdivision. The number of completed tests will determine the number
of proposed housing units for consideration.
Accurate location of sewage disposal system and reserve leach areas,
as determined by field testing.
E.
A location of the dwelling in relation to the well, septic system and leach
area, including reserve area.
F.
G. The well location.
Woodwaste disposal: the location, if any, to be used for the disposal
of woodwastes, tree stumps, or wood debris. (See Board of Health
Woodwaste Policy.24) The filing of subdivision plans with the Board
of Health shall include a notarized statement signed by the owner/
developer, as part of the application, which notifies the Board as to the
manner in which the woodwaste generated by the proposed subdivision
will be disposed of in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 150A, and 310
CMR 19.01 (2).
H.
Additional requirements for plan development as stipulated by the
Barre Planning Board.
I.
Whereas:
Floor drains in industrial and commercial facilities are often tied
to a system leading to a leaching structure (e.g. dry well, cesspool,
leach field) or a septic system; and
(1)
A.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 309, Woodwaste Policy.
§ 303-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 304-2
5:229
§ 304-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this regulation, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — A public or private
establishment where the principal use is the supply, sale, and/or
manufacture of services, products, or information, including but not limited
to: manufacturing, processing, or other industrial operations; service or
retail establishments; printing or publishing establishments; research and
development facilities; small or large quantity generators of hazardous
material; laboratories; hospitals.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISCHARGE — The accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of toxic or hazardous
material upon or into any land or water so that such hazardous material or
any constituent thereof may enter the land or waters of the commonwealth.
Discharge includes, without limitation, leakage of such materials from failed
or discarded containers or storage systems and disposal of such materials
into any on-site leaching structure or sewage disposal system.
FLOOR DRAIN — An intended drainage point on a floor constructed to be
otherwise impervious which serves as the point of entry into any subsurface
drainage, treatment, disposal, containment, or other plumbing system.
LEACHING STRUCTURE — Any subsurface structure through which a fluid
that is introduced will pass and enter the environment, including, but not
Poor management practices and accidental and/or intentional
discharges may lead petroleum and other toxic or hazardous
materials into these drainage systems in facilities managing these
products; and
(2)
Improper maintenance or inappropriate use of these systems may
allow the passage of contaminants or pollutants entering the drain
to discharge from the leaching structure or septic system to the
ground; and
(3)
Discharges of hazardous materials and other pollutants to floor
drains leading to leaching structures and septic systems have
repeatedly threatened surface and ground water quality
throughout Massachusetts; and
(4)
Surface and ground water resources in the Town of Barre
contribute to the town's drinking water supplies.
(5)
The Town of Barre adopts the following regulation, under its authority
as specified in § 304-1, as a preventative measure for the purposes of
preserving and protecting the Town of Barre's drinking water resources
from discharges of pollutants to the ground via floor drains.
B.
§ 304-2 BARRE CODE § 304-3
5:230
limited to, dry wells, leaching catch basins, cesspools, leach fields, and oil/
water separators that are not watertight.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain petroleum-based oil or grease, flammable materials as
well as sand and particles from normal wastes while permitting normal
sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
Other common names for such systems include MDC traps, gasoline and
sand traps, grit and oil separators, grease traps, and interceptors.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual,
or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health
if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water of the
Town of Barre. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious materials, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as toxic
or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and c. 21E or Massachusetts hazardous
waste regulations (304 CMR 30.000), and also include such products as
solvents, thinners, pesticides, and herbicides.
USE OF TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — The handling, generation,
treatment, storage, or management of toxic or hazardous materials.
§ 304-4. Prohibitions.
With the exception of discharges that have received (or have applied and
will receive) a Department-issued permit prior to the effective date of this
regulation, no floor drain(s) shall be allowed to discharge, with or without
pretreatment (such as an oil/water separator), to the ground, a leaching
structure, or septic system in any industrial or commercial facility if such
floor drain is located in either:
§ 304-5. Requirements for existing facilities.
A. An industrial or commercial process area,
A petroleum, toxic, or hazardous materials and/or waste storage area,
or
B.
A leased facility without either A or B of this section, but in which the
potential for a change of use of the property to a use which does have
either A or B is, in the opinion of the Board of Health or its agent,
sufficient to warrant the elimination of the ground discharge at the
present.
C.
The owner of a facility in operation prior to the effective date of this
regulation with a prohibited (as stated in § 304-4) floor drain system
shall:
Disconnect and plug all applicable inlets to and outlets from (where
possible) applicable leaching structures, oil/water separators, and/
or septic systems;
(1)
A.
§ 304-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 304-5
5:231
§ 304-6. Effective dates for all facilities.
The effective date of this regulation is indicated in § 304-10 of the
regulation, which shall be identical to the date of adoption of the regulation.
Remove all existing sludge in oil/water separators, septic systems
and, where accessible, leaching structures. Any sludge determined
to be a hazardous material shall be disposed of in accordance with
state hazardous waste regulations (304 CMR 30.000). Remedial
activity involving any excavation and/or soil or groundwater
sampling must be performed in accordance with appropriate
Department policies;
(2)
Alter the floor drain system so that the floor drain shall be either:
Connected to a holding tank that meets all applicable
requirements of Department policies and regulations, with
hauling records submitted to the Barre Board of Health at the
time of hauling;
(a)
Connected to a municipal sanitary sewer line, if available, with
all applicable Department and local permits; or
(b)
Permanently sealed. Any facility sealing a drain shall be
required to submit for approval to the Board of Health a
hazardous materials management plan detailing the means of
collecting, storing, and disposing of any hazardous material
generated by the facility, including any spill or other discharge
of hazardous materials.
(c)
(3)
Any oil/water separator remaining in use shall be monitored (by
periodic inspections conducted by the Board of Health or by agents for
the Board of Health), cleaned not less than every 90 days, and restored
to proper conditions after cleaning so as to ensure proper functioning.
Records of the hauling of the removed contents of the separator shall
be submitted to the Board of Health at the time of hauling.
B.
Compliance with all provisions of this regulation must be accomplished
in a manner consistent with Massachusetts Plumbing, Building, and
Fire Code requirements.
C.
Upon complying with one of the options listed under Subsection A(3),
the owner/operator of the facility shall notify the Department of the
closure of said system by filing the Department's UIC Notification Form,
which may be obtained by calling 617/292-5770, with the Department,
and sending a copy to the Barre Board of Health.
D.
Existing facilities:
Owners/operators of a facility affected by this regulation shall
comply with all of its provisions within 90 days of the effective date.
(1)
A.
§ 304-5 BARRE CODE § 304-6
5:232
§ 304-7. Enforcement.
Enforcement of these regulations shall be implemented by the Board of
Health, its staff, or other persons who may be designated by the Board as
its agents. The Board will enforce these regulations through Chapter 67,
Noncriminal Disposition of Bylaw Violations.
§ 304-8. Violations and penalties.
Noncriminal disposition is a progressive ticketing fine process, which allows
for a hearing, and only becomes criminal if the ticket is not paid. First
offense is a fine of $200. Second offense is a fine of $500. Third offense is a
fine of $1,000. Failure to comply with any provision of this regulation once
ordered to do so shall result in a noncriminal disposition fine. Each day of
noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 304-9. Severability.
Each provision of this regulation shall be construed as separate to the end
that if any provision, or sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections
shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 304-10. Effective date.
These regulations are signed on the eighth day of May in the year 2000, and
are effective on the first day of July in the year 2000.
All applicable discharges to the leaching structures and septic
systems shall be discontinued immediately through temporary
isolation or sealing of the floor drain.
(2)
New facilities:
As of the effective date of the regulation, all new construction and/
or applicable change of use within the Town of Barre shall comply
with the provisions of this regulation.
(1)
Certification of conformance with the provisions of this regulation
by the Board of Health shall be required prior to issuance of
construction and occupancy permits.
(2)
The use of any new oil/water separator shall comply with the
same requirements as for existing systems, as specified above in
§ 304-5B.
(3)
B.
§ 304-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 304-10
5:233
Chapter 305
SITING OF COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 21.
Environmental evaluation — See Ch. 42.
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
§ 305-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the regulatory authority vested in the Board of Health by MGL
c. 111, § 31, the Board of Health has adopted the following regulation in
regard to the siting of land for the operation of commercial operations.
§ 305-2. Location assignment; public hearing.
In keeping with MGL c. 111, §§ 143 through 150, no trade or employment
which may result in a nuisance, be harmful to the inhabitants, injurious to
their estates, dangerous to public health, or may be attended by noisome
and injurious odors shall be established in the Town of Barre unless the
Board of Health, after a public hearing, has assigned a location for such
trade or occupation.
§ 305-3. Hazardous waste facilities.25
Hazardous waste facilities governed by MGL c. 111, § 150B and refuse
treatment or disposal facilities governed by § 150A are not exempt from this
regulation, and must request site assignment from the local Board of Health
prior to operation.
§ 305-4. Application requirements; fee.
Application for site assignment must be submitted, in writing, to the Board
of Health, along with an application fee of $100. The application shall
include the name of the person or company requesting site assignment,
adequate identification of the proposed facility location, including street
address and Assessors map and lot number, a description of the operation,
and proposed hours of operation. After receipt of the application and fee,
the Board of Health shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the
requirements set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 11.
§ 305-5. Decision deadline.
The Board of Health shall make a decision no later than 30 days following
the date of the public hearing.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 101, Sludge and Hazardous Waste.
§ 304-10 BARRE CODE § 305-5
5:234
Chapter 306
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of bylaw
violation — See Ch. 67.
Tobacco product distribution — See Ch. 307.
§ 306-1. Statement of purpose.
Whereas conclusive evidence exists that tobacco smoke causes cancer,
respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes, irritations to the
eyes, nose, and throat; and whereas the harmful effects of tobacco smoke
are not confined to smokers but also cause severe discomfort and illness
to nonsmokers; and whereas environmental tobacco smoke (hereinafter
E.T.S.), which includes both exhaled smoke and the side stream smoke
from burning cigarettes, causes the death of 53,000 Americans each year
(McGinnis JM, Foege W, "Actual Causes of Death in the United States,"
JAMA 1993 270:2207-2212); and whereas in 2000, the Public Health
Service's National Toxicology Program listed environmental tobacco as a
known human carcinogen (U.S. DHHS, 2000, citing Cal. EPA, 1997) similar
to radon and asbestos with no known safe levels of exposure; now,
therefore, the Board of Health of the Town of Barre recognizes the right of
those who wish to breathe smoke-free air and establishes this regulation to
protect and improve the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking
in public places.
§ 306-2. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the Barre
Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31, that "Boards of Health may make
reasonable health regulations."
§ 306-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BAR — An adult-only establishment whose business is devoted to the
serving of alcoholic beverages for the consumption by guests on the
premises and is not within a restaurant.
BOARD — The Board of Health of the Town of Barre.
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other business entity, including retail establishments where
goods or services are sold.
§ 305-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 306-3
5:235
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or
other organized group of individuals, including the Town of Barre or any
agency thereof, which utilizes the services of one or more employees.
ENCLOSED AREA — A space bounded by walls (with or without windows)
continuous from the floor to the ceiling and enclosed by doors, including,
but not limited to, offices, rooms and halls.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building that is owned by or under the
control of the Town of Barre, including but not limited to schools, fire
stations, police stations, DPW buildings, and the Town Hall.
MUNICIPAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is owned by or under the control
of the Town of Barre, including but not limited to police, fire, DPW vehicles,
and vehicles that are assigned to departments that work out of the Town
Hall.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind including, but not limited to, an
owner, operator, manager proprietor or person in charge of any building,
establishment, business, or restaurant or retail store, or the agents or
designees of any of the foregoing.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any establishment which employees normally
frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to,
work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference and classrooms,
employee cafeterias, and hallways.
PRIVATE CLUB — A not-for-profit establishment created and organized
pursuant to MGL c. 180 as a charitable corporation with a defined
membership. A private club is not a place of public accommodation but
rather distinctly private. Criteria used to determine whether a club is
distinctly private include, but are not limited to, those factors identified in
204 CMR 10.02. If the private club holds an alcoholic beverage license,
said license shall be a "club license" or a "war veterans club license" as
defined in MGL c. 138, § 12, and by the Massachusetts Alcohol Beverage
Commission. Said license is subject to the terms set forth by local licensing
authority.
PRIVATE SOCIAL FUNCTION — A social gathering associated with a single
purpose that is not opened to the public and is under the control of the host/
hostess rather than the proprietor/manager, such as a wedding reception.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or facility owned, leased, operated or
occupied by the municipality, including school building, or grounds; any
enclosed area open to the general public, including, but not limited to,
retail stores, retail food stores, libraries, museums, theaters, banks,
Laundromats, indoor sports arenas, auditoriums, inn/hotel/motel lobbies,
private and public educational facilities, shopping malls, common areas
§ 306-3 BARRE CODE § 306-3
5:236
of residential buildings, public restrooms, lobbies, staircases, halls, exits,
entranceways, elevators accessible to the public and licensed child-care
locations.
PUBLIC SOCIAL FUNCTION — A social gathering that is open to the
general public and is not associated with membership.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE — Buses, taxis, and other means
of transportation available to the general public while such means of
transportation is operating within the boundaries of the Town, including
indoor platforms by which such means of transportation may be accessed.
RESTAURANT — Any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, and any other
eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public,
guests, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere; including catering facilities.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco
product in any form.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, pipe tobacco and
smokeless tobacco.
TOWN — The Town of Barre.
§ 306-4. Application of this regulation to public places.
No person shall smoke nor shall any person, employer, or business
agent having control of the premises upon which smoking is prohibited
by this regulation, or the business agent or designees of such person,
permit a person to smoke in any of the following places as defined
herein:
Any municipal building or vehicles, including but not limited to
police, fire and DPW vehicles owned by or under the control of the
Town of Barre, and vehicles that are assigned to departments in
the Town Hall. Smoking is also prohibited within 10 feet of any
entrance of a public building.
(1)
Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the
authority of the Town, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of
public transit depots.
(2)
(3) Elevators and restrooms under the control of the Town of Barre.
Indoor service lines such as any indoor line at which one or more
persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or
not such service involves the exchange of money.
(4)
(5) Retail stores.
Laundromats, hairdressing, barbershop and beauty salon facilities,
and gas stations.
(6)
A.
§ 306-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 306-4
5:237
§ 306-5. Places where smoking is not regulated.
Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries, sports arenas,
bowling alleys, arcades and museums that are open to the public.
(7)
Any facility that is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture,
stage, drama, lecture, or musical except where smoking is part of
the production.
(8)
Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly,
including public school buildings and public school grounds, under
the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including
joint committees, or agencies of the Town or any political
subdivision of the commonwealth during such time as public
meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Town.
(9)
Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and semiprivate rooms of healthcare
facilities, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics,
physical therapy facilities, massage therapy, doctors' offices, and
dentists' offices.
(10)
Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in retirement facilities
and nursing homes. Smoking is only permitted in specially
designated areas that are not the common areas listed above.
(11)
(12)Polling places.
All day-care and child-care facilities including private residences
during hours of operation when being used as day-care or childcare
facilities.
(13)
Public and common areas of hotels, motels and bed-and-breakfasts.
Hotels, motels, and bed-and-breakfasts must set aside permanent
nonsmoking guest rooms.
(14)
(15)Public areas of places of employment.
Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general
public is invited.
(16)
(17)Houses of worship.
(18)Restaurants.
(19)Bars.
(20)Schools. (MGL c. 71, § 2A)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment or
facility may declare the entire establishment or facility and grounds as
a nonsmoking establishment.
B.
§ 306-4 BARRE CODE § 306-5
5:238
§ 306-6. Posting of signs.
"No Smoking" signs, or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously
posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated, by the
owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building
or other place. One sign must appear at each public entrance.
§ 306-7. School property.
Students, faculty, staff and visitors are prohibited from smoking on school
grounds and property.
§ 306-8. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this
regulation:
Private clubs, except when such clubs are being used for a function
to which the general public is invited.
(1)
Private residences, except during the time when used as child-care
or health-care facilities, as regulated by the State of Massachusetts
and the Barre Board of Health.
(2)
(3) Nonenclosed outdoor spaces such as sidewalks, streets, and parks.
Private businesses and worksites that are not open to the general
public.
(4)
A.
Unless prohibited elsewhere, this prohibition does not apply in cases
in which an entire facility or hall is used for a private social function
or when the establishment is in use and persons under 18 years of age
are not permitted. If a party requests a nonsmoking environment, the
proprietor of the facility must assure that the air be filtered sufficiently
between private social functions by utilizing existing means of
ventilation.
B.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner,
operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment
described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a
nonsmoking establishment.
C.
No person shall allow another individual or individuals to smoke in any
area where smoking is prohibited by these regulations.
A.
Any person who violates this regulation shall be subject to a warning
for the first offense within one year, a fine of $100 for a second violation
within one year of the date of the current offense, a fine of $200 for a
third violation within one year of the date of the current offense, and a
B.
§ 306-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 306-8
5:239
§ 306-9. Enforcement.
Chapter 307
TOBACCO PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of bylaw
violations — See Ch. 67.
Smoking — See Ch. 306.
§ 307-1. Findings and purposes.
§ 307-2. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR — Any individual under 18 years of age.
PERSON — Any natural person or any firm, partnership, company,
corporation or other entity.
fine of $300 for a fourth or subsequent offense within one year of the
date of the current offense.
Violations of the prohibition of smoking on school property in § 306-7
shall be punishable of a fine of $25.
C.
The Board of Health and/or its designee shall enforce this regulation.
One method of enforcement shall be periodic unannounced inspections
of those establishments subject to this regulation.
A.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint of noncompliance with
these regulations may do so with the Board of Health.
B.
There exists substantial evidence that tobacco is the major cause of
preventable deaths in the United States.
A.
Nicotine is an addictive drug and addiction to nicotine usually begins
during childhood and adolescence.
B.
The free distribution of tobacco products and the availability of self
service tobacco products have been demonstrated to result in the
unlawful distribution of tobacco to minors.
C.
The Barre Board of Health adopts these regulations pursuant to MGL c.
111, §§ 31 and 31A, to protect and improve the health of the residents
of the Town of Barre and to prevent violations of Massachusetts state
law prohibiting the provision of tobacco products to minors.
D.
§ 306-8 BARRE CODE § 307-2
5:240
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, pipe tobacco, and
smokeless tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE — Any self-service device which, upon insertion of
money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco, cigarettes,
or any other tobacco product.
§ 307-3. Retail tobacco permit; exception for vending machines;
fees.
§ 307-4. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell, give, or furnish tobacco in any form to any
individual under 18 years of age.
§ 307-5. Distribution of free samples.
No free samples of tobacco or tobacco products shall be distributed in
Barre. This restriction does not apply to "buy one get one free" offers or to
the redemption of coupons in stores.
§ 307-6. Regulations for sale of tobacco through vending machines.
No person shall sell tobacco by use of a vending machine, or install or
maintain a tobacco vending machine with the intent of making such sales,
except as provided in the following subsections:
No person shall sell any tobacco product unless that person holds a
valid retail tobacco permit obtained from the Barre Board of Health.
Such permit shall be renewed annually at a cost of $5. Before a tobacco
permit is issued to an individual, that individual must first read and
understand all of the provisions of these regulations. A separate permit
shall be required for each place of business.
A.
A permit is not required to sell tobacco products from a vending
machine; however, all operators of tobacco vending machines shall be
required to pay an annual registration fee of $5 for each machine from
which tobacco products are sold.
B.
All tobacco vendors shall additionally be required to pay an annual
inspection fee of $20 for each location at which tobacco is sold. This
fee will be waived when the Barre Board of Health is not conducting its
own inspections.
C.
Vending machines are permitted if they are equipped with a lockout
device which prevents the machine from being operated until the
person responsible for monitoring sales from the machine disables the
lock. The locking device must be of a design which prevents it from
being left in an unlocked condition, and which will allow only a single
sale when it is unlocked.
A.
§ 307-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 307-6
5:241
§ 307-7. Proof of age required.
Any person who sells tobacco products, or who is responsible for monitoring
sales from a tobacco vending machine, shall request of any customer who
is not obviously 18 years of age or older a photographic identification
establishing their age. Positive proof of age must be established before any
sale of tobacco is made.
§ 307-8. Display of certain notices at cash registers.
§ 307-9. Sale to persons with note from adult prohibited.
No person shall sell tobacco products to a person under 18 years of age who
has a note from an adult requesting such a sale.
§ 307-10. Displays; sale in original packaging.
All tobacco products must be issued by the clerk on duty. Freestanding
displays must be enclosed from public access. Broken pack sales of
cigarettes are prohibited. Cigarettes must be sold in their original sealed
packaging.
§ 307-11. Training of employees; acknowledgment of regulations.
Tobacco permit holders shall be responsible for training all employees
regarding their responsibilities under these regulations. Each employee
In addition, a vending machine is allowed only in establishments where
a responsible person will be present to monitor the machine when the
establishment is open.
B.
Any vending machine permissible under Subsections A and B must be
placed in a location approved by the Board of Health. Such machines
shall be located well within a premises and close enough to the person
controlling the machine that such person can determine the age of any
person requesting permission to use the machine.
C.
No sales of tobacco are permitted from a vending machine which also
offers for sale any nontobacco product.
D.
Tobacco retailers shall conspicuously post and reasonably maintain the
following notices as described in this section at each cash register
where tobacco products are sold:
A notice facing the cashier stating that tobacco sales to minors are
illegal.
(1)
A notice facing the customer stating that the store refuses to sell
tobacco to minors.
(2)
A.
Signs shall be available from the Board of Health at no charge, from a
tobacco trade industry or from the Tobacco Alliance.
B.
§ 307-6 BARRE CODE § 307-11
5:242
involved with tobacco sales shall read these regulations. Permit holders
may obtain a written statement from each employee acknowledging that the
employee has been given and has read and understands these regulations.
§ 307-12. Enforcement through inspections and attempted
purchases by minors.
These regulations shall be enforced through periodic inspections conducted
by the Health Department, the Police Department, constables, or agents
thereof, including the Tobacco Alliance. These inspections shall include
attempted purchases of tobacco products by individuals under 18 years
of age under the supervision of an agent of the enforcing agency. Such
inspections shall not be considered "entrapment." Inspections will be
conducted a minimum of three times each year. Inspections may be
conducted more frequently at the discretion of the enforcing agency. The
results of these inspections shall be presented to the Board of Health on a
regular basis.
§ 307-13. Violations of §§ 307-3, 307-4, 307-5, 307-6 and 307-9.
Violations of §§ 307-3, 307-4, 307-5, 307-6, and 307-9, shall be punishable
by a fine and/or a suspension or revocation of the violator's tobacco sales
permit. A first offense is punishable by a fine of $100 or a suspension of
the tobacco permit for a period of one day; a second offense within a twoyear
period shall be punishable by a fine of $200 or a one-week suspension;
a third offense within a two year period shall be punishable by a fine of
$300 or a permit suspension of 30 days. Any subsequent offenses may
be punishable by a fine of $300 or the revocation of the tobacco permit.
A revoked permit may not be reinstated for a period of one year. The
Board of Health may, at its discretion, issue a warning in lieu of either
a fine or permit suspension for a first offense. Violations of § 307-6 shall
be assessed against the owner of the vending machine. Any fine will be
assessed against the person who holds the tobacco permit, unless that
person can demonstrate that the employee who violated these regulations
was properly trained as per § 307-12. If such evidence is presented to the
Board of Health, the Board may, at its discretion, require that the employee
pay up to 1/2 of the fine, with the remainder to be paid by the permit holder.
§ 307-14. Violations of §§ 307-8 and 307-9.
Violations of §§ 307-8 and 307-9 shall be punishable by a fine of $50. The
Board of Health may, at its discretion, issue a warning in lieu of a fine for a
first offense.
§ 307-15. Enforcement authority.
The Health Department and the Police Department shall have jurisdiction
to enforce these regulations. Such authority may be delegated to agents
working under their authority in either a paid or voluntary capacity.
§ 307-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 307-16
5:243
§ 307-16. Requests for assistance in training employees.
The Health Department shall respond to any requests from tobacco retailers
for assistance in training sales personnel. The Health Officer shall provide
copies of these regulations to tobacco retailers for the purpose of training
their employees.
§ 307-17. Violations by minors.
Minors are forbidden from using or possessing tobacco on school property,
on school buses and in public places as stated in Chapter 306, § 306-3,
Definitions, including public ways. School personnel may confiscate any
tobacco possessed by a minor in the school locations and may report
violations to the Board of Health. The Board of Health (and members
and agent) and the Police Department officers may confiscate any tobacco
possessed by a minor in these locations. Minors under the age of 18 are
forbidden from purchasing or attempting to purchase cigarettes or tobacco
products. Merchants may report violators to the Board of Health. Violations
of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25 or a requirement to
perform five hours of community service. The Board of Health members at
a regularly scheduled Board of Health meeting will determine the type of
community service that is acceptable. Both the fine and community service
will be waived for a first offense if the minor completes a smoking cessation
course approved by the Board of Health.
§ 307-18. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid, the other provisions
shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 307-19. When effective.
These regulations will go into effect 30 days after being approved by the
Board of Health, with the exception of § 307-6, which shall go into effect 90
days after being approved.
Chapter 308
WELLS
§ 308-1. Background and findings
Water supply from a private well is a regulatory area with multiple
enforcement in the State of Massachusetts. There are state statutes
enforceable by the Board of Selectmen (MGL c. 40, § 54) and by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management (Well
Completion Report).
A.
These regulations, hereby adopted by the Barre Board of Health in
accordance with MGL, c. 111, § 31, serve as a summary of existing laws.
B.
§ 307-16 BARRE CODE § 308-1
5:244
§ 308-2. Areas of joint jurisdiction and source of water.
§ 308-3. Construction of drilled artesian wells.
§ 308-4. Water testing and quality.
§ 308-5. Water yield to well depth.
Since a private source of water is not supervised by anyone other than
an individual homeowner, it is imperative that a homeowner be aware
of the factors which govern approval of a water supply as fit for human
consumption.
C.
MGL c. 40, § 54, states that a building permit for a residential dwelling
shall not be issued unless there is a potable (approvable) source of
water. This law is enforceable by the Board of Selectmen through the
Building Inspector.
A.
Department of Environmental Management regulations, 313 CMR 3.00,
require that a Well Completion Report be submitted to the state, the
local Board of Health, and the landowner.
B.
MGL c. 21, § 16, requires that all well drillers must be registered with
the state, which includes meeting state qualification requirements. The
local Board of Health requires that only licensed well drillers fill out
applications for well installation. The Board of Health also requires
that, prior to any well driller being given approval for well installation,
a copy of his/her well driller's license must be on file at the Board of
Health office.
C.
Drilled artesian wells must be constructed according to guidelines
detailed by the Department of Environmental Management. The
guidelines, basically, state the following:
(1) The well casing must be sealed off into ledge.
(2) The well cap must be at ground level and visible.
The soil around the capped well casing must be sloped to shed
runoff water.
(3)
A.
B. The water should be chlorinated after drilling and then pumped off.
The water must be tested by a state-approved lab for bacteriological
quality. A test result of 0 coliform/100 ml is the minimum acceptable
test result.
A.
The Barre Board of Health does not require that water be tested for
chemical quality. The Board does have information available concerning
the primary and secondary water quality standards, which are both
Federal EPA and Massachusetts DEP standards.
B.
§ 308-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 308-5
5:245
§ 308-6. Severability.
If any provision of these rules and regulations, or their application, is
deemed to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any provisions of the
rules and regulations not specifically deemed to be invalid.
Chapter 309
WOODWASTE POLICY
§ 309-1. Closing of landfill; reliance on state policy.
In light of the recent directive from the Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering (DEQE) dated August 14, 1987, our Board has been
forced to reevaluate our policy regarding the Town Farm Landfill. The Barre
Board of Health has decided to close the Town Farm Landfill and to rely on
the DEQE policy as the official means for handling woodwaste in our town.
§ 309-2. Summary of DEQE policy.
The DEQE policy of August 14, 1987 calls for the following:
The Barre Board of Health does not require that pump testing be
completed on all water supplies. However, to ensure an adequate water
supply, the following water yield to well depth table is suggested:
Well Depth
(feet)
Minimum Recommended Yield
(gallons per minute)
100 – 300 5 or greater
300 – 600 3 or greater
600 – 900 1 or greater
A.
If the yield is not adequate according to the above chart, it may be
necessary to incorporate a larger storage tank into the home system to
ensure adequate storage capacity.
B.
Woodwaste burial of up to 200 cubic yards is permitted without DEQE
review, provided it is from the same property, does not pose an
environmental threat (ex. burial in wetlands), and that a plan is filed
with the local Board of Health.
A.
If the area poses an environmental threat as determined by the Board
of Health, regardless of quantity of disposal, a DEQE review will be
required.
B.
Woodwaste burial of larger than 200 cubic yards of waste will require
DEQE review.
C.
§ 308-5 BARRE CODE § 309-2
5:246
§ 309-3. Procedure.
§ 309-4. Fee.
The fee is $25 per lot.
Chapter 310
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING BOILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition of bylaw
violations — See Ch. 67.
§ 310-1. Statutory authority.
This regulation is adopted under MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 31C, 142B, 142D,
and 310 CMR 7.00, 310 CMR 7.09, and 310 CMR 7.52, which gives the
Barre Board of Health authority to make reasonable health regulations. This
regulation is also adopted under MGL c. 111, § 122, which directs the Board
of Health to examine all nuisances, sources of filth, and causes of sickness
within its town, which may, in its opinion, be injurious to the public health
and to destroy, remove, or prevent the same.
§ 310-2. Purpose.
It is important to note that the DEQE policy statement specifically
says, "It is not the intent of this policy to regulate small quantities of
woodwastes generated by private citizens on their own property."
D.
Obtain and complete a Town of Barre Woodwaste Disposal Application,
including site plan and application fee, and submit application to the
Board of Health.
A.
B. Board of Health will review application and take action.
If the Board of Health approves the application, the applicant will
be notified and required to schedule an inspection date and time to
determine applicant compliance regarding woodwaste disposal.
C.
The applicant or the owner of the property shall cause an affidavit to
be recorded with the Registry of Deeds attesting to the fact that the
premises have been used for woodwaste burial of less than 200 cubic
yards and that a plan showing the location of the woodwaste burial is
on file with the Barre Board of Health. The affidavit shall be indexed to
the owner's deed, and proof of recording in the Registry of Deeds shall
be provided to the Board of Health.
D.
§ 309-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 310-2
5:247
§ 310-3. Definitions.
When used in these regulations or in communications, notices, or orders
relative thereto, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below.
CFR — The Code of Federal Regulations.
CLEAN WOOD — Seasoned wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of
coatings, and wood that has not been treated with any chemical, including
but not limited to copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or
pentachlorophenal.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER or OWB — A wood-fired boiler located outside of
the building, surrounded by a water jacket in an insulated freestanding shed
with a smokestack and used to heat water that is carried by underground
pipes to provide heat to a building.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, authority, bureau, agency,
political subdivision of the commonwealth, law enforcement agency, firefighting
agency, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
REFUSE — Any animal, vegetable, or mineral, solid, liquid, or gaseous
waste. It includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, garbage, ashes,
Recognizing that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive air pollution capable of jeopardizing
their health or safety or welfare or of degrading their quality of life,
this regulation is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health,
safety, welfare and quality of life for the citizens of Barre,
Massachusetts, through the reduction, control and prevention of air
pollution.
A.
Outdoor wood boilers, also known as "outdoor water stoves" and
"outdoor wood furnaces," are generally composed of a wood-burning
firebox surrounded by a water jacket or reservoir vented by a chimney
stack. The heated water is then pumped via insulated underground
pipes to the residence or business. Emissions from outdoor woodburning
boilers drift across property lines raising health concerns for
neighbors who inadvertently breathe the smoke-filled air.
B.
Wood smoke is a complex mixture of chemicals and particulates. It
contains carbon monoxide and other organic gases, particulate matter,
chemicals, and some inorganic gases. Some of these compounds are
toxic, aldehydes and phenols, and some are carcinogens, benzoprene,
and cresols. The particulate matter is mostly made up of elemental
carbon, soot and organic ash.
C.
§ 310-2 BARRE CODE § 310-3
5:248
construction waste, industrial waste, commercial waste, demolition waste,
agricultural waste, abandoned vehicles, and any unwanted or discarded
material. It does not include hazardous waste.
SEASONED WOOD — Wood that has been dried for at least six months.
WOOD FUEL — All wood intended to be used as fuel, including but not
limited to trees, cordwood, logs, lumber, sawdust, and wood from
manufacturing processes (butt offs, shavings, turnings, sander dust) wood
pellets, slabs, bark, chips, waste pallets. This definition does not include
wood chemically treated with any preservative, paint, or oil.
§ 310-4. Requirements for existing units; new units.
Existing units. Any person that wishes to continue using an OWB
installed prior to the effective date of this regulation must register his/
her OWB at the Board of Health within six months of the Effective Date
of this Regulation. Where the OWB owner already possesses an existing
permit from the Town of Barre Building Department, a copy must be
brought to the Board of Health to be placed in its file. The Board of
Health permitting fee will be waived for existing OWB owners, but the
applicant must comply with the following process. Said application shall
include:
Submission of a written application on a form provided by the Barre
Board of Health.
(1)
An informal plan depicting the location of the OWB in relation to
the facility that it serves and all other occupied structures within
close proximity to the OWB.
(2)
Any existing OWB must have a permanent stack height extending
five feet higher than the peak of any roof structure located within
150 feet of the OWB with exception of the structure it is serving.
(3)
A secondary source of heat for dwelling and/or any other heated
buildings is required.
(4)
A.
New units.
No person shall install or cause to be installed an OWB after the
effective date of this regulation without a permit from the Board
of Health. The permit process shall include submission of a written
application on a form provided by the Barre Board of Health;
a suitable plan meeting the requirements set forth below; and,
payment of the permit application fee established by the Barre
Board of Health as well as an electrical permit with the Barre
Building Department.
(1)
Board-of-Health-approved plans for the location and installation of
any outdoor wood boiler to be installed after the effective date of
this regulation shall be shown in the form of a plot plan detailing
the boiler component(s) and shall include depiction of:
(2)
B.
§ 310-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 310-4
5:249
§ 310-5. Installation and use.
The requirements set forth in this section are intended to set forth the
minimum criteria that the Board of Health presently believes is required
to protect public health, safety and the environment, based on information
reviewed by the Board as of the effective date of this regulation. Nothing in
this regulation is intended to limit the powers of the Board of Health, and
the Board expressly reserves its right to take further action with respect
to any individual case pursuant to its authority as set forth in MGL c. 111,
§ 122 through 125 (regarding nuisances), or any other applicable law.
(a) The legal boundaries of the lot to be served;
The location of all dwelling(s) and building(s) existing and
proposed on the lot to be served by the outdoor wood boiler
and identification of those to be served by the boiler;
(b)
The locations of all known easements and rights-of-way on the
lot to be served;
(c)
The location of all components of the outdoor wood boiler,
including underground electric lines, fluid lines or ductwork;
(d)
(e) The proposed wood burner stack height;
The location of all roads, pass ways and rights-of-way within
100 feet of the proposed outdoor wood boiler;
(f)
The location of all buildings existing within 300 feet of the
proposed outdoor wood boiler, whether or not on the lot to be
served by the outdoor wood-burning boiler;
(g)
The roof heights of all buildings within 300 feet of the proposed
outdoor wood boiler;
(h)
(i) Proposed wood storage area.
A secondary source of heat for dwelling and/or any other
heated buildings is required.
(j)
Installation must be completed within six months of issuance of the
permit.
(3)
All new and existing outdoor wood boilers shall be installed and
operated according to the manufacturer's specifications. Any EPAapproved
outdoor wood boiler which has been altered, installed, or
disassembled in anyway not specified by the manufacturer shall be
considered a non-EPA-compliant boiler. Some common examples of
what manufacturers prohibit burning are:
Any wood that does not meet the definition of "clean wood" or
"wood fuel."
(1)
(2) Refuse.
A.
§ 310-4 BARRE CODE § 310-5
5:250
(3) Treated wood.
(4) Plastic products.
(5) Rubber products.
(6) Waste petroleum products.
(7) Paints and paint solvents.
(8) Chemicals.
(9) Coal.
(10)Manure.
(11)Animal carcasses.
(12)Glossy or colored paper.
Plywood, saltwater driftwood, particle board, construction/
demolition debris.
(13)
(14)Asphalt products.
Any other material not intended by a manufacturer for use as fuel
in a solid fuel-burning device.
(15)
Retailers selling or offering for sale new outdoor wood boilers in the
Town of Barre shall supply public education information with each sale
of an outdoor wood boiler in the form of pamphlets, brochures or fact
sheets on the following topics:
Proper installation, operation, and maintenance of the outdoor
wood boiler;
(1)
(2) Proper fuel selection and use;
(3) Health effects from wood smoke; and
(4) Proper sizing of outdoor wood boiler.
B.
No person shall install or cause to be installed any outdoor wood boiler
after the effective date of this regulation within 50 feet of the house
it is serving or within 300 feet of any other occupied structure. This
requirement will not apply to outdoor wood boilers installed prior to the
effective date of this regulation.
C.
Any new OWB must have a permanent stack height extending five feet
higher than the peak of any roof structure located within 300 feet of the
OWB with the exception of the structure it is serving.
D.
The operation of any new or existing outdoor wood burning boiler may
not occur between the dates of May 15 and September 15 of each
calendar year. A variance may be granted if the OWB owner exceeds
the distances required within these regulations.
E.
§ 310-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 310-5
5:251
§ 310-6. Variances.
The Board of Health may vary any provision of these regulations with
respect to any particular case, when in its opinion, the enforcement thereof
would do manifest injustice, and the applicant has proved that the same
degree of protection can be achieved without strict application of the
particular provision. All variances shall be considered at a hearing by the
Board of Health.
§ 310-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
An outdoor wood boiler shall be located no less than 100 feet from any
property line.
F.
Permit suspension or revocation. The Board of Health may suspend or
revoke any permit issued pursuant to these regulations for any violation
of these regulations, or any other applicable General Law, regulation or
bylaw.
A.
Penalties. The owner of any OWB operated in violation of these
regulations shall be penalized.
First offense: A written warning to correct a violation of these
regulations shall be issued after a verification of a complaint.
(1)
Second offense: Automatic fine of $100 issued by the Board of
Health or Board of Health Agent. The OWB owner has option to
appeal an order to correct a violation of these regulations, provided
that a written request for a hearing is filed with the Board of Health
within seven days of receipt of the violation notice.
(2)
Any subsequent offense: If an inspection or examination reveals
that an OWB is installed or operated in a manner that is not
compliant with these regulations, the Board of Health, the Health
Agent or the Town of Barre Fire Department shall issue an order
to cease operation of the OWB until it has been restored to
compliance so as to not be deemed a nuisance under the public
health laws. Such revocation or suspension may take place after a
hearing held by the Board of Health of which the permit holder is
given seven days' written notice. Such notice shall be deemed given
upon certified mail and return receipt requested to the address
listed on the permit application.
(3)
B.
Noncriminal disposition.
This regulation may be enforced by any Barre Police Officer, Barre
Fire Department, the Barre Board of Health or the Barre Health
Agent.
(1)
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized
by a noncriminal disposition process as provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D and the Town's noncriminal disposition bylaw.26 If
(2)
C.
§ 310-5 BARRE CODE § 310-7
5:252
§ 310-8. When effective.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be effective upon adoption by the Barre
Board of Health, approval by DEP and publication pursuant to MGL c. 111,
§ 31C.
Chapter 401
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 11.
Animal regulations — See Ch. 80.
Zoning — See Ch. 140.
§ 401-1. Effect on Animal Bylaw.
This policy shall not be confused with or conflict with any portion the Town
of Barre Animal Control Bylaw previously adopted by Town Meeting.27
noncriminal disposition is elected, then any person who violates
any provision of this regulation shall be subject to a penalty in
the amount of $100 per day for each day of violation, commencing
10 days following day of receipt of written notice from the Board
of Health. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate
offense. If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
Other.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized
by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court. Except
as may be otherwise provided by law and as the district court
may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or
offense shall be $1,000. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute
a separate offense. If more than one, each condition violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1)
The Barre Board of Health may enforce these Regulations or enjoin
violations thereof through any lawful process, and the election of
one remedy by the Board of Health shall not preclude enforcement
through any other lawful means.
(2)
D.
An owner may appeal an order to correct a violation of these
regulations, provided that a written request for a hearing is filed with
the Board of Health within seven days of receipt of the violation notice.
E.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Noncriminal Disposition of Bylaw Violations.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Animals.
§ 310-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 401-2
5:253
§ 401-2. Road-injured animals complaint procedure.
Calls or complaints received regarding road injured or killed animals are to
be handled in the following manner:
§ 401-3. Other wildlife injured or killed in roadways.
The Police Department shall notify the Animal Control Officer also
known as the "Dog Officer" whenever a report is received regarding
injured dogs or cats on a public way. The Animal Control Officer or her
designee shall retrieve the animal and provide for its treatment until
the owner may be determined.
A.
If the dog or cat has been killed, and the incident occurs during normal
business hours, the dispatcher on duty shall notify the Barre
Department of Public Works which shall remove the animal from the
roadway and dispose of it properly. If the incident occurs at times when
the Department of Public Works is not working, the police officer on
duty shall remove the carcass to the side of the roadway so it will not
interfere with motor vehicle traffic. The carcass will remain to the side
of the roadway until the Department of Public Works can remove the
carcass and dispose of it properly during its normal workday. It shall
be the responsibility of the dispatcher to see to it that the Department
of Public Works is notified of the incident in a manner consistent with
other notification procedures during off hours.
B.
To help identify owners of dogs and cats, the Town Clerk shall provide
the Police Department with a list of all licensed dogs and cats.
C.
At the time the injured or killed dog or cat is retrieved, the dispatcher
on duty shall be provided with a detailed description of the dog or cat,
the location of the incident, and tag information, if any.
D.
If the injured or killed animal is not a dog or cat, the Wildlife Animal
Control Officer shall be notified. The Wildlife Animal Control Officer
shall be responsible for the capture, removal, euthanization and
quarantine of wild and domestic animals.
A.
The Wildlife Animal Control Officer has the authority to destroy skunks,
raccoons, bats, foxes, opossums or woodchucks in certain cases. Other
wildlife shall be the responsibility of the Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife or a licensed problem animal control person.
B.
Injured or killed deer shall be reported to the Wildlife Control Officer
who shall follow procedures set forth by the Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife. In the event the Wildfire Control Officer cannot be reached,
the Massachusetts Environmental Police shall be notified.
C.
§ 401-2 BARRE CODE § 401-3
5:254
Chapter 402
SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 33.
Street openings — See Ch. 108, Art. II.
Surface water control — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Sewer use rules and regulations — See Ch.
403.
§ 402-1. General provisions, definitions and regulations.
Definitions: As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Sewer Commissioners of the Town of Barre,
Massachusetts.
CONTRACTOR — A person, partnership or corporation which has
demonstrated experience in the construction of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances and which has sufficient equipment, labor and resources
to construct the proposed project. The contractor shall be employed
by the developer and shall be responsible to the developer for the
construction of the sanitary sewers and appurtenances.
DEVELOPER — The legal entity which owns the property to be
developed and which desires to design and construct sanitary sewers
and appurtenances in the Town of Barre, Massachusetts.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of record.
A.
Plans and profiles: The developer shall submit three copies of all plans,
profiles and details of the proposed project to the Board for review
and approval. All plans, profiles and details, hereinafter referred to as
"plans," shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and
shall be drawn using a scale of 40 feet to the inch horizontal and four
feet to the inch vertical.
B.
Conformity with plans: The developer shall construct the sanitary
sewers and appurtenances in accordance with the approved plans, the
Sewer Use Rules and Regulations of the Board28 and these standard
specifications for sewer construction. No changes in the approved plans
will be permitted without prior approval of the Board. All work on the
project shall be performed under the observation of the Engineer. The
Engineer may request a pre-construction meeting with the developer
and the contractor.
C.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 403, Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
§ 401-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-1
5:255
Materials and workmanship: All materials and workmanship utilized on
the project shall be subject to the review and approval of the Engineer,
acting on behalf of the Board. The developer shall submit three copies
of all shop drawings, details and the like which are requested by the
Engineer.
D.
Defective workmanship or materials: Any portion of the work which is
found to be defective or not in complete conformance with the approved
plans or these specifications shall be corrected by the developer, at his
expense, before the project is accepted by the Board.
E.
Permits: The developer, and his contractor, shall conform to all federal,
state and local laws, rules, and regulations in the conduct of their
work. The developer shall obtain all permits and licenses required by
all federal, state, or local authorities.
F.
Engineering services: All engineering services required by the Board on
the project shall be performed under the "agreement for engineering
services" between the developer, the Board and the Engineer. The
Engineer shall be given 48 hours notice of the initiation of work on the
project. If the work on the project is interrupted, the Engineer shall be
given additional notice of 48 hours for each subsequent starting of the
work. All fees for engineering services required by the Board on the
project will be established in the agreement for engineering services,
and all fees for field services will be based on a four-hour minimum
charge per day.
G.
Insurance:
The developer shall purchase and maintain such comprehensive
general liability and other insurance as is appropriate for the work
being performed. The specific coverages and limits of liability shall
be as required by law. The minimum amount of comprehensive
general liability insurance coverage shall be as follows:
Bodily injury:
[1] $1,000,000 each person.
[2] $2,000,000 each occurrence.
(a)
Property damage:
[1] $1,000,000 each occurrence.
[2] $2,000,000 annual aggregate.
(b)
(1)
Certificates of insurance, which are acceptable to the Board, shall
be submitted to the Board prior to the commencement of the
work. These certificates shall contain a provision to the effect that
coverages afforded under the policies will not be canceled unless
at least 30 days prior written notice has been given to the Board.
(2)
H.
§ 402-1 BARRE CODE § 402-1
5:256
Record drawings: The developer shall furnish all data, which the
Engineer determines is necessary, to prepare record drawings of the
completed project for the Board.
I.
Notification: The developer shall be fully responsible for the proper
notification of all underground utility locating services and any utilities
which may be affected by the work.
J.
Grades and layout: All roads and easements, through which any sewer
or appurtenances are to be constructed, shall be at the proposed
subgrade elevation before the sewer construction begins. The
developer shall be responsible for and shall furnish all engineering
design, field layout, grades and supervision, which is necessary for the
project.
K.
Testing: The developer shall conduct all tests which are required by
these specifications and which may be required by the Engineer. All
tests shall be conducted in the presence of the Engineer and at such
time as is acceptable to the Engineer. The developer shall also provide
all manpower which is necessary to assist the Engineer in any visual
inspections or tests which the Engineer may perform.
L.
Supervision by developer: The developer will supervise and direct all
the work on the project, including the work of any contractor employed
by the developer. The developer expressly accepts all responsibility
for the construction means, methods, techniques, sequences and
procedures and for safety precautions and programs. The developer
shall employ and maintain a qualified supervisor or superintendent on
the project who shall have been designated in writing by the developer
as the developer's representative at the site. The supervisor shall have
full authority to act on behalf of the developer, and all communications
given to the supervisor shall be as binding as if given to the developer.
The supervisor shall be present on the site at all times as required to
perform adequate supervision and coordination of the work.
M.
Rules and regulations: The developer shall be responsible for complete
adherence to the Sewer Use Rules and Regulations of the Board,29
particularly with regard to the requirements for obtaining all permits
and licenses. The developer shall also be responsible for obtaining all
other federal, state and local permits, which are required, before the
work begins. The developer shall present evidence which is satisfactory
to the Board that all permits have been obtained, before the work
begins.
N.
Tripartite bond agreement: The developer shall be required to execute
a tripartate bond agreement with the Board and an escrow agent,
which is approved by the Board. The tripartate bond agreement shall
secure the performance of the developer's obligation to complete the
installation and testing of the sanitary sewers and appurtenances and
O.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 403, Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
§ 402-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-1
5:257
§ 402-2. Excavation and backfill.
the restoration of all areas affected by the developer's operations. A
copy of a sample of a tripartate bond agreement is attached to these
specifications.
Agreement for engineering services: The developer shall be required to
execute an agreement for engineering services with the Board and the
Engineer. The agreement shall outline the engineering services which
will be provided by the Engineer for the Board. These engineering
services will generally consist of the review of the developer's project
plans for the Board; the observation on behalf of the Board of the
construction by the developer of sanitary sewers and appurtenances;
and the preparation of record drawings of the completed sanitary sewer
and appurtenances for the Board. The developer shall be responsible
for payment of the Engineer's fee for performance of these services.
P.
Excavation:
General: The developer shall make all excavations in earth and rock
necessary or incidental to construct the proposed work as shown
on the approved plans. All excavations shall be by open cut, except
as otherwise permitted by the Engineer, and shall be of sufficient
width to allow for thorough compaction of the refill material and
for the inspection of the work.
(1)
Sheeting and bracing: The developer shall furnish and place such
sheeting and bracing as may be required to properly perform the
work. Sheeting and bracing shall be permanently left in place, if
requested by the Engineer.
(2)
Depth of trench - earth: Bottom of earth trenches shall be
excavated four inches below the barrel of the pipe to provide for
granular bedding of the pipe, as specified under § 402-3.
(3)
Depth and width of trench - rock: The bottom of rock trenches shall
be excavated a minimum of six inches below the barrel of the pipe
and a minimum of nine inches clear on each side of the pipe.
(4)
Blasting: The removal of rock by blasting shall be accomplished by
licensed individuals, and the developer shall obtain all necessary
permits before the blasting occurs. All handling, storage and use
of explosives shall be in accordance with the requirements of MGL
c. 148, §§ 10 to 27 inclusive, latest revisions or additions thereto.
Where ledge rock is encountered, the developer shall take accurate
measurements from the top surface of the ledge to the proposed
invert of the pipe. This information shall be recorded and made
available to the Engineer.
(5)
(6) Excavation in public ways:
A.
§ 402-1 BARRE CODE § 402-2
5:258
All trench excavation in existing public ways shall be subject
to the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Town
of Barre Highway Department and the Massachusetts
Department of Public Works. The developer shall be
responsible for obtaining all street opening permits and
licenses which are required.
(a)
Excavation in streets having an improved pavement shall be
preceded by cutting the existing pavement so that pavement
beyond the trench limits will not be disturbed. Before
resurfacing, the edges of the pavement shall be inspected and
recut if found to be broken or ragged. The developer shall
furnish all materials and do all the work necessary to restore
the street to its original condition and pavement depth. All
work shall be subject to inspection and approval of the Barre
Highway Department and the Massachusetts Department of
Public Works.
(b)
Unsuitable foundation material: The developer shall remove all
material that is determined to be unsuitable foundation material
and refill the excavation with bank gravel, screened gravel or
concrete, as determined by the Engineer.
(7)
Dewatering: The developer shall dewater the area in which work
will be performed to allow the construction to proceed in
conformance with these specifications. All water from dewatering
operations shall be disposed of by the developer in a manner which
is acceptable to the Engineer.
(8)
Backfilling:
General: The trenches and other excavations shall be backfilled as
soon as possible after completion of the work. No backfilling shall
be done until the Engineer has completed his observations.
(1)
Materials and placement:
The area below the pipe, and extending to a point six inches
above crown of PVC pipe and to the side limits of the trench
as excavated, shall be backfilled with screened gravel and
compacted. The area below the pipe, and extending to a point
half way up the barrel of ductile iron pipe and to the side limits
of the trench as excavated, shall be backfilled with screened
gravel and compacted.
(a)
The remaining volume of the trench above the screened gravel
to a point 12 inches below the ground surface shall be
backfilled with ordinary borrow, which has been approved by
the Engineer. No rock fragment weighing more than 50 pounds
will be permitted in the ordinary borrow. The ordinary borrow
shall be placed in twelve-inch layers and thoroughly
compacted, using mechanical compacting equipment.
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 402-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-2
5:259
§ 402-3. Pipe and fittings.
The final 12 inches of the trench which is directly beneath the
finished grade on paved surfaces shall be backfilled with bank
gravel and compacted in six-inch layers, using mechanical
compacting equipment.
(c)
The developer shall be fully responsible for the proper
backfilling and compaction of all trench bedding and refill
material. Alternate methods of compaction shall be submitted
to the Engineer for approval before the work begins.
(d)
The final 12 inches of the trench which is directly beneath
the finished grade on unpaved surfaces shall be backfilled
with eight inches of bank gravel and four inches of loam. The
bank gravel shall be thoroughly compacted with mechanical
compacting equipment. All loam shall be approved by the
Engineer. Final restoration of disturbed areas by seeding,
sodding, mulching or other method shall be approved by the
Engineer.
(e)
PVC pipe and fittings:
PVC main sewers: Pipe and fittings for main sewer shall be
polyvinyl chloride (PVC), which meets the requirements of ASTMD-
3033 or D-3034-77 (latest revision) and which has a pipe
diameter to wall thickness ratio (SDR) of 35. Maximum pipe length
shall be 13.0 feet, and the elastometric ring, bell and spigot style
joint shall meet the requirements of ASTM D3212-76 (latest
revision).
(1)
PVC lateral sewers: Pipe and fittings for lateral sewers shall be
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) meeting the same requirements as the
main pipe. Fittings shall be molded, one-piece construction, and a
PVC cap, designed for use on a bell end of a pipe, shall be installed
on each lateral sewer.
(2)
A.
Ductile iron pipe and fittings:
Ductile iron pipe force mains: Force mains shall be constructed
using ductile iron pipe and fittings. Ductile iron pipe shall meet
the requirements of ANSI A21.51-76 (latest revision), fittings shall
meet the requirements of ANSI A21.10-71 (latest revision), and
mechanical joints shall meet the requirements of ANSI A21.11
(latest revision).
(1)
Ductile iron gravity sewers: In areas where ductile iron gravity
sewer pipe is required by regulation or as directed by the Engineer
(such as in shallow trenches; when passing through existing
drainage structures or manholes; and in proximity to water
supplies or recreational areas) the developer shall furnish and
install Class 52 ductile iron pipe and fittings. Tees or wyes with
(2)
B.
§ 402-2 BARRE CODE § 402-3
5:260
mechanical joints shall be furnished and installed for lateral
sewers. A mechanical joint plug or cap shall be furnished and
installed on the lateral inside the property line to allow air testing
of the system.
Pipe laying:
Lines and grades: The developer shall provide all engineering
services which may be required to ensure that the pipelines are
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and these
specifications. Laser beam aligning equipment will be permitted if
the developer demonstrates that the equipment and operators can
produce the required line and grade of the sewer to be constructed.
(1)
Handling and storage:
All pipe shall be handled carefully to avoid injury to persons,
other structures, or to the pipe itself. Only equipment or
methods approved by the Engineer shall be employed in
handling pipe. Pipe or fittings damaged, for whatever reason,
shall be removed from the job site immediately.
(a)
Care shall be taken to stack and store all PVC pipe properly
and in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's
recommendations. All PVC pipe shall have a straight barrel.
The deflection of the pipe prior to installation shall not exceed
1/16 inch per two-foot length.
(b)
(2)
Foundation: All pipe shall be laid on a stable foundation to prevent
settlement. All material which is determined to be unsuitable by the
Engineer shall be removed and replaced with suitable material as
described in these specifications.
(3)
Bottom of trench and bedding:
In general, the bottom of the trench shall be excavated to
a depth of four inches below the bottom of the pipe barrel
and a compacted granular bedding placed for pipe laying. The
granular bedding shall be washed screened gravel or crushed
stone, ranging in size from 1/2 to one inch. After the pipe has
been set to line and grade, additional granular material, of the
same size and characteristics as that which has been placed
below the pipe, shall be lightly tamped in place to a point six
inches above the barrel of the pipe. This material, and the
granular material beneath the pipe, shall be placed to the full
width of the trench, as excavated, or to the inside surfaces of
the sheeting.
(a)
Similar bedding shall be provided in rock trenches except
that there shall be six inches clear under the pipe to the
rock surface and nine inches clear on each side. Under no
circumstance will the pipe be permitted to bear directly on
(b)
(4)
C.
§ 402-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-3
5:261
the rock. All backfilling shall be performed in accordance with
§ 402-2 of these specifications.
Exclusion of mud or dirt: Care shall be taken by the developer
to exclude mud and/or water containing dirt from entering the
pipelines. Temporary plugs shall be installed and the developer
shall weight the pipes or backfill to prevent flotation from water in
the trench.
(5)
Concrete cradles and envelopes: The developer shall install a half
section, or full envelope section, of concrete around the pipe when
called for by design or if determined by the Engineer. All concrete
cradles or envelopes shall be approved by the Engineer.
(6)
Jointing:
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall be bell-and-spigot-type
joint, with elastometric ring supplied by pipe manufacturer.
Immediately prior to jointing, the spigot, bell and gasket shall
be thoroughly cleaned and a lubricant applied, as supplied by
the pipe manufacturer. Extreme care shall be exercised during
the jointing process, to ensure that the pipe is in the correct
position within the bell. Pullers, or other types of mechanical
equipment which may damage the pipe or joint, shall not be
allowed.
(a)
Ductile iron pipe joints shall be mechanical. The bell and spigot
shall be washed clean and, after installing the rubber ring and
gland, the bolts shall be tightened, in alternating sequence,
with a torque wrench set at 75 foot pounds.
(b)
(7)
House service connections:
House service connections (lateral sewers) shall be six-inch
diameter polyvinyl chloride (PVC) SDR 35, with corresponding
wye branch, sweep, and cap. Connections to the main sewer
shall be made at a wye branch which has been installed during
installation of the main sewer.
(a)
House service connections shall be installed to a point beyond
the sideline of the roadway layout and capped to allow testing
prior to connection to a building. Laterals shall be laid in
granular bedding, as specified for main sewer pipe, and the
same backfilling procedures shall be followed throughout the
installation.
(b)
Lateral sewers may be connected to existing main sewers with
cast-iron saddles. Saddles shall be cast iron with a rubber ring
at the joint to the main. The joint to the lateral pipe shall be
rubber ring or boot with stainless steel clamps. Mortar joints
will not be acceptable. The saddle shall be attached to the main
by the use of a wide-band stainless steel strap and stainless
(c)
(8)
§ 402-3 BARRE CODE § 402-3
5:262
steel bolts. The opening in the main sewer for installation of
the saddle shall be machine cut, using a six-inch diameter shell
cutter. The use of a hammer and chisel or hand tools to make
the opening will not be permitted.
A lateral shall not be connected to a building until a permit
to connect has been issued by the Board. Permits to connect
laterals to buildings shall not be issued until mains and laterals
have been tested and accepted by the Board. All connections
from house sewers to the main sewer shall be performed in
accordance with these specifications and by licensed
drainlayers.
(d)
In locations where ductile iron pipe main sewers and laterals
are required, the developer shall furnish and install six-inch
diameter branch wyes with mechanical joints and six-inch
diameter Class 52 ductile iron pipe with mechanical joint
fittings and end caps.
(e)
At such time as the building sewer has been connected to
the town's sewer system, any existing septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with sand, gravel or other suitable
material which is acceptable to the Board and the Engineer.
(f)
Chimneys: Chimneys shall be furnished and installed as required
by the depth of the sewer main and as determined by the Engineer.
Chimneys shall be precast concrete sections which are specifically
manufactured for this purpose. Alternate methods of construction
shall be approved by the Engineer.
(9)
Force mains:
Force mains shall be ductile iron mechanical joint pipe,
furnished and installed by the developer, from the lift station
to the point of discharge. Ductile iron pipe shall be Class 52,
cement lined, tar coated and sealed, with compatible fittings.
All fittings shall be installed with concrete thrust blocks.
(a)
In combination trenches, which contain both the gravity sewer
and the force main, the force main shall be laid on a shelf
excavated in the side of the trench. A minimum of four to six
inches of cover material shall be maintained in all cases.
(b)
(10)
Testing:
Gravity sewers, including laterals, shall be air tested for
leakage after backfilling and compaction has been completed,
and the base course of bituminous concrete has been installed.
The equipment and method used to conduct the air test will
be subject to the approval of the Engineer. The developer shall
furnish all labor and equipment for testing. No sewers will
(a)
(11)
§ 402-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-3
5:263
be accepted by the Board until all testing is completed to the
satisfaction of the Engineer.
In general, a section between two manholes shall be isolated
by inflatable plugs. Air shall be introduced into the pipeline
to an internal pressure 4 psig greater than the average back
pressure of the groundwater, or an increase of .434 psi for
each foot of water above the top of the pipe. After stabilizing
the pressure at 3.5 psig minimum, the air line shall be
disconnected, and the pressure drop, if any, observed. The line
shall be termed acceptable if the time required, in minutes, for
the pressure to decrease to 2.5 psig is not less than one minute
per inch of diameter.
(b)
The developer shall submit to the Engineer a record of the
location and cause of each leak encountered, along with his
method for replacement or repair, for approval, prior to
completion of the work. A second test shall be made to
determine the acceptability of the work. Any pipe which fails
the air test shall be replaced or repaired to the satisfaction of
the Engineer.
(c)
Cleaning and visual inspection:
After laying of the pipe is completed between manhole
sections, the interior of the sewer pipeline shall be thoroughly
cleaned of construction debris or other foreign matter. The
section shall then be closed off by bulkheads at the outlet side
of the manholes. All bulkheads shall be sufficient to prevent
the wash of mud or dirt into the completed section of pipeline.
Upon completion of the entire line, the bulkheads shall be
removed, and any debris shall be cleared from the pipes and
manholes.
(a)
Prior to acceptance, the Engineer shall conduct a visual
inspection of the pipeline, and the developer shall supply all
materials and labor necessary for this inspection.
(b)
(12)
Deflection test - PVC pipe: All PVC pipe shall be checked for
deflection after backfilling and compaction is complete. The
pipeline to be checked shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to testing.
A mandrel shall then be pulled through the pipe to check overall
deflection. The mandrel shall have an OD 5% less than the pipe ID.
A pipe through which a mandrel can not be pulled without extreme
force shall be considered to have failed the test. Pipe which has
failed the test shall be excavated and replaced. The pipe shall be
retested after backfilling and compaction is complete.
(13)
Leakage test - force mains: Force main pipes shall be tested with
water pressure. The pipe shall be slowly filled with water, and all
the air shall be expelled at the discharge end of the force main. The
discharge end shall then be plugged and blocked and the pressure
(14)
§ 402-3 BARRE CODE § 402-3
5:264
§ 402-4. Miscellaneous structures.
The developer shall submit to the Engineer four copies of materials and
method of construction of all miscellaneous structures which shall include,
but not be limited to, the following: pump stations, inverted siphons, culvert
or stream crossings, railroad crossings, state highway encroachment, and
drain sump manholes.
§ 402-5. Bank gravel; screened gravel; ordinary borrow.
§ 402-6. Manholes.
inside the force main raised to 150 pounds per square inch. The
amount of water added to the pipeline, to maintain this pressure,
shall be metered, and if the amount added exceeds one gallon the
pipe shall be considered to have failed the test. The developer shall
locate the leak or leaks and shall make all necessary repairs. The
pipes shall then be retested.
Bank gravel: Bank gravel shall be furnished and placed by the
developer as trench refill for roadway subbase and for all other
disturbed areas. Bank gravel shall consist of hard, durable stone and
coarse sand free from loam, clay, mud or other unacceptable materials.
A.
Screened gravel: Screened gravel shall be furnished and placed by the
developer as granular bedding material for the pipelines and may be
washed and graded bank-run gravel or crushed stone ranging in size
from 1/2 inch to one inch.
B.
Ordinary borrow: Ordinary borrow shall be furnished and placed by
the developer as trench refill material. It shall not contain any rock
fragment weighing more than 50 pounds, and it shall be free of loam,
clay, vegetation or other unacceptable material.
C.
Approval: All bank gravel, screened gravel and ordinary borrow shall
be approved by the Engineer before incorporation into the work.
D.
General description:
Precast structures: Manholes shall be constructed of reinforced
precast concrete in monolithic sections and shall meet the
applicable requirements of ASTM Spec. C 478-70T (latest revision).
Manholes shall generally consist of a base section, barrel sections
and a dome or flat top section. All precast manhole sections shall
be designed for H-20 loading.
(1)
Pipe connector: Pipe-to-manhole connections shall be made with a
flexible rubber boot and stainless steel clamp. The flexible rubber
boot shall be installed during manufacture of precast manhole
sections and shall include a stainless steel screw clamp designed
specifically for use on the size and type of pipe utilized on the
(2)
A.
§ 402-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-6
5:265
project. A continuous bead of silicone shall be applied to the inside
of the boot at the clamp location, prior to installation of the pipe.
Section joints: Joints between manhole sections shall be sealed
with butyl rubber sealant compound.
(3)
Brick: Red clay brick for constructing the table and the invert, and
for adjusting castings to grade, shall be hard burned, and shall
conform to ASTM C32 (latest revision). Cement bricks or blocks
will not be allowed.
(4)
Steps: Manhole steps shall be aluminum alloy 6061 T6, extruded,
safety type, cast in place, 12 inches on center, in the barrel and
dome sections. The portion of step imbedded in concrete, plus an
additional two inches, shall be coated with aluminum oxide.
(5)
Frames and covers:
Cast-iron frames and covers shall meet the requirements of
ASTM Specification of Grey Iron Castings, Cast Iron Class 20.
All castings shall be clean and without blow holes or sand holes
or defects of any kind. Plugging or other stopping of holes will
be cause for rejection. Castings shall not vary more than 5%
from the specified weight.
(a)
All manhole frames and covers shall be carefully cleaned of all
rust, dirt, and scale, and then shall be given a full coat of coaltar
pitch varnish which is applied hot. The finish of the castings
shall be satisfactory to the Engineer. Any rusted or uncoated
surfaces shall be cause for rejection of the castings.
(b)
Manhole covers shall closely fit the frames. The underside
of the cover and upper side of the lip of the frame must
present parallel plane surfaces. These points of contact shall
be machined to prevent the covers from rocking in the frames.
Covers shall bear evenly on the frames for the entire
circumference and shall be interchangeable with other frames.
(c)
Manhole frames and covers shall be the Massachusetts
Department of Public Works Standard (Plate 201.6.0) and, in
general, shall be eight inches in height with a twenty-four-inch
clear opening. The total weight of the frame plus the cover
shall be a minimum of 475 pounds. The manhole cover shall
have three-inch high letters ("SEWER") cast into the top.
(d)
Watertight frames and covers shall be as manufactured by
LeBaron Foundry Co., Model LBW 268-2, C.M. White Iron
Works, or Mechanics Iron Foundry Co., or equal. In general,
frame shall be eight inches high with a twenty-two-inch clear
opening, complete with interior cover, locking bar and sealed
seating surfaces. Watertight frames and covers shall be used
(e)
(6)
§ 402-6 BARRE CODE § 402-6
5:266
where indicated on the approved drawings or as determined by
the Engineer.
Grade adjustment: Red clay brick shall be used for grade
adjustment, with all joints completely filled with mortar. The inside
and outside faces of the brick shall also be covered with mortar
and troweled smooth. The maximum height allowable for grade
adjustment with brick masonry shall be 12 inches.
(7)
Installation:
Base: The developer shall excavate to a depth of six inches below
the bottom of the manhole base, compact and fine grade, and
install washed screened gravel subbase material. Base section shall
be installed at the correct grade and leveled. Pipes shall be
installed and shall extend approximately one inch inside the
interior wall. The clamps on the rubber boot shall be tightened and
mortar shall be troweled on the inside face of the manhole at the
pipe connection.
(1)
Joints: Joint between the base section and the barrel section shall
be brushed clean, and a strip of butyl rubber shall be placed
completely around the joint prior to placement of the barrel
section. Once the barrel section has been placed, a timber shall
be placed across the top of the dome, and a controlled downward
pressure shall be applied with the hydraulic excavating machine
to complete the joint. The same method shall be used in making
the joints between the remaining barrel sections and dome section.
A precast concrete flat slab top section shall be used if height
limitations prohibit the use of a dome section, or as determined by
the Engineer.
(2)
Grout: All lift holes and interior manhole joints shall be filled with
nonshrink grout and smoothed.
(3)
Brick and mortar:
Inverts and table shall be constructed of red clay brick with
mortar joints. Care shall be taken in construction of brick
inverts that the width of the invert shall be slightly larger than
the ID of the larger of the pipes entering the manhole wall.
Bricks shall be laid in a full bed of mortar with push joints, and
all brick shall be thoroughly wet immediately before laying.
(a)
Mortar shall be made of one part of Portland cement and two
parts of clean fine sand, well mixed and tempered. Water shall
be clean and free from impurities affecting its value. Sand and
cement shall be first thoroughly mixed dry and only enough
water added to make the mortar uniform and workable. No
greater quantity of mortar is to be prepared than is required
for immediate use, and it shall be constantly worked until used.
(b)
(4)
B.
§ 402-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-6
5:267
Any mortar that has once set shall not be retempered and used
in the work.
The table shall be constructed at an elevation even with the top
of the pipe, and shall slope up toward sidewalls. Inverts shall
be constructed in a manner to provide smooth flow through
manholes, with no sharp turns or projecting portions of brick.
Brick for inverts shall be laid on edge. Brick for the table shall
be laid flat.
(c)
Frames shall be set upon a full bed of mortar, and mortar shall
be brought up alongside of the frame to provide a watertight
joint.
(d)
Dimensional restrictions: Maximum allowable distance between
manholes shall be not greater than 300 feet.
(5)
Drop inlets:
In general, the use of a drop inlet will not be approved unless a
direct inlet is shown to be impractical.
(1)
If approved, drop inlets shall be constructed using tees and a
section of pipe, which are the same size as the main, and all
encased within Class B concrete. Concrete shall be placed upon the
same subbase material as the manhole. A brick masonry dam shall
be constructed in the outlet of the upper pipe at the interior face of
the manhole, and extend from the invert to 3/4 pipe.
(2)
C.
Approval and testing:
All manholes delivered to the site shall be subject to the approval of
the Engineer. Any rejected manholes shall be immediately removed
from the site by the developer.
(1)
All manholes shall be vacuum tested by the developer. All testing
shall be performed under the observation of the Engineer. The
developer shall be responsible for providing all labor and
equipment required to complete the tests. Individual manholes
shall be tested by plugging all inlet and outlet piping and placing an
approved vacuum base at the top of the manhole cone section. An
initial vacuum of 10 inches Hg shall be drawn. The test time shall
be that time allowed for the pressure to drop from 10 inches Hg to
nine inches Hg. Maximum allowable test times shall be as follows:
Manhole Depth Maximum Test Time
0 to 10 feet 1 minute
10.1 to 15 feet 1 minute 15 seconds
15.1 to 25 feet 1 minute 30 seconds
(2)
Manholes which fail to meet the above allowable test times shall be
repaired using methods approved by the Engineer. Manholes shall
(3)
D.
§ 402-6 BARRE CODE § 402-6
5:268
§ 402-7. Concrete masonry.
§ 402-8. Bituminous concrete resurfacing.
Type I-1 bituminous concrete shall be used to resurface trenches in existing
public ways in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Town of
Barre Highway Department or the Massachusetts Department of Public
Works, whichever governs. Specific depths and details of composition of
materials are to be as agreed upon in the application for the permit to
open the public way. The developer shall recut the edges of the trench in
approximately parallel lines; the edges shall be brushed clean, and a coat of
RS-1 shall be applied to act as a bonding agent, prior to resurfacing.
Chapter 403
SEWER USE RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 33.
Surface water control — See Ch. 112.
Sewer construction standard
specifications — See Ch. 402.
then be retested using the vacuum test. Following a second vacuum
test failure, the manhole shall be repaired and tested using a water
exfiltration method, as determined by the Engineer.
Concrete masonry: Concrete masonry shall be used for thrust blocking,
foundation material, pipe cradles (half section or full section), manhole
drop inlets, chimney encasement or as otherwise determined by the
Engineer.
A.
Concrete: Concrete shall be mixed using Portland cement, crushed
stone and clean, hard sand with enough clean water to ensure proper
mixing. Concrete may be job mixed or ready mixed, a nominal 1:2.5:5
mix, and shall contain not less than 4.5 bags of cement per cubic yard.
B.
Steel reinforcement: Steel reinforcement shall be deformed bars of
approved type and structural quality free from dirt or rust and shall be
bent as required and accurately placed with depth of cover not less than
two inches.
C.
§ 402-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 402-8
5:269

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Applicability; Revenue
§ 403-1. Principal objectives.
The principal objectives of these rules and regulations are:
§ 403-2. Applicability; enforcement authority.
These rules and regulations shall apply to the Town of Barre and to persons
outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of
the town's public sewer and treatment works system. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Board of Sewer Commissioners of the Town of Barre
shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of these rules and
regulations.
§ 403-3. Designated fund for revenues.
The revenues collected, as a result of the user charges levied, shall be
deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known as the "Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund." Fiscal year-end balances in the
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be used for no other
purposes than those designated.
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public sewer and
treatment works system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
A.
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public sewer and
treatment works system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
B.
To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
C.
§ 403-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-3
5:271

ARTICLE II
Assessments
§ 403-4. Establishment of user charge system by Board of Sewer
Commissioners.
The Board of Sewer Commissioners (BSC), established by the Town of Barre
under the provisions of MGL c. 83, § 16, shall establish the sewer user
charge system for the operation, maintenance, replacement and use of
treatment works.
§ 403-5. Computation of assessments.
The following definitions apply to the determination and levying of
assessments for sewer betterments under the user charge policy.
ASSESSMENTS — An amount assessed to a property owner to provide
an equitable distribution of the costs of construction of the treatment
works.
PROPERTY — A parcel(s) of real estate owned by an individual(s) or
other legal entity, as shown on the Assessor's map with a designation
for reference to the property owner(s).
SEWER BETTERMENTS — The value of the treatment works to the
property owner.
UNIT — Each sewer unit shall be equal to a single-family residence.
A.
The assessment to property owners for sewer betterments shall be
computed by the BSC, and a predetermined amount shall be charged
per unit adjacent to the public sewer in a public or private right-of-way
or sewer easement.
B.
A uniform unit method is based upon sewerage construction costs
divided among the total number of existing and potential sewer units
to be served, after having proportioned the cost of special and general
benefit facilities.
C.
Each sewer unit shall be equal to a single-family residence. Potential
sewer shall be calculated on the basis of zoning then in effect. Existing
and potential multifamily, commercial, industrial and semipublic uses
shall be converted into sewer units on the basis of residential
equivalents. (MGL c. 83, § 15)
D.
Potential units may apply for a deferral in payment of the betterment
until such property is actually sold or construction is completed. This
deferral in payment shall not exceed five years. It should be calculated
on the basis of zoning then in effect.
E.
Any units not identified as actual or potential at the time of
construction, and wish to connect at a later date, will be assessed a
betterment determined by the Board of Sewer Commissioners.
F.
§ 403-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-5
5:273
Betterment equivalent fees.
In the event that a unit(s) is added to a parcel or that a unit(s)
is added to a subdivided parcel, at any time after the July 31,
1991, assessment and billing of the betterment lien or liens, the
additional unit(s) shall be charged a unit betterment equivalent fee,
according to the following schedule:
(a) $1,200 per unit.
$600 per 1/2 unit. The 1/2 unit would be an addition to a full
unit. The minimum assessment is for one unit, 500 square feet
or less.
(b)
(1)
Said unit betterment equivalent fees, as applicable, shall be paid
prior to the issuance of the connection permit by the BSC for
the connection to the sewer main line/sewer line. When a new/
additional connection to the sewer main line/sewer line is made
an administrative connection fee shall also be charged. This
administrative connection fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of
the connection permit.
(2)
G.
In the event that an additional unit(s) and/or 1/2 unit(s) is constructed
on an existing structure, which has been already assessed and billed
a betterment lien(s), the unit betterment equivalent fee shall be paid
at the time the building application is submitted to the Building
Department for the construction of the unit(s) or 1/2 unit(s).
H.
Determination of units for assessments shall be obtained to the extent
possible from the appropriate official maps of the Board of Assessors
(hereinafter called "Assessor's maps") which are current at the time of
original assessment; and Zoning Bylaws which are in effect.30
I.
When a property is not adjacent to a public sewer, but access to
the public sewer may be by easement, the assessment for sewer
betterments shall be at the time of connection to the public sewer.
J.
Assessments to be made under this regulation shall be determined
by the BSC, who shall file with the Board of Assessors a certificate
designating the way on which the property lies, the amount of
assessment, and the person or persons liable to assessment therefor
as of the preceding January 1. A copy or duplicate of said certificate
shall, within 30 days, be recorded in the Registry of Deeds for the
County of Worcester, or, in the case of registered land, filed in the office
of the Assistant Recorder for the Worcester County Registry District.
The Board of Assessors shall, upon receipt of such certificate, forthwith
commit such assessment with their warrant to the Collector of Taxes
who shall forthwith serve notice upon the person or persons designated
as the owner of each parcel assessed, and shall collect the assessment
in accordance with MGL c. 80.
K.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Zoning.
§ 403-5 BARRE CODE § 403-6
5:274
§ 403-6. Abatement and exemptions.
The owner of any real estate upon which sewer betterments have
been assessed may, within 30 days after notice of such assessment has
been sent out by the Tax Collector, file with the BSC a petition for an
abatement thereof. The Board shall thereupon process and act upon
said petition in the manner prescribed in MGL c. 83.
A.
The owner of any real estate upon which betterments have been
assessed shall have available to him all rights of abatement, appeal,
apportionment and reapportionments provided by MGL c. 80 or by c.83.
B.
The owner of any real estate upon which existing and/or potential
betterments have been assessed may, within 30 days after notice of
such assessment has been sent out by the Tax Collector, file with the
BSC a petition for a deferral thereof.
C.
§ 403-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-6
5:275

ARTICLE III
Connections
§ 403-7. Deadline for connection; exemption.
All sewer service lateral connections must be connected by September
20, 1993. The only exemptions will be those commercial, industrial and
residential buildings which are declared uninhabitable by the Building
Inspector, in written documentation, after an on-site inspection.
§ 403-8. Penalty for failure to connect by deadline.
The per-day penalty for failure to connect by September 20, 1993, will be
$200 for the first day and $10 for each additional day. The Board of Health
may require service lateral connections prior to September 20, 1993.
§ 403-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-8
5:277

ARTICLE IV
Definitions and Abbreviations
§ 403-9. Copy on file.
A copy of the definitions and abbreviations adopted by the Board of Sewer
Commissioners is on file at the Henry Woods Building.
§ 403-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-9
5:279

ARTICLE V
Regulations
§ 403-10. General discharge prohibitions.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the public sewer or treatment works
(PSTW). These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a PSTW
whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any other national, commonwealth, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following
substances to any PSTW:
Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any
other way to the PSTW or the operation of the PSTW. At no time
shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system),
be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any
other substances which the Town of Barre, the commonwealth or
EPA has notified the user as a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
(1)
Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grain, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
(2)
Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or in excess of 9.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of
the PSTW.
(3)
Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the PSTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include,
(4)
A.
§ 403-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-10
5:281
but not limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section
307(a) of the Act.31
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(5)
Any substance which may cause the PSTW's effluent or any other
product of the PSTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the PSTW cause the PSTW to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guideline, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, or commonwealth criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
(6)
Any substance which will cause the PSTW to violate its National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(7)
Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye and vegetable
tanning solutions.
(8)
Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the PSTW treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction
into the PSTW which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.), unless the PSTW
treatment plant is designed to accommodate such temperatures.
(9)
Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants released
at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to the PSTW. In no case shall slug load have a flow rate
or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for
any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during
normal operation.
(10)
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes or
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established
by the Plant and Systems Manager (PSM) in compliance with
applicable commonwealth or federal regulations.
(11)
Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(12)
31.Editor's Note: The "Act" refers to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended .
§ 403-10 BARRE CODE § 403-10
5:282
§ 403-11. Use of public sewers required.
(13)Any water from pools, reservoirs, or cellars.
Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(14)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Sewer Commission in
compliance with applicable commonwealth or federal regulations.
(15)
When the PSM determines that a user is contributing to the PSTW any
of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere
with the operation of the PSTW, the PSM shall advise the user of
the impact of the contribution on the PSTW and develop effluent
limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference with the PSTW.
B.
If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in § 404-10A of this article, and which
in the judgment of the Sewer Commission may have a deleterious effect
upon the treatment works, processes, equipment, or receiving water, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance,
the Sewer Commission may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(4)
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Town of Barre any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
A.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Barre any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of these rules and regulations.
B.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the Town of Barre and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer, shall at his own expense install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and connect such facilities to the public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of these rules and regulations, within 90 days after
C.
§ 403-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-11
5:283
§ 403-12. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal Standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under these rules and regulations for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under these rules and regulations. The PSM shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section
403.12.
§ 403-13. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
Where the Town of Barre's treatment system achieves consistent removal
of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the Sewer
Commission may apply to EPA for modification of specific limits in the
federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction
in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant
by the wastewater treatment system to less toxic or harmless state in the
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within
100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
In any new subdivision, the cost of the sewer connection to the existing
sewer shall be borne by the developer.
D.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely
in the opinion of the Sewer Commission that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Sewer Commission will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relations to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140° F.
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
(2)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/
4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Sewer Commission.
(3)
E.
§ 403-11 BARRE CODE § 403-13
5:284
effluent which is achieved by the system 95% of the samples taken when
measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7c(2) of Title
40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, "General Pretreatment
Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated
pursuant to the Act. The Town may then modify pollutant discharge limits
in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40
CFR Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from EPA is
obtained.
§ 403-14. Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge or convey, or permit or allow to be
discharged or conveyed, to a public sewer any wastewater containing
pollutants of such character or quantity that will:
Not be susceptible to treatment or interference with the process of
efficiency of the treatment system.
(1)
Constitute a hazard to humans, or to the stream or watercourse
receiving the treatment effluent.
(2)
(3) Violate pretreatment standards.
Cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or
applicable receiving water standards.
(4)
Result in degradation of water quality, from dischargers using
dilution methods to comply with concentration limitations rather
than installing and operating pretreatment facilities.
(5)
A.
If wastewaters contain any substance of such character or quality that
will cause the aforementioned and are discharged or proposed to be
discharged into the sewer system, the Sewer Commission may take any
action necessary to:
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications
will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in
conformity with these rules and regulations.
(2)
Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable
characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate
these rules and regulations.
(3)
Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to
pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the handling and
treating of excess loads imposed on the treatment system.
(4)
Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable
or necessary to achieve the purpose of these rules and regulations.
(5)
B.
§ 403-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-15
5:285
§ 403-15. Commonwealth requirements.
Commonwealth requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in
any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in these rules and regulations.
§ 403-16. Right of revision.
The Board of Sewer Commission reserves the right to amend, by rules and
regulations, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in Article I of these rules and regulations.32
§ 403-17. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the Town of Barre or the commonwealth.
§ 403-18. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited material or other substances regulated by these rules and
regulations. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's
own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Sewer
Commission for review and shall be approved by the Commission before
construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to
the PSTW after the effective date of these rules and regulations shall
be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental
discharge procedures have been approved by the Sewer Commission.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of these rules and regulations. In
the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user
to immediately notify the PSM of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
A.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the PSM a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a
B.
32.Editor's Note: At the Special Town Meeting on June 17, 1991, Art. 9, the Town Meeting
authorized the Sewer Commission to adopt amendments to the Sewer Use Rules and
Regulations without further Town Meeting action, upon a public hearing, a majority vote
of the Sewer Commission and publication in a newspaper of local circulation.
§ 403-15 BARRE CODE § 403-18
5:286
result of damage to the PD/STW, fish kills, sludge contamination so as
to prevent its intended disposal or use, or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by these rules and
regulations or other applicable law.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees when to call in the event of
a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who
may cause or suffer a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
C.
§ 403-18 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-18
5:287

ARTICLE VI
General Requirements for Building Sewers and Connections
§ 403-19. Connection permit.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Sewer Commission
as explained in Article VII; and such person shall make good any defects
which may appear in any sewer, street, drain or work done by him and
remunerate the commonwealth or town or any person for loss or damage
occurring in consequence of any work done under any permit granted him.
§ 403-20. Indemnity.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owner shall indemnify the
town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer from the inside foundation wall to
the public sewer.
§ 403-21. Independent connections; use of old building sewers.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each
building which connects to the public sewer. The Sewer Commission may
allow an exception to the requirement for separate connections if, in its
opinion, there is no alternative method of making a connection from the
building to the public sewer. Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Sewer Commission, to meet all requirements of these rules and
regulations.
§ 403-22. Licensed drainlayers.
Licenses to connect particular sewers to the public sewers will be
issued to experienced and competent contractors. Licensed drainlayers
shall procure and maintain minimum insurance in types and amounts
as follows;
Workman's compensation and employer's liability insurance as
required by Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
Limits of liability insurance for personal bodily insurance; including
comprehensive general liability including explosion, collapse and
underground exposures.
(a) Each occurrence limit: $1,000,000.
(b) Products and completed operations: $1,000,000.
(c) General aggregate limit: $1,000,000.
(2)
A.
§ 403-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-22
5:289
§ 403-23. Materials and methods of construction.
Limits of liability insurance for property damage; including
comprehensive general liability including explosion, collapse and
underground exposures.
(a) Each occurrence limit: $1,000,000.
(b) Products and completed operations: $1,000,000.
(c) General aggregate limit: $1,000,000.
(3)
Motor vehicle insurance:
(a) Bodily injury per person: $500,000.
(b) Bodily injury per accident: $1,000,000.
(c) Property damage per accident: $300,000.
(4)
All insurance shall be obtained from companies satisfactory to the
Sewer Commission. Licensed drainlayers shall file a certificate of same
with the Sewer Commission prior to any work.
B.
Licensed drainlayers shall post a bond in the amount of $10,000 to
guarantee the satisfactory completion of the work. No subcontractors
shall be allowed. This bond is for the work performed by a drainlayer
making a connection from the existing sewer lateral at the town
property line to a single-family residential structure on private
property; or the work performed by a drainlayer making a connection
from the sewer main line to a single-family residential structure on
private property.
C.
The bond shall remain in full effect for a period of one year after
the satisfactory completion of the most recent work performed by the
drainlayer. The drainlayers shall repair or replace without cost to the
property owner or the town any defects in the work or parts of the work
furnished or built by him and any damage due to faulty workmanship on
his part or due to faulty or imperfect material or equipment furnished
by him, which defects or damage may appear within one year from the
date of completion of the work. Violation of the requirements of these
rules and regulations shall be cause for revocation of the license.
D.
Any other type of work performed by the drainlayer in relationship
to the connection to the wastewater municipal system shall require
bonding and insurance satisfactory to the Sewer Commission.
E.
The Board of Sewer Commissioners has adopted Standard
Specifications for Sewer Construction.33 Copies may be obtained at the
DPW building.
A.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 402, Sewer Construction Standard Specifications.
§ 403-22 BARRE CODE § 403-23
5:290
§ 403-24. Excavations in public ways.
All excavations in existing public ways shall be subject to the requirements
of the rules and regulations of the Town of Barre Highway Department or
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts depending on the location of the work.
§ 403-25. Inspections.
All work on sewer lines shall be performed only by qualified licensed
drainlayers. Road permits shall be required of every installer of a
sewer service in public or private way before any work is started.
These permits are issued by the Town of Barre Highway Department
or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Public Works,
depending upon the location of the work. In the case of a state highway,
the town will obtain the permit.
B.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Standard Specifications for Sewer Construction
adopted or amended from time to time, by the Board of Sewer
Commissioners; Building and Plumbing Codes and other applicable
rules and regulations of the town and the commonwealth. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Sewer Commission before installation.
C.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so far as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town of Barre or the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts depending on the location of the work.
D.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to the property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these rules
and regulations, and any septic tank, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable materials, to the satisfaction of the Sewer Commission.
E.
All connections made to the building plumbing system shall be
upstream of any septic tanks or cesspools.
F.
The applicant should first seek a permit and be given the Board of
Sewer Commissioners specifications for construction. Then the
applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Sewer
Commission when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer.
A.
§ 403-23 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-25
5:291
§ 403-26. Tripartite Bond Agreement.
Any legal entity which desire to connect to the public sewer from a property
or properties which require approval by the Planning Board or subdivision
of the property shall be required to execute a Tripartite Bond Agreement
with the Board and an escrow agent, who is approved by the Board. The
Tripartite Bond Agreement shall secure the performance of the developer's
obligation to complete the installation and testing of the sanitary sewers
and appurtenances and the restoration of all areas affected by the
developer's operations.
The building sewer service shall not be accepted until the pipe has been
tested, cleaned and inspected as directed by the Sewer Commission.
B.
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be made
under the supervision of the Sewer Commission.
C.
The initial inspection will be granted by virtue of the permit; a fee for
each subsequent inspection will be paid for by the contractor.
D.
An additional charge per inspection shall be assessed for any inspection
made outside the normal working hours of the Sewer Department.
E.
§ 403-25 BARRE CODE § 403-26
5:292
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 403-27. Permit required to discharge wastewater.
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a Sewer Commission permit to any
natural outlet with the Town of Barre, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of said town, and/or to the PSTW, any wastewater, except as authorized by
the PSM in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
§ 403-28. Wastewater contribution permits.
There shall be two classes of wastewater contribution permits for the
town: Class A shall refer to residential and commercial users; Class B
shall refer to users producing industrial waste or wastewater or users
deemed to be significant by the Sewer Commission. For both classes,
the user or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Sewer Commission.
A.
The permit application and the supplemental information submitted
shall be required to show proper engineering design for any sewer
connections and/or extensions by a registered professional engineer in
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
Prior to any person constructing, erecting, maintaining or using a
sewer system extension or connection for the discharge of industrial
wastewater or for discharge of domestic water in excess of 2,000
gallons, he must also obtain a permit from the Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering Division of Water Pollution Control
by filing an appropriate application form and obtaining a completed
permit from the Division's Permit Section as specified in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations Controlling the
Extension of Sewer Systems and Connections of Wastewater
Discharges and as published in Title 314 of the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations.
C.
Class A permits will be issued only to drainlayers licensed to lay drains
in the Town of Barre and are not transferable. Users required to obtain
a Class A wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with
the Sewer Commission an application in the form prescribed by the
Sewer Commission and accompanied by a fee determined by the Sewer
Commission. Class A users shall apply at least 30 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the PTSW.
D.
No person permitted by the Sewer Commission to make connections
with sewers shall allow his name to be used by any other person either
for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any other work under his
permit.
E.
§ 403-27 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-28
5:293
Permits shall be subject to revocation when any of the rules and
regulations contained herein are not followed.
F.
If the work is not completed within 30 days, a new permit must be
obtained.
G.
H. Permits must be obtained for repair work to existing sewer services.
Permits will not be issued until the Sewer Commission has received
and approved the applicant's layout plan showing location of existing
service connection, house location, and route of sewer service.
I.
In the case of sewer extension on or to a new development, the owner of
the property or the developer shall install and construct the sewer main
and services in accordance with the rules pertaining to the subdivision
of land34 as required by the Planning Board, and all materials and
procedures shall conform to the specifications of the Barre Sewer
Department. Prior to any work a plotted plan and profile must be filed
with the Sewer Commission for approval.
J.
Users required to obtain a Class B wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Sewer Commission an application in the
form prescribed by the Sewer Commission, and accompanied by a fee
determined by the Sewer Commission, required for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts water pollution control connection/extension permit
application. Proposed Class B users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the PSTW. In support of the application,
the Class B user shall submit in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(2)
Wastewater constituent and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article V of these rules and
regulations as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of
the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(3)
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations if any.
(5)
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation.
(6)
K.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 403-28 BARRE CODE § 403-28
5:294
Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(7)
Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Town of Barre, commonwealth
or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
(8)
If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standards. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction.)
(a)
No increment referred to in Subsection K(9)(a) shall exceed
nine months.
(b)
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the Class B user shall submit a
progress report to the PSM including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met
on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay,
and the steps being taken by the Class B user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Superintendent.
(c)
(9)
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
(10)
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(11)
Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(12)
§ 403-28 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-28
5:295
Any other information, certifications and/or assurances as may be
deemed by the Sewer Commission to be necessary to evaluate the
permit application.
(13)
The Sewer Commission will evaluate the data furnished by the Class
B user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Sewer Commission may issue a
Class B wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
L.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with
such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard.
Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater
contribution permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution
permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with
an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the PSM
within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard information on the nature and
concentration of pollutants limited by applicable pretreatment
standards and required pretreatment and/or O&M to meet said
standards.
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(1)
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(2)
Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(3)
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(4)
Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types for
standards for testing and reporting schedule.
(5)
(6) Compliance schedules.
Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(7)
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge, as specified by the Sewer Commission,
and affording access thereto.
(8)
Requirements for notification of the Sewer Commission for any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
(9)
M.
§ 403-28 BARRE CODE § 403-28
5:296
§ 403-29. Monitoring facilities.
§ 403-30. Inspection and sampling.
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(10)Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Sewer Commission
to ensure compliance with these rules and regulations.
(11)
Class B permits shall be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed
three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or
may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the Sewer Commission during the term of
the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Article IV are
modified or other just cause exists. The Class B user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
N.
Class B wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the prior approval of
the Sewer Commission. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
O.
The Sewer Commission may require to be provided and operated at the
industrial user's own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal
drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated
on the industrial user's premises, but the Sewer Commission may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring
facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the user.
A.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Sewer
Commission's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within
120 days following written notification by the Sewer Commission.
B.
§ 403-28 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-30
5:297
The Sewer Commission shall inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of these rules and regulations are being
met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall
allow the Sewer Commission or its representative ready access at
all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any
of its duties. The Sewer Commission shall have the right to set up on
the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel will be permitted
to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
A.
All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in these rules and regulations
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by
the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at
the monitoring facility or control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of the constituents'
hazards to life, limb and property.
B.
The Plant and Systems Manager bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations. This
PSM or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
proprietary processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of the discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
C.
While performing the necessary work on private properties, the Plant
and Systems Manager shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be
harmless for injury or death to employees and the town shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by town employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
monitoring and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
D.
The Plant and Systems Manager bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
E.
§ 403-30 BARRE CODE § 403-30
5:298
§ 403-31. Pretreatment.
which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose
of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the treatment works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with these rules and regulations and shall achieve compliance
with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
Sewer Commission shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the Sewer Commission
for review, and shall be acceptable to the Sewer Commission before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the Sewer Commission on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or pretreatment is necessary
to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified by a
qualified professional.
A.
Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the PSTW, shall submit to the
PSM, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or
by the PSM, a biannual report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily
flows, which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily
flows previously reported.
B.
The PSM may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution
to meet applicable pretreatment standards of requirements or, in other
cases, where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In
such cases, the compliance report required shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the
user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of
the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass, where requested by PSM, of pollutants contained
therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards.
C.
If the Sewer Commission permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Sewer Commission
D.
§ 403-30 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-31
5:299
§ 403-32. Confidential information.
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, regulations and
laws.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the user at his expense.
E.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Sewer Commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Sewer Commission, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
F.
Any changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall
be reported to and be acceptable to the Sewer Commission prior to the
user's initiation of the changes.
G.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Sewer Commission that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes
or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user.
A.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to these rules and regulations, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination Systems (NPDES) Permit, and/or the pretreatment
programs; provided, however, that such portions of the report shall
be available for use by the commonwealth in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
B.
Information accepted by the Town Board of Sewer Commissioners as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to
the general public until and unless a fourteen-day notification is given
to the user.
C.
§ 403-31 BARRE CODE § 403-32
5:300
ARTICLE VIII
Fees
§ 403-33. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Town of Barre's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges
or fees shall be set forth in the town's Schedule of Charges and Fees.
§ 403-34. Charges and fees.
The Board of Sewer Commissioners may adopt charges and fees which
may include:
Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program.
(1)
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(3)
(4) Fees for permit application.
(5) Fees for filing appeals.
Fees for consistent removal of pollutants otherwise subject to
federal pretreatment standards.
(6)
Other fees as the Town of Barre may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.
(7)
A.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by these rules and
regulations and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Town
of Barre.
B.
§ 403-33 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-34
5:301

ARTICLE IX
Protection from Damage
§ 403-35. Tampering with structures and equipment.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the treatment works. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 403-35 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-35
5:303

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 403-36. Harmful contributions.
§ 403-37. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions of these rules and
regulations, or applicable commonwealth or federal regulations, is subject
to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of Article
VII of these rules and regulations:
§ 403-38. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Sewer Commission finds that any user has violated or is
violating these rules and regulations, wastewater contribution permit, or
any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the Sewer
Commission may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature
of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the
The Sewer Commission may suspend the wastewater treatment service
and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Sewer Commission in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, causes interference to the PSTW or causes
the Town of Barre to violate any condition of the NPDES permit.
A.
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Sewer Commission
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage
to the PSTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The Sewer
Commission may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/
or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted
by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the Sewer Commission within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
B.
Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge.
A.
Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
B.
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring.
C.
D. Violation of conditions of the permit.
§ 403-36 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-38
5:305
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Sewer Commission
by the user.
§ 403-39. Show-cause hearing.
§ 403-40. Legal action.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
PSTW contrary to the provisions of these rules and regulations, federal
or commonwealth pretreatment requirements, or any order of the Sewer
Commission, the Town Counsel may commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief.
The Sewer Commission may order the user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the PSTW to show cause before the
Sewer Commission and reason why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Sewer Commission
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause
before the Sewer Commission why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
A.
The Sewer Commission may conduct the hearing and take the evidence,
or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to:
Issue in the name of the Sewer Commission notices of hearing
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings;
(1)
(2) Take the evidence; or
Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations for
action thereon.
(3)
B.
After the Sewer Commission has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
C.
§ 403-38 BARRE CODE § 403-40
5:306
ARTICLE XI
Penalties
§ 403-41. Violations and penalties.
§ 403-42. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to these rules and regulations,
or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under these rules and regulations, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of not less then $100 or more than $1,000.
Any person found to be violating any provision of these rules and
regulations shall be served by the town with notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
A.
A city, town or sewer district may, from time to time, prescribe rules
and regulations regarding the use of common sewers (MGL c.83, § 10,
as amended by St. 1987, c. 174, § 7A) to prevent the entrance or
discharge therein of any substance which may tend to interfere with
the flow of sewage or the proper operation of the sewerage system
and the treatment and disposal works, for the connection of estates
and buildings with sewers, for the construction, alteration, and use of
all connections entering into such sewers, and for the inspection of all
materials used therein; and may prescribe civil penalties, not exceeding
$5,000 for each day of violation of any such rule or regulation.
B.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Town of Barre may
recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees
and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated these rules and regulations or the orders,
rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
C.
§ 403-41 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-42
5:307

ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous
§ 403-43. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of these rules and
regulations is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not
be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 403-44. Validity.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of these rules
and regulations shall not effect the validity of any other part of this
regulation which can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
§ 403-45. Town not responsible.
The Town of Barre shall not be held responsible for any inconvenience or
damage due to breakdowns or stoppages.
§ 403-43 ALARM SYSTEMS § 403-45
5:309
Chapter 404
WATER DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 33.
Surface water drainage control — See Ch.
112, Art. I.
Water — See Ch. 134.
§ 403-45 BARRE CODE § 403-45
5:310
ARTICLE I
Connection to Municipal Water System
§ 404-1. Permission required; fee.
§ 404-2. Connection requirements.
No person shall be permitted to connect or cause to be connected any
service pipe for conveying water from any of the main or distributing
pipes to any house, building, or factory, for any purposes whatsoever,
without the written permission of the Water Commission or its
designee. Nor shall any addition to, or alteration of, any water pipe
be made without such written permission. A connection fee will be
charged.
A.
Water connection and related fee as of April 2006 = $2,000 per unit.
No service connection will be made until the applicant has paid the
required connection fee.
B.
Connection requirements: domestic service (one inch).
All applicable forms must be filled out by the property owner and/or
contractor and returned to the Department of Public Works before
any work or inspection will be allowed.
(1)
The applicant shall arrange with a private contractor to complete
all excavation (minimum five-foot depth), tap the street main (road
opening permit will be required), installation of tapping strap
(saddle), corporation stop, tubing, curb stop, curb box to and
through the basement of the building.
(2)
The applicant shall bear all costs for labor and materials not
specifically provided by the Department.
(3)
The Water Department will provide the water meter and associated
materials, installation of the water meter and inspection of all work
prior to backfilling the trench.
(4)
(5) Backfill material will be approved by the Water Department.
All work must be guaranteed for a minimum of one year after
completion.
(6)
Replacement of pavement shall be done with bituminous blacktop
or with matching material approved by the DPW Superintendent or
his/her designee.
(7)
Any damage to the drains or other Town property shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
(8)
All water lines must be a minimum of 10 feet apart from a sewer
main and 20 feet from a septic system.
(9)
A.
§ 404-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-2
5:311
§ 404-3. Term of permit.
The permit is valid for one year from date of issuance (copy of Chapter 165,
Section 1C, attached).35
§ 404-4. Domestic service.
Any contractor working on Town of Barre property is required to
have a minimum of $500,000 in general liability insurance. This
must include comprehensive premises-operations, underground
and completed operation hazard. A certificate of insurance must be
on file with the Water Department.
(10)
If digging on Town of Barre property, the contractor is required to
contract Dig Safe and file such findings (with Dig Safe number) to
the Water Department prior to excavation.
(11)
All plumbing must be done in accordance with the State of
Massachusetts Plumbing Codes.
(12)
Connection requirements: commercial and industrial service (one inch
or larger).
Services larger than one inch will be handled on an individual
basis.
(1)
Any contractor working on Town of Barre property is required to
have a minimum of $500,000 in general liability insurance. This
must include comprehensive premises-operations, underground
and completed operation hazard. A certificate of insurance must be
on file with the Water Department.
(2)
B.
A. A one-inch connection fee will be charged.
The applicant shall arrange with a private contractor to:
(1) Complete all excavation (minimum five-foot depth).
(2) Tap the street main (road opening permit will be required).
Install tapping strap (saddle), corporation stop, tubing, curb stop,
curb box to and through the basement of the building.
(3)
(4) Any and/or all other requirements set forth by the Department.
The applicant shall bear all costs for labor and materials not
specifically provided by the Department.
(5)
B.
The Water Department will provide the following:
(1) Water meter and associated materials.
C.
35.Editor's Note: Said Ch. 165, Section 1C, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 404-2 BARRE CODE § 404-4
5:312
§ 404-5. Commercial and industrial service over one inch.
Services larger than one inch will be handled on an individual basis. A
meeting with the Water Commissioners, DPW Superintendent and/or the
Chief Operator is required.
§ 404-6. Water connection approved materials list.
(2) Installation of the water meter.
(3) Inspection of all completed work before the trench is backfilled.
Single-family home.
Saddle: double strapped.
(a) Body: ductile Iron, meeting ASTM A-536.
(b) CC (AWWA).
(c) Ten mils of fusion applied nylon.
(d) Straps/bolts, washers: stainless steel type 304 (18-8).
(e) Gaskets: virgin NBR compounded for water.
(1)
The following fittings must be McDonald's brass or equivalent (300
psi working):
(a) Tapping corporation.
(b) Street curb.
(c) Inside ball valve.
(2)
A.
Approved materials:
(1) All CPPJ connections must have a one-inch stainless steel insert.
(2) Service box: Erie style with plug cover and extension rod.
(3) Plastic tubing: must be HDPE, 200 psi.
(4) Marking tape: must be one foot above pipe.
B.
Multifamily dwelling: Each unit must have its own connection meeting
the requirements.
C.
§ 404-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-6
5:313

ARTICLE II
Water Emergencies
§ 404-7. Shutoff of water supply.
The Water Department reserves the right at any time, without notice, to
shut off the water supply for purposes of making alterations, repairs or for
other purposes. Whenever possible, every attempt will be made to notify our
customers in advance.
§ 404-8. Water conservation measures.
To protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare,
and upon the declaration of the need for water supply conservation, by a
majority vote of the Water Commission, the following restrictions will be put
forth limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply.
§ 404-9. Notification.
Notifications of water supply conservation or a water emergency may be by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town or such
other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users.
Odd/even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with
odd-numbered addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days. Outdoor
watering by water users with even-numbered addresses is restricted to
even-numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a state
of water supply conservation and public notice thereof.
C.
D. Filling swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is
prohibited.
E.
§ 404-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-9
5:315

ARTICLE III
Water Charges
§ 404-10. Owner of property to be billed.
The owner of property supplied shall be charged, and held responsible,
for all water passing through the meter until such time as the Water
Department is notified in writing that public water is no longer desired.
In case of the sale of the property, the owner shall request a final meter
reading, and the Water Department shall be notified of the name and
mailing address of the new owner.
§ 404-11. User fees established.
§ 404-12. Billing.
The Water Commission will establish water rates after three consecutive
votes of the Commission and a public hearing.
All fees are subject to change after a vote of the Water Commission and
a public hearing.
A.
Water user fee rates (as of July 1, 2011):
(1) Residential/nonprofit: $0.055 per cubic foot; minimum bill: $55.
(2) Commercial: $0.057 per cubic foot; minimum bill: $57.
(3) Industrial: $0.059 per cubic foot; minimum bill: $59.
(4) Unmetered flat rate: $60 per quarter.
B.
A. Water billing will be conducted quarterly (four times per year).
A minimum charge shall be assessed to the owner for active water
services whether or not water is used.
B.
Requests for abatement of your water bill must be made within 30 days
of the billing date.
C.
All bills for water use must be paid within 30 days of the billing date.
Overdue bills will immediately become delinquent. Delinquent accounts
will be charged interest calculated on a per-diem basis based on a
fourteen-percent annual percentage rate.
D.
Unpaid and delinquent customers will be subject to termination of their
water service if the balance remains unpaid. The Water Department
shall notify the owner regarding overdue bills and issue a shutoff
notice. If payment is not received within 15 days from the date the
shutoff notice is rendered, the Department may shut off the service
without further notice in accordance with MGL c. 40, §§ 42A through
42F (accepted at the Annual Town Meeting of (June 10, 1996, Article
44). All charges and additional fees associated with the collection of
E.
§ 404-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-12
5:317
payments, including but not limited to legal fees, demand fees, and
turn-on fees, shall be paid in full prior to the water service being turned
back on.
Imposition of liens against delinquent accounts. Accounts delinquent
over 60 days may be turned over to the Town Collector and placed into
lien against your property tax.
F.
Property owners are responsible for water use and charges for rental
properties.
G.
§ 404-12 BARRE CODE § 404-12
5:318
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 404-13. Right to entry.
Owners and/or occupants of commercial, industrial or residential properties
serviced by the Water Department shall, upon presentation by Water
Department personnel of their credentials, authorize entry to inspect the
water service or to remove, repair, or replace a water meter at any time
the Water Department deems necessary. Water service apparatus shall be
readily accessible. Should access be refused, water service may be shut
off and may not be turned on until such access has been allowed and
appropriate fees paid.
§ 404-14. Loss of water supply.
§ 404-15. Water meters.
The Water Department shall have the right to interrupt water supply
as necessary for maintenance, repair or other cause beyond the Water
Departments control. No user shall be entitled to damages or to
payment of a refund for any interruption of supply or water quality.
Users having appliances dependent on routine pressure for proper
operations are cautioned that they should provide, at their own
expense, safety features to protect the appliances.
A.
The Water Department will make every attempt to give proper notice
to our customers when it may become necessary to shut off the flow of
water from the system to make repairs or changes to the water mains.
B.
If an owner requests the meter servicing the property to be tested
or replaced, and such meter is found to be defective, the Water
Department shall pay costs associated with the work. If the meter is
found not to be defective, a fee shall be paid by the owner to cover the
cost of testing, labor, materials and reinstallation of the meter.
A.
Tampering with water meters by any person shall be subject to a fine.
Necessary repairs and/or replacement shall be at the owner's expense.
B.
Should a meter fail to register the consumption used, or if an actual
meter reading cannot be obtained, the quantity of water used shall be
estimated, and the charge made shall be based on its average for the
prior four billing periods.
C.
All water passing through the meter will be charged for, whether it is
used or wasted.
D.
Any meter damaged or lost due to any cause shall be repaired or
replaced by the Water Department at the expense of the owner.
E.
§ 404-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-15
5:319
The water service can be shut off from any taker for noncompliance
with the rules and regulations and for any violations of the
Massachusetts General Laws relating to water supply.
F.
§ 404-15 BARRE CODE § 404-15
5:320
ARTICLE V
Cross-Connection Controls36
§ 404-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be:
§ 404-17. Authority.
§ 404-18. Responsibility.
The Water Commission shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result
of a survey of the premises, the Commission determines that an approved
backflow prevention device is required at the Town's water service
connection or as in-plant protection on any customer's premises, the
Commission, or its delegated agent, shall issue a cross-connection violation
form to said customer to install approved backflow prevention devices.
The customer shall, within a time frame determined by the Commission,
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure
or refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device
or devices within the specified time frame shall constitute a ground for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been properly installed.
To protect the public potable water supply served by the Barre Water
Commission from the possibility of contamination of pollution by
isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or
backsiphon into the public water system.
A.
To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connection,
actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water
system and nonpotable systems.
B.
To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
C.
As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public
Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking Water
Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the water purveyor has the primary
responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any
other substances from entering the public potable water system.
A.
B. Barre Water Commission Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted.
36.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 33, Cross-Connection Control.
§ 404-16 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-19
5:321
§ 404-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The method of preventing backflow through
the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
APPROVED — Accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable for the proposed
use.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR DEVICES — A method
to prevent backflow approved by the Department for use in Massachusetts.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow device used
to prevent backsiphonage, which is not designed for use under static line
pressure.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply of unknown or
questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the
supplier's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other
than the intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT —
A device having two independently operating check valves separated by
an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it to the
atmosphere, in which the check valves are force loaded to a normally closed
position and venting means is force loaded to a normally open position.
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other means
which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a
direction opposite to that which is intended.
BACKSIPHONAGE — A form of backflow due to reduced or subatmospheric
pressure within a water system.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe raising at least 35 feet, at its topmost
point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
COMMISSION — The Town of Barre Water Commission or owner or
operator of a public water supply system.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in the water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between a
distribution pipe of potable water from a public water system and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or other unapproved source.
§ 404-19 BARRE CODE § 404-19
5:322
CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATION FORM — A violation form designated
by the Department, Plumbing Inspectors and Board of Health delineating
cross-connection violations found on the owner's premises and a procedure
for corrective action.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — A backflow-preventing device which
incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shutoff valves at each end
and appurtenances for testing.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION — The location of approved backflow prevention
devices in a manner which provides simultaneous protection of the public
water system and the potable water system within the premises.
OWNER — Any person maintaining a cross-connection installation or
owning or occupying premises on which cross-connections can or do exist.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department which allows a crossconnection
installation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, trust,
partnership, the Commonwealth, a municipality, district, or other
subdivision or instrumentality of the United States except that nothing
herein shall be constructed to refer to or to include any American Indian
tribe or the United States Secretary of the Interior in his capacity as trustee
of Indian lands.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention device
designed to prevent only backsiphonage and which is designed for use
under static line pressure and which has necessary appurtences for testing.
REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An approved backflow
prevention device incorporating (1) two more check valves, (2) an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two
checks, (3) two shutoff valves, and (4) necessary appurtences for testing.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shutoff valves
and test cocks. Generally employs immediately downstream of the water
meter to act as a containment device.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY — The Department, its designer, or the local
Plumbing Inspector, authorized by MGL c. 142 and licensed by the Board
of State Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters, whichever is responsible
for the review and approval of the installation of an approved backflow
prevention device.
§ 404-20. Administration.
The Commission will operate an active cross-connection control
program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the
requirements of the State DEP's Cross-Connection Regulations and is
approved by the Department.
A.
§ 404-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-20
5:323
§ 404-21. Requirements.
The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible crossconnections
and shall follow the provisions of the Commission's
program in the Department regulations.
B.
Commission.
On new installations the Commission will provide on-site evaluation
and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of
backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, and notify the
owner of plan approval requirements by the appropriate reviewing
authority.
(1)
For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the
Commission will perform surveys of the premises and reviews of asbuilt
plans and issue a cross-connection violation form to the owner
detailing any corrective action required, the method of achieving
the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
The time period allowed shall depend upon the degree of hazard
involved.
(2)
The Commission will not allow any cross-connection to remain
unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which
a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to
insure satisfactory operation.
(3)
If the Commission determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
(4)
The Commission shall have on its staff, or shall have a delegated
representative who is, a backflow prevention device tester certified
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(5)
The Commission will begin initial premises inspections to
determine the nature of existing or potential hazard, following the
approval of this program by the Department. Initial focus will be on
high hazard industries and commercial premises.
(6)
A.
Owner.
The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
(1)
The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining all
necessary approvals and permits for the maintenance of crossconnections
and installation of backflow prevention devices, and
applying annually for the renewal of each permit.
(2)
The owner shall have any device that fails an inspection or test
repaired by a licensed plumber.
(3)
B.
§ 404-20 BARRE CODE § 404-21
5:324
§ 404-22. Degree of hazard.
The Commission recognized the threat to the public water system arising
from cross-connections. As such, the Commission, whereas it is responsible
for the quality of the public water supply, may require a containment
device on the water service entrance to any customer who, as a result of
unprotected cross-connections, could contaminate the public water supply
system.
§ 404-23. Enforcement.
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Commission to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the
effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or result in an unreasonable
risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in
the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment,
any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure
backflow preventer, or a reduced pressure backflow preventer must be
installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
§ 404-24. Periodic testing.
The owner shall inform the Commission of any proposed or
modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connections
of which the owner is aware but has not been found by the
Commission.
(4)
The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the
device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing
to take place.
(5)
The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the Department and by the Commission.
(6)
The owner shall install only reduced-pressure backflow preventers
and double check valve assemblies approved by the Department.
(7)
The owner of any residential premises having a private well or
other private water source will not be allowed a physical
connection with the public water supply system.
(8)
The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, device testing, retesting in the case that the device fails
to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance
with the Commission or Department requirements.
(9)
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by the
Commission.
A.
§ 404-21 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-24
5:325
§ 404-25. Records and reports.
The Commission's certified tester or his delegated representative, who
shall be a certified tester, shall perform periodic testing.
B.
The testing shall be conducted during the Commission's regular
business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner,
may require additional charges to cover the increased costs of the
Commission.
C.
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies must be tested annually by the owner independent of the
semiannual test by the water supplier, and said test must be conducted
by a certified tester.
D.
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must be
repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are
necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be retested at
the owner's expense to insure proper operation. High hazard situations
will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer
fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations,
a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be
established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools or a
replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective
means of the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service remains
during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when
the owner desires such continuity.
E.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection A in cases where there is a history of
test failures and the Commission feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests
will be born by the owner.
F.
Records: The Commission will initiate and maintain the following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3)
A.
Reports: The Commission will submit the following to DEP:
(1) Initial listing of high hazard cross-connections.
(2) Initial listing of low hazard cross-connections.
(3) Annual updated lists of the items in Subsection B(1) and (2) above.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections and surveys.
B.
§ 404-24 BARRE CODE § 404-26
5:326
§ 404-26. Addendum.
Residential dual check.
Effective the date of the acceptance of the Cross-Connection
Control Program for the Town of Barre, Massachusetts, all new
residential buildings on the public water supply will be required
to install a residential dual check device immediately downstream
of the water meter. This device will be provided by the Water
Commission at a scheduled cost to the homeowner. Installation of
this residential dual check device on a retrofit basis on existing
service lines will be instituted at a time and at a potential cost to
the homeowner as deemed necessary by the Commission.
(1)
The owner must be aware that installation of a residential dual
check valve results in a potential closed plumbing system within his
residence. As such, provisions may have to be made by the owner
to provide for thermal expansion within his closed loop system, i.e.,
the installation of thermal expansion devices and/or pressure relief
valves.
(2)
A.
Strainers. The Commission strongly recommends that all new and
retrofit installations of reduced pressure backflow preventers and
double check valve assemblies include the installation of strainers
located immediately upstream of the backflow device. The installation
of strainers will preclude the fouling of backflow devices due to both
foreseen and unforeseen circumstances occurring to the water supply
system such as water main repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic
cleaning and flushing of mains, etc. These occurrences may "stir up"
debris within the water main that will cause fouling of backflow devices
installed with the benefit of strainers.
B.
Right to establish further regulations. The Water Commission reserves
the right to establish such further regulations, from time to time, as it
may deem expedient for the introduction and use of the water.
C.
§ 404-26 ALARM SYSTEMS § 404-26
5:327
Chapter 405
COUNCIL ON AGING BYLAWS
§ 405-1. Establishment; statutory authority.
The name of the organization shall be the Barre Council on Aging,
hereinafter referred to as the "Council," as established by the Town of
Barre, April 1974, pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 8B.
§ 405-2. Purposes.
The basic purposes of the Council are to:
§ 405-3. Location of offices.
The principal office of the Council shall be located at the Barre Senior
Center, 557 South Barre Road, Barre, Massachusetts. All mail shall be
delivered to Post Office Box 433, unless another shall be specified by the
Director or officers of the Council.
§ 405-4. Membership.
A. Identify the needs of elders in the community.
Educate the community and enlist the support and participation of all
citizens to meet the needs of elders.
B.
Design, advocate, and/or implement services to fill these needs, or to
coordinate existing services.
C.
Cooperate with the Massachusetts Executive Office of Elder Affairs, and
the Central Mass Agency on Aging, and to be cognizant of state and
federal legislation and programs regarding elders.
D.
The Council shall consist of nine members (who are residents of the
Town of Barre).
A.
Prospective Council members shall be nominated by a majority of the
existing members of the Council, and no person so nominated for
Council membership is to serve on the Council until appointed by the
Board of Selectmen.
B.
No person shall serve as an elected officer in the same position for more
than three years in succession.
C.
Council membership shall reflect the make-up of the community-atlarge
and shall be composed of at least 51% of elders (persons 60 and
over).
D.
All members shall be sworn in by the Town Clerk before assuming their
duties.
E.
§ 404-26 BARRE CODE § 405-5
5:328
§ 405-5. Voting rights of members.
All voting rights shall be vested in the members, and each individual
member shall be entitled to one vote with respect to any question or matter
that may come before a meeting of the members of the Council. Council
members and employees are subject to the state's Conflict of Interest Law
[MGL c. 268A; see especially §§ 1 through 3, 8 through 10, 17 through 23,
(not 23A), 24, 25].
§ 405-6. Meetings of members.
§ 405-7. Resignation; attendance requirements.
Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the members of the Council shall be held once
a month on the first Wednesday unless otherwise posted.
(1)
The Council shall distribute to its members minutes of the previous
meeting and an agenda for the upcoming meeting at least seven
days prior to each regular meeting.
(2)
A.
Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Council may be called at any time by the
Chair or at the request of at least three other members of the
Council.
(1)
Due notice (written or verbal) must be sent to each member of the
Council at least 24 hours prior to the scheduled meeting time.
(2)
B.
Annual meeting. The annual meeting of the Council shall be held on the
first Wednesday in September for the purpose of electing officers.
C.
Meeting notices. All meetings shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Open Meeting Law (MGL c. 39, § 23B).
D.
Quorum. At all meetings of the Council, the presence of a simple
majority of the total membership shall be necessary and sufficient to
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. Votes shall be
cast only by members in attendance.
E.
Conduct of meetings. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance
with Robert's Rules of Order.
F.
Resignation. In the event that a member wishes to resign from the
Council, he/she shall notify the Selectmen and the Council in writing
(through the Town Clerk).
A.
Attendance. As a matter of policy, regular attendance is expected of all
members. In the event of absence of any member for three consecutive
meetings, except for reasons of health or extenuating circumstances as
duly reported to the Chair in advance of Council meetings, the Council
B.
§ 405-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 405-7
5:329
§ 405-8. Officers.
§ 405-9. Amendments.
Amendments or alterations of these bylaws may be considered at either
a regular or special meeting of the Council called for such purpose. In
either case, notification of the meeting and its purpose shall be given at
least 14 days prior to assembly. Accompanying this notification shall be a
summary of the proposed action, the full text of the proposed amendment
or alteration, and a statement of the purpose of the proposed changes. The
proposed amendment or alteration of the bylaws must be approved by a
vote of 2/3 (six) members of the Council.
shall request resignation of that member through the Selectmen. Six
absences during any calendar year shall constitute an automatic
dismissal from the Council.
Background.
The officers shall consist of a Chair (Chairperson), a Vice Chair, and
Secretary.
(1)
Officers of the Council shall be elected at the annual meeting of the
Council and shall take office upon election.
(2)
Election of officers to fill vacancies created by death, resignation,
or other cause, may take place at any regular or special/emergency
meeting and shall be for the unexpired term of the previous
incumbent; however, the office of the Chair, if vacated, shall be
filled by the Vice Chair for the unexpired term of the Chair's normal
term of office. The position of Vice Chair will then be filled by
election.
(3)
A.
Chair. The Chair shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council,
subject to the direction of members of the Council. He/She shall
prepare an agenda in conjunction with the Director, preside at all
meetings of the members, appoint all committees and their chairs, and
be an ex-officio member of all committees.
B.
Vice Chair. During the absence, or disability of the Chair, the Vice Chair
shall exercise all the functions of the Chair and, when so acting, shall
have all the powers and be subject to all the restrictions of the Chair.
C.
Secretary. The Secretary shall:
Accurately record all the proceedings of the meetings of members;
and
(1)
(2) Forward to the director within seven days.
D.
Representation. No member of the Council or its staff shall make
written or oral representations for the Council, unless authorized by
Council vote.
E.
§ 405-7 BARRE CODE § 405-10
5:330
§ 405-10. Relationship with staff.
§ 405-11. Service on committees.
Council members shall be available to serve on one or more committees as
appointed by the Chair.
§ 405-12. Effective date.
The effective date of the bylaws shall be the date of that meeting at which
the bylaws shall have been approved by an affirmative vote of not less than
2/3 of the members present. The date on which this approval is voted is July
7, 1999.
Chapter 406
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
The Council shall recommend candidates for the position of Director to
the Board of Selectmen.
A.
The Director shall recommend for hire all subordinate staff positions,
including temporary positions.
B.
Council on Aging boards are primarily advisory.
Board members shall refrain from supervisory and (day-to-day)
management activities.
(1)
The Board shall consult with the Director and other staff (if
appropriate) in policy matters.
(2)
Staff and Council members shall ensure the confidentiality of
individual client records.
(3)
The Council shall fill all vacant and new positions in accordance
with local personnel practices and procedures.
(4)
C.
§ 405-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 405-12
5:331

ARTICLE I
Hiring Outside Consultants
[Adopted 5-12-2009]
§ 406-1. Imposition of fees.
Conservation Commission may impose reasonable fees for the employment
of outside consultants engaged by the Conservation Commission for specific
expert services. Such services shall be deemed necessary by the
Commission to come to a final decision on an application submitted to
the Conservation Commission pursuant to the requirement of the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40), the Town's non-zoning wetlands bylaw,
in the event it applies, Conservation Commission Act (MGL c. 40, § 8C), or
any other state or municipal statute, bylaw or regulation, as they may be
amended or enacted from time to time. The Conservation Commission may
also impose fees for other consultant services, related to application review,
or permit conditioning or monitoring, under any of the above-referenced
laws or regulations.
§ 406-2. Special account.
Funds received pursuant to these rules shall be deposited with the Town
Treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose.
Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction of
the Conservation Commission without further appropriation as provided in
MGL c. 44 § 53G. Expenditures from this account shall be made only in
connection with a specific project or projects for which a consultant fee has
been collected from the applicant. Expenditures of accrued interest may
also be made for these purposes.
§ 406-3. Consultant services.
Specific consultant services may include but are not limited to resource
area survey and delineation analysis of resource area values, hydrogeologic
and drainage analysis, impacts on municipal conservation lands, and
environmental or land use law. Services may also include on-site monitoring
during construction, or other services related to the project deemed
necessary by the Commission. The consultant shall be chosen by and report
only to the Commission and/or its administrator.
§ 406-4. Notice to applicant.
The Conservation Commission shall be given written notice to the applicant
of the selection of an outside consultant. Such notices shall state the
identity of the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the
applicant, and a request for payment of said fee in its entirety. Such notice
shall be deemed to have been given on the date it is mailed or delivered. No
such costs or expenses shall be incurred by the applicant if the application
or request is withdrawn within five days of the date notice is given.
§ 406-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 406-5
5:333
§ 406-5. Payment of fee required.
The fee must be received prior to the initiation of consulting services. The
Commission may request additional consultant fees if necessary review
requires a larger expenditure than originally anticipated or new information
requires additional consultant services. Failure by the applicant to pay
the consultant fee specified by the Commission within 10 business days
of the request for payment, or refusal of payment, shall be cause for the
Commission to deny the application based on lack of sufficient information
to evaluate whether the project meets applicable performance standards
in 310 CMR 10.00 and the Town's Wetlands Bylaw or its regulations, in
the event it applies. An appeal stops the clock on the above deadline; the
countdown resumes on the first business day after the appeal is either
denied or upheld. A denial for lack of information may be based solely on
the lack of the third party consultant review identified as necessary by
the Commission. The Commission shall specify in its denial the nature of
the information lacking which its chosen consultant would provide, e.g. the
questions it needs answered. Failure by the applicant to pay the consultant
fee specified by the Commission within 10 business days of the request for
payment shall be cause for the Commission to deny the permit application.
§ 406-6. Appeals.
The applicant may appeal the selection of the outside consultant to the
Board of Selectmen, who may only disqualify the outside consultant
selected on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or does
not possess minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications
shall consist of either an educational degree or three or more years of
practice in the field at issue or related field. Such an appeal must be in
writing and received by the Board of Selectmen and a copy received by
the Conservation Commission, so as to be received within 10 days of the
date consultant fees were requested by the Conservation Commission. The
required time limits for action upon the application shall be extended by the
duration of the administrative appeal.
§ 406-7. Return of unspent fees.
When the Commission's review of a project is completed and an order of
conditions issued, any balance in the special account attributable to that
project shall be returned within 30 days. The excess amount, including
interest, shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant's successor in
interest. For the purpose of this regulation any person or entity claiming to
be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Commission with
appropriate documentation. A final report of said account shall be made
available to the applicant or applicant's successor in interest.
§ 406-5 BARRE CODE § 406-7
5:334
Chapter A601
ACCEPTANCES OF GENERAL LAWS AND ACTS
§ A601-1. Acceptances of General Laws [From 1892 to the present]
MGL Reference Date/Art. No. Subject
c. 32, § 85H 1/2 6-12-2000/34 Pension rights; indemnification for
injuries; widow's allowance
c. 32B (certain
portions)37
3-4-1968
Election/Ques. 1
Contributory group life insurance,
accidental death, hospital and
medical insurance
c. 32B, § 18A 2-6-2012/8 Transfer of retiree, spouse or
dependent to Medicare health
plan
c. 32B, § 20 6-21-2010/15 Post-Employment Benefits
Liability Trust Fund
c. 39, § 23D 6-18-2013/20 The Mullin Rule
c. 40, § 22D 2-22-1982/5 Towing of illegally parked vehicles
impeding snow removal
c. 40, § 39K 5-30-1989/32 Drinking water protection district
c. 40, § 42-A 3-7-1936/35 Collection of water rates
c. 40, § 42A-E 6-10-1996/44 Collection of water fees
c. 40, § 4G 5-18-1985/15 Increase bidding limit from
$2,000 to $4,000 (Rescinded
5-14-1990/32)
c. 40, § 57 6-10-1996/64 Licenses and permits of
delinquent taxpayers
c. 40, § 6B 3-9-1963/20 Authorize money for purchase
uniforms for members of Police
and Fire Departments
c. 40, § 8a (Ch. 297,
Acts of 1954,
amended by Ch.
102, Acts of 1955)
5-22-1971/10 Establish a Development and
Industrial Commission
c. 40, § 8C 7-9-1973/12 Establish Conservation
Commission
37.Editor's Note: Article 11 adopted at the 1-31-2011 STM provided that all retirees retiring
after acceptance of MGL c. 32B, § 18A, their spouses and dependents who are enrolled in
Medicare Part A at no cost to retirees, their spouses or dependents, or eligible for
coverage hereunder at no cost to retirees, their spouses or dependents, be required to
enroll in a Medicare health benefits supplement plan offered by the Town.
§ 406-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § A601-1
5:335
MGL Reference Date/Art. No. Subject
c. 40, § 8E 6-14-1999/49 Establishment of Youth
Commission
c. 40, § 8G 5-17-1980/26 Mutual police aid agreements
c. 40, § 22F 6-13-1994/19 Fixing of reasonable charges for
service performed by boards and
officers issuing licenses, etc.
c. 41, §§ 19K and
108P
6-17-2002/35 Allow additional compensation for
the Town Treasurer, Town Clerk
and Town Collector upon
certification
c. 41, § 110A 6-11-2007/17 Closing of Town offices on
Saturdays permitted
c. 41, § 110I 5-15-1976/28 Indemnification of municipal
officers
c. 41, § 112A 6-22-1976/8 Separation from service of war
veterans holding unclassified
positions
c. 41, § 41B 6-14-1999/48 Authorize Treasurer to directly
deposit compensation of any
employee who authorizes such
direct deposit
c. 41, § 97A 3-11-1961/23 Establishment of Police
Department by Selectmen
c. 43D, as amended
by Ch. 205, § 11,
Acts of 2006
1-31-2011/12 Expedited permitting
c. 44, § 53C 3-10-1973/21 Establish fund for control of offduty
police fees
c. 44, § 53E (Ch.
339, Acts of 1981)
2-7-1983/9 Offsetting of appropriations for
operating costs of agencies by
estimated receipts from user fees
charged by agency
c. 48, §§ 42, 43 and
44
3-8-1952/27 Establishment of Fire Department
c. 53, § 9A 6-9-2003/33 Relative to the deadline to obtain
nomination papers for elective
office
c. 54, § 16A 6-9-2008/24 Filling election worker vacancies
by Town Clerk
c. 54, § 103A 3-7-1964/16 Absentee voting in town elections
§ A601-1 BARRE CODE § A601-1
5:336
MGL Reference Date/Art. No. Subject
c. 59, § 5, Cl. 17 1/2
as amended by Ch.
73, Acts of 1986
5-30-1989/26 Property tax exemption
c. 59, § 5, Cl. 17C
(amended by Ch.
653, Acts of 1982)
6-18-1983/13 Property tax exemption
c. 59, § 5, Cl. 17D 6-14-2004/27 Relative to elderly tax abatements
for fiscal 2005 and thereafter
c. 59, § 5, Cl. 41C
as amended by Ch.
73, Acts of 1986
5-30-1989/27 Property tax exemption
c. 59, § 5, Cl. 54 6-9-2008/21 Establish a minimum value of
$10,000 for personal property
subject to taxation, the so-called
“Small Personal Property Account
Exemption,” beginning in FY 2010
c. 59, § 5K 6-11-2007/20 Establishment of senior tax workoff
program beginning in FY 2008
c. 59, § 57B (Ch.
402, Acts of 1987)
5-14-1990/35 Interest on unpaid real estate and
personal property taxes effective
in FY 91
c. 59, § 57C 11-5-2007/4 Establishment of quarterly tax
payment system beginning in FY
2009
c. 71, § 16 through
16I
2-2-1963/1 Establishment of Regional School
District
c. 80, § 13B 4-11-1988/17 Deferral and recovery agreements
(betterments)
c. 83, §§ 16A and
16B-F
6-17-1991/10 Sewer rates and charges
c. 90, § 20A 11-2-1981/10 Parking violations and fines
(Rescinded 2-22-1982/3)
c. 90, § 20A1/2 2-22-1982/4 Parking violations and fines
c. 90, § 20C 4-7-1975/32 Outstanding unpaid parking
violations
c. 90, § 22B 6-17-2014/20 Abandoned vehicles
c. 131, § 105C 8-30-1934/10 Suspend operation of statute
regulating use of traps to capture
fur-bearing animals
§ A601-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § A601-1
5:337
MGL Reference Date/Art. No. Subject
c. 136, § 4B, as
amended by Ch.
207, Acts of 1946
10-18-1946/1 Authorize Selectmen to grant
licenses for operation of bowling
alleys on Lord's day
c. 139, §§ 1, 2 and 3 11-28-1966/11 Disposal of burned or dangerous
buildings
c. 140, § 147A 6-13-1994/40 Enactment of bylaws and setting
of fees relative to dogs
c. 147, §§ 32
through 51
3-7-1936/34 Legalization of boxing
c. 148, § 26C 6-18-1983/11 Smoke and heat detectors in
apartment houses, hotels and
boardinghouses
c. 148, § 26E 6-12-2000/35 Smoke detectors in residential
buildings
c. 148, § 26G 6-18-1983/12 Automatic sprinkler systems in
new buildings of more than 7,500
gross square feet
c. 148, § 26I 5-20-1991/22 Installation of automatic
sprinklers in buildings containing
four or more dwelling units
c. 149, § 33C 3-10-1973/14 Overtime compensation of
permanent employees
c. 258, § 13 4-7-1980
Election/Ques. 3
Indemnification of town officers
§ A601-2. Acceptances of Acts [From 1892 to the present]
Chapter/Acts of Date/Art. No. Subject
Ch. 27, §§ 64
through 68
3-5-1894/14
Ch. 417, §§ 267 and
268, Acts of 1893
3-2-1896/17 Australian ballot system
Ch. 264, Acts of
1890
4-4-1898/3 Cemetery Commission
(Rescinded 11-18-2014/4)
Ch. 11, § 335 3-3-1902/16 Election of Clerk for three-year
term
Ch. 209, Acts of
1908
3-1-1909/11 Protection of forests and sprout
lands from fire
Ch. 560, Acts of
1907, § 364
3-6-1911/14 Election of Highway Surveyor
§ A601-1 BARRE CODE § A601-2
5:338
Chapter/Acts of Date/Art. No. Subject
Ch. 560, Acts of
1907, § 359
1-11-1912/3 Elect Moderator for three-year
term
Ch. 807, Acts of
1913
3-1-1915/19 Compensation of certain public
employees for injuries
Ch. 293, Acts of
1916
3-5-1917/16 Licensing of motor vehicles
carrying passengers for hire
Ch. 240, Acts of
1920
3-7-1921/Ques. 2 Sports and games on Lord's day
Ch. 240, Acts of
1920
3-6-1922/Ques. 2 Sports and games on Lord's day
Ch. 248, Acts of
1934
8-30-1934/6 Felton Field Commission
Ch. 723, Acts of
1945
12-19-1945/7 Establish and maintain
departments and districts for
furnishing advice and assistance
to veterans
Ch. 403, Acts of
1936
9-29-1950/7 Workmen's compensation
Ch. 820, Acts of
1950
3-10-1951/25
Ch. 624, Acts of
1952
11-29-1952/1 Increase retirement allowance
and pensions to persons
separated from town service prior
to 4-1-1951
Ch. 434, Acts of
1953
8-24-1953/4 Rent control
Ch. 568, Acts of
1964, as amended
by Ch. 543, Acts of
1965
11-2-1965/2 Establishment of Regional School
District
Ch. 835, Acts of
1970
3-11-1972/15 Career incentive pay program for
police officers; partial
reimbursement by commonwealth
1979 Act of General
Court
4-7-1980
Election/Ques. 2
Recall and removal elections
Ch. 477, Acts of
1984
4-29-1985/7 Exemption from public bidding
laws when purchasing materials
from other governmental agencies
§ A601-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § A601-2
5:339
Chapter/Acts of Date/Art. No. Subject
Ch. 188, § 13, Acts
of 1985
10-28-1985/9 Professional development grant
program for Montachusett
Regional Vocational Technical
School
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
10-28-1985/10 Equal education opportunity grant
for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
5-16-1987/24 Equal education opportunity grant
for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Ch. 640, Acts of
1985
5-16-1987/28
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
6-22-1987/9 Equal education opportunity grant
for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
4-11-1988/14 Equal education opportunity grant
for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School for
FY89
Ch. 56, Acts of
1988
6-27-1988/6 Authorize Town of Barre to
establish a Department of Public
Works
Ch. 188, Acts of
1985
4-11-1988/14 Equal education opportunity grant
for FY90 to be expended by
Quabbin Regional School District
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
5-30-1989/31 Equal education opportunity grant
for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
5-14-1990/33 (no
final vote
indicated)
Equal education opportunity grant
for FY91 Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Ch. 291, Acts of
1990
5-20-1991/8 Enhanced 911 service
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
5-20-1991/38 Equal education opportunity grant
for FY92 for Montachusett
Regional Vocational Technical
School
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
5-18-1992/48 Equal education opportunity grant
for FY93 for Montachusett
Regional Vocational Technical
School
§ A601-2 BARRE CODE § A601-2
5:340
Chapter/Acts of Date/Art. No. Subject
Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
6-14-1993/29 Equal education opportunity grant
for FY94 for Montachusett
Regional Vocational Technical
School
Ch. 324, Acts of
1993
6-13-1994/37 Regulating employment of certain
building officials
Ch. 481, Acts of
1993
6-13-1994/43 Permit common victualers
licensed to sell wine and malt
beverages to also sell liquors and
cordials
Ch. 46, § 12, Acts of
2003
6-14-2004/12 Further defines definition of
"employee" in MGL c. 32B, § 12,
pertaining to members of a call
fire department
Ch. 7, Acts of 2011 1-31-2011/15 Appointment of a Treasurer-
Collector
Chapter A603
ROAD LISTS
§ A601-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § A601-2
5:341

ARTICLE I
Barre Roads
§ A603-1. Road lists.
1. Adams Road Fruitland Road to MDC
2. Adams Street South Street to Wheelwright Road
3. Airport Road North Brookfield Road to end
4. Allen Road Old Stage Road to Washburn Road (not
passable all the way)
5. Almon Thrasher Road Old Hardwick Road to Sheldon Road
6. Austin Street Wheelwright Road to end
7. Baldwin Road Hawes Hill Road to end
8. Barre Depot Road Vernon Avenue to Oakham Town line
9. Barre Plains Street Wheelwright Road to junction of Main Street
and North Brookfield Road
10. Beech Street Cedar Street to Oak Street
11. Bentley Road Winter Street to Ruggles Lane (Accepted as
Bentley Street in 1955. Sign reads "Bentley
Street." Selectmen changed to Bentley Road.)
12. Blair Road Sheldon Road to Spring Hill Road
13. Britton Road East Oakham Road to end to Oakham Road
14. Britton Road West North Brookfield Road to end (never closed in
between but impassable)
15. Broad Street Junction of School Street North and Exchange
Street to Ruggles Lane
16. Butterworth Road West Street to Petersham Town line
17. Cathy Lane Junction of Wildwood Drive and Terry Lane to
end
18. Cedar Street South Barre Road to end
19. Chamberlain Hill
Road
Junction of Wheelwright Road and South Street
to Root Road
20. Chapman Road Old Coldbrook Road to Worcester Road
21. Church Lane Dana Road to Petersham Town line
22. Church Street Trafalgar Square to Vernon Avenue
23. Circle Road Mechanic Street to Mechanic Street
24. Clem Court South Barre Road to end
25. Company Farm Road Woods Road to end
26. Common Street Junction of Concert Mall, Pleasant Street and
School Street North to South Street
§ A603-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-1
5:343
27. Concert Mall Junction of James Street, Exchange Street and
Summer Street to junction of Common Street,
Pleasant Street and School Street North
28. Covered Bridge Road Granger Road to second gate of Riverside
Cemetery
29. Cummings Road Hubbardston Road to end
30. Cutler Road Chamberlain Hill Road to junction of Jewett,
Hardwick and Wauwinet Roads
31. Cut-Off Road Walnut Hill Road to Cummings Road
32. Dana Road West Street to Petersham Town line
33. Daunt Road Hardwick Road to end
34. Debra Lane Town Farm Road to end
35. Elm Street North West Street to end
36. Elm Street South South Barre Road to end
37. Everett Road Hubbardston Road to Sunrise Avenue
38. Exchange Street Town Hall to junction of Summer Street, James
Street and Concert Mall (even numbers). Town
Hall to junction of School Street North and
Broad Street (odd numbers).
39. Farrington Road Williamsville Road to end
40. Fellows Road Sheldon Road to end
41. Fir Street South Barre Road to end
42. Fisher Road Sunrise Avenue to MDC
43. Flaherty Road Williamsville Road to end
44. Fritscher Road Wheelwright Road to end
45. Fruitland Road Worcester Road to Walnut Hill Road (now called
Fruitland Road West from Bradley Brown's to
Walnut Hill Road because a section is almost
impassable)
46. Fuller Road Jewett Road to end
47. Gilbert Road Old Petersham Road to MDC (Emergency
personnel must take note that this road is
numbered from Old Petersham Road, the point
farthest from the Town Hall. Gilbert Road
crosses Williamsville Road and the three houses
with largest numbers, Elliott White, 585,
Ladeau, and Theodore Kelley 685, are east of or
to the right of Williamsville Road coming from
the center of town.)
48. Glancy Road Pleasant Street to end
49. Glazier Road Wheelwright Road to Hardwick Town Line
§ A603-1 BARRE CODE § A603-1
5:344
50. Granger Road Hubbardston Road to Covered Bridge Road
51. Grogan Road South Street to Wauwinet Road
52. Grove Street North Concert Mall to Newton Street
53. Grove Street South Barre Road to junction of Nichols Road
and Oak Street
54. Hancock Road West Street to end
55. Hardwick Road Junction of Jewett, Wauwinet and Cutler Roads
to Hardwick Town line
56. Harty Road Phillipston Road to end
57. Hawes Hill Road Pleasant Street to Eiben house
58. High Street North Pleasant Street to Broad Street
59. High Street Street Peach Street to cul-de-sac
60. High Plains Street Main Street to High Street South
61. Hinkley Road Hardwick Road to end
62. Hubbardston Road Junction of Valley Road and Mechanic Street to
Hubbardston Town line
63. Hurst Road Wheelwright Road to end
64. Jackson Lane West Street to end
65. James Street Junction of Summer Street, Concert Mall and
Exchange Street to junction of Valley and Old
Coldbrook Roads
66. Jewett Road Junction of Cutler, Hardwick and Wauwinet
Roads to Hardwick Town line
67. Jim Barry Road Old Stage Road to end
68. Kendall Street James Street to South Street
69. Lane Road Chamberlain Hill Road to Glazier Road (Part of
this road is impassable beyond Matukaitis
farm.)
70. Lockwood Road Pleasant Street to end
71. Lovers Lane Pleasant Street to Old Stage Road
72. Loring Road Stetson Road to South Street
73. Main Street Junction of South Barre Road and Vernon
Avenue to junction of North Brookfield Road
and Barre Plains Street
74. Maple Lane Wheelwright Road to end
75. Marsh Road Farrington Road to end
76. Mechanic Street Exchange Street to junction of Valley and
Hubbardston Roads
77. Mill Road Pleasant Street to Old Stage Road
§ A603-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-1
5:345
78. Moulton Street South Street to James Street
79. Murphy Road Williamsville Road to end
80. Nelson Street Vernon Avenue to Trafalgar Square
81. Newton Street Grove Street North to West Street
82. Nichewaug Road West Street to Petersham Town line
83. Nichols Road Worcester Road to junction of Oak Street and
Grove Street South
84. North Brookfield
Road
Junction of Barre Plains Street and Main Street
to New Braintree Town line
85. Nourse Lane School Street North to end
86. Oak Street Junction of Nichols Road and Grove Street
South to Beech Street
87. Oakham Road North Brookfield Road to Oakham Town line
88. Old Coach Road Root Road to end
89. Old Colderook Road Junction of Valley Road and James Street to
MDC
90. Old Dana Road West Street to Dana Road
91. Old Hardwick Road West Street to Hardwick Road
92. Old Petersham Road Williamsville Road to Petersham Town line
(Emergency personnel should note that
residences of Mark Cummings, 50, and Conrad
Rivard, 81, are reached from Williamsville
Road. From Rivards' to the junction with
Phillipston Road, the road is presently
impassable.)
93. Old Stage Road Pleasant Street to Petersham Town line
94. Osgood Road Washburn Road to end (not really passable
now)
95. Park Street Broad Street to Pleasant Street
96. Peach Street Junction of Main Street and Wheelwright Road
to High Street South
97. Phillipston Road Gilbert Road to Hubbardston Town line.
98. Pine Tree Terrace Main Street to cul-de-sac
99. Pleasant Street Junction of Common Street, School Street
North and Concert Mall to Petershan Town line
100. Quinn Road North Brookfield Road to end
101. Rocking Stone Road West Street to Old Dana Road
102. Root Road South Street to Cutler Road
103. Ruggles Lane Pleasant Street to Bentley Road
104. Sanderson Road Pleasant Street to end
§ A603-1 BARRE CODE § A603-1
5:346
105. School Street North Junction of Pleasant Street, Concert Mall and
Common Street to junction of Williamsville and
Valley Roads
106. School Street South Peach Street to High Street South
107. Sheldon Road Old Dana Road to Hardwick Road
108. Sibley Road Wauwinet Road to end
109. Sibley Road Wauwinet Road to end
110. Silver Brook Road Dana Road to Old Dana Road
111. Skelley Road Old Petersham Road to Warren house
112. South Street Junction of School Street North and Exchange
Street to Wheelwright Road
113. South Barre Road Junction of Worcester Road, Summer Street and
Valley Road to junction of Vernon Avenue and
Main Street
114. Spooner Road Spring Hill Road to Hardwick Town line
115. Spring Hill Road Old Dana Road to Hardwick Town line
116. Station Road North Brookfield Road to end
117. Stetson Road South Street to South Barre Road
118. Stevens Road Barre Plains Street to Austin Street
119. Summer Street Junction of Exchange Street, James Street and
Concert Mall to junction of Valley, Worcester
and South Barre Roads
120. Sunrise Avenue Hubbardston Road to Farrington Road
121. Terry Lane Junction of Wildwood Drive and Cathy Lane to
end
122. Town Farm Road South Barre Road to Worcester Road
123. Trafalgar Square Nelson Street to Church Street
124. Union Street Broad Street to West Street
125. Valley Road Junction of Summer Street and Worcester and
South Barre Roads to junction of School Street
North and Williamsville Road
126. Vernon Avenue Worcester Road to junction of Main Street and
South Barre Road
127. Walnut Hill Road Old Coldbrook Road to Hubbardston Road
128. Washburn Road Pleasant Street to West Street
129. Wauwinet Road South Street to junction of Cutler, Jewett and
Hardwick Roads
130. West Street Pleasant Street to Petersham Town line
131. Wheelwright Road Junction of Main and Peach Streets to Hardwick
Town line
§ A603-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-1
5:347
132. Wildwood Drive Worcester Road to junction of Terry and Cathy
Lanes
133. Williamsville Road Junction of Valley Road and School Street North
to Hubbardston Town line
134. Wilton Street Ruggles Lane to end
135. Winship Road West Street to end
136. Winter Street Broad Street to School Street North
137. Woods Road Oakham Road to Oakham Town line
138. Worcester Road Junction of Valley and South Barre Roads and
Summer Street to Oakham Town line
§ A603-1 BARRE CODE § A603-1
5:348
ARTICLE II
Scenic Roads
[Adopted 4-27-1974 ATM, Art. 33]
§ A603-2. Road lists.
The following roads in Barre were designated as scenic roads according to
MGL c. 40, § 15C:
1. Adams Road Fruitland Road to MDC taking
2. Allen Road Old Stage Road westerly to Washburn Road
3. Almon Thrasher Road Cleveland Road across Hardwick Road along
discontinued section to Wauwinet Road
4. Baldwin Road Hawes Hill Road to Petersham Skelly Lane
5. Blair Road Cleveland Road to Spring Hill Road
6. Britton Road New Braintree Road to end (also includes that
section or sections not already discontinued)
7. Butterworth Road Rte. 122 northerly to Petersham Town line
8. Chamberlain Hill Road Old Furnace Road to junction Root and Cole
Road
9. Chapman Road Rte. 122 to Old Worcester Road
10. Cleveland Road Old Dana Road southerly to Hardwick Road
11. Cole Place White Cemetery Road to Jewett Road
12. Covered Bridge Road Granger Road to cemetery
13. Cummings Road Hubbardston Road to MDC taking (Junction
Cut-Off and Cummings)
14. Cut-off Road Walnut Hill Road to Cummings Road
15. Dana Road Rte. 122 west to Petersham Town line
16. Daunt Road Hardwick Road to farmhouse
17. Everett Road Sunrise Avenue to MDC taking
18. Farrington Road Williamsville Road to MDC taking
19. Fisher Road Sunrise Avenue to MDC taking
20. Fruitland Road Old Worcester Road to Walnut Hill Road
21. Gilbert Road Petersham-Hubbardston Road to MDC taking
22. Granger Road Hubbardston Road to MDC taking (listed as far
as Covered Bridge Road)
23. Grogan Road South Street to Wauwinet Road
24. Hancock Road Rte. 122 to end
25. Hawes Hill Road Pleasant Street to Petersham Town line
26. Jackson Lane Rte. 122 to end
§ A603-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-2
5:349
27. James Street Common to Valley Road
28. Jim Barry Road Old Stage Road westerly to end
29. Lockwood Road Pleasant Street to end
30. Loring Road South Barre Road to South Street
31. Lovers Lane Pleasant Street westerly to Old Stage Road
32. Marsh Road Williams or Farrington Road southerly to end
33. Mill Road Pleasant Street westerly to Old Stage Road
34. Murphy Lane Williamsville Road to end
35. Nichewaug Road Rte. 122 westerly to Petersham Town line
36. Nichols Road South Barre Road to Rte. 122
37. Nourse Lane School Street to end
38. Oakham Road New Braintree Road to Oakham Town line
39. Old Coach Road Root Road to end
40. Old Dana Road Rte. 122 westerly to Dana Road
41. Old Stage Road Pleasant Street to Petersham Town line
42. Old Worcester Road Valley Road to Rte. 122 in Coldbrook
43. Osgood Road Washburn Road to end
44. Peter Klem Road White Cemetery Road (formerly known as Cole
Road to cellar hole)
45. Petersham-
Hubbardston Road
Petersham Town line easterly to Hubbardston
Town line
46. Phillipston Road Petersham-Hubbardston Road
47. Raccoon Hill Road Dana Road southerly to Spring Hill Road
48. Rockingstone Road Old Dana Road to Rte. 122
49. Root Road South Street to Junction Cole and Chamberlain
Hill Road
50. Silver Spring Road Old Dana Road to Dana Road
51. Skelly Road Petersham Town line to Junction Gilbert and
Petersham-Hubbardston Roads
52. Skelly Cut-Off Skelly Lane northerly to Petersham-
Hubbardston Road
53. Spooner Road Spring Hill Road to Hardwick Town line
54. Spring Hill Road Old Dana Road southerly to Hardwick Town line
55. Stetson Road Loring Road to South Street
56. Sunrise Avenue Hubbardston Road to Williams or formerly
Farrington Road
57. Town Farm Road South Barre Road to Rte. 122
58. Walnut Hill Road Old Worcester Road to Hubbardston Road
§ A603-2 BARRE CODE § A603-2
5:350
59. Washburn Road Pleasant Street to Rte. 122
60. White Cemetery
Road
(Formerly known as Cole Road) from now Cole
and Davis Roads across to Jewett Road
61. Woods Road Oakham Rd to Oakham Town line
§ A603-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-2
5:351

ARTICLE III
Precinct Roads
§ A603-3. Road lists.
PRECINCT 1 ROADS
1. Allen Drive
2. Allen Hill
3. Almond Thrasher
4. Baldwin Road
5. Barre Mobile Park
6. Bentley Road
7. Blair Road
8. Broad Street
9. Butterworth
10. Cat Alley
11. Circle Road
12. Common Street
13. Dana Road
14. Deer Run Circle
15. Eagle Drive
16. Elm Street North
17. Everett Road
18. Exchange Street
19. Farrington Road
20. Fellows Road
21. Flaherty Road
22. Fisher Road
23. Gilbert Road
24. Glancy Road
25. Grandview Terrace
26. Grove Street North
27. Hancock Road
28. Hardwick Road (even numbers only)
29. Harty Road
30. Hawes Hill
31. High Street North
32. Hubbardston Road (odd numbers only)
§ A603-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-3
5:353
PRECINCT 1 ROADS
33. Jackson Lane
34. James Street
35. Kendall Street
36. Lockwood Road
37. Marsh Road
38. Mechanic Street
39. Mill Road
40. Moulton Street
41. Murphy Road
42. Newton Street
43. Nourse Lane
44. Old Dana
45. Old Hardwick
46. Old Petersham
47. Old Stage
48. Park Street
49. Phillipston Road
50. Pleasant Street
51. Rockingstone
52. Ruggles Lane
53. School Street North
54. Sheldon Road
55. Sibley Road
56. Skelly Road
57. South Street (all houses numbers 581 and lower)
58. Silver Brook Road
59. Spooner Road
60. Springhill Road
61. Stetson Road
62. Summer Street
63. Sunrise Avenue
64. Union Street
65. Valley Road (odd numbers)
66. Washburn Road
67. Wauwinet Road (even numbers)
68. West Street
§ A603-3 BARRE CODE § A603-3
5:354
PRECINCT 1 ROADS
69. Williamsville Road
70. Wilton Street
71. Winship Road
72. Winter Street
PRECINCT 2 ROADS
1. Adams Street
2. Austin Street
3. Beech Street
4. Bradford Apartments
5. Britton Road East
6. Britton Road West
7. Cathy Lane
8. Cedar Street
9. Chapman Road
10. Chamberlain Hill
11. Church Street
12. Clem Court
13. Company Farm Road
14. Cummings Road
15. Cutler Road
16. Cutler Road
17. Cutoff Road
18. Daunt Road
19. Debra Lane
20. Elm Street South
21. Fir Street
22. Fritscher Road
23. Fruitland Road
24. Fuller Road
25. Glazier Road
26. Granger Road
27. Grogan Road
28. Grove Street South
29. Hardwick Road (odd numbers)
30. High Street South
§ A603-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § A603-3
5:355
PRECINCT 2 ROADS
31. Hinckley Road
32. Hubbardston (even numbers)
33. Hurst Road
34. Jewett Road
35. Lane Road
36. Loring Road
37. Main Street
38. Maple Lane
39. Nelson Street
40. Nichols Road
41. North Brookfield Road
42. Oak Street
43. Oakham Road
44. Old Coach Road
45. Old Coldbrook
46. Peach Street
47. Pine Tree Terrace
48. Quinn Road
49. Root Road
50. School Street South
51. South Street (all house numbers 611 and higher)
52. South Barre Road
53. Station Road
54. Terry Lane
55. Town Farm Road
56. Trafalgar Square
57. Valley Road (even numbers)
58. Vernon Avenue
59. Walnut Hill Road
60. Wauwinet Road (odd numbers)
61. Wheelwright Road
62. Wildwood
63. Woods Road
64. Worcester Road
§ A603-3 BARRE CODE § A603-3
5:356
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 31 6-17-2002 Noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment; Inspector of
Gas Piping and Appliances
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 67; 73, Art. II;
140
ATM, Art. 34 6-17-2002 Street acceptance Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 35 6-17-2002 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
STM, Art. 4 7-29-2002 Wellhead Protection Map Ch. 140
Board of
Health
8-12-2002 Smoking amendment Ch. 306
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-6-2002 Rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 404
ATM, Art. 32 6-9-2003 Meetings of boards,
committees and
commissions
Ch. 18, Art. III
ATM, Art. 33 6-9-2003 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 36 6-9-2003 Animals amendment Ch. 11
ATM, Art. 37 6-9-2003 Noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment
Ch. 67
ATM, Art. 38 6-9-2003 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art.
14
10-27-2003Zoning Map amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art.
15
10-27-2003Street vacation Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 12 6-14-2004 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 27 6-14-2004 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 34 6-14-2004 Smoking Ch. 306
§ A603-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § DL-1
5:357
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 35 6-14-2004 Noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment
Ch. 67
ATM, Art. 41 6-14-2004 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 43 6-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 44 6-14-2004 Noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment
Ch. 67
ATM, Art. 45 6-14-2004 Inspector of Gas Piping
and Appliances
amendment
Ch. 73, Art. II
STM, Art. 5 7-26-2004 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art. 4 2-28-2005 Zoning amendment;
Zoning Map amendment
Ch. 140
ATM. Art. 24 6-13-2005 Street acceptance Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 28 6-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 29 6-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 30 6-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art. 4 11-21-2005Zoning amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art. 6 11-21-2005Unregistered motor
vehicles
Ch. 15
Board of
Water
Commissioners
4-5-2006 Water Department rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 404
ATM, Art. 14 6-12-2006 Surface water control Ch. 112
ATM, Art. 28 6-12-2006 Agricultural Commission Ch. 18, Art. IV
ATM, Art. 32 6-12-2006 Animals amendment Ch. 11
Board of
Health
3-12-2007 Tobacco product
distribution amendment
Ch. 307
ATM, Art. 17 6-11-2007 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 18 6-11-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 19 6-11-2007 Finance Committee
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. I
ATM, Art. 20 6-11-2007 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 21 6-11-2007 Obsolete equipment and
property amendment
Ch. 90, Art. II
ATM, Art. 27 6-11-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
§ DL-1 BARRE CODE § DL-1
5:358
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM, Art. 4 11-5-2007 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
Board of
Water
Commissioners
3-5-2008 Water Department rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 404
ATE,
Question 2
4-7-2008 Tree Warden Ch. 122, Art. I
ATM, Art. 21 6-9-2008 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 23 6-9-2008 Animals amendment Ch. 11
ATM, Art. 24 6-9-2008 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 25 6-9-2008 Town Meeting warrants Ch. 119, Art. VI
Board of
Health
9-15-2008 Outdoor wood-burning
boilers
Ch. 310
STM, Art. 7 10-22-2008Right to farm Ch. 44, Art. I
Council on
Aging
1-14-2009 Bylaws of the Council on
Aging amendment
Ch. 405
Conservation
Commission
5-12-2009 Employment of outside
consultants
Ch. 406
ATM, Art. 18 6-22-2009 Alarm systems Ch. 5
ATM, Art. 19 6-22-2009 Public use of marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 63
ATM, Art. 20 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 22 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
STM, Art.
10
11-23-2009Town Meetings: rules of
procedure amendment
Ch. 119, Art. V
Planning
Board
2-2-2010 Wind-energy facilities:
regulations for
construction and
operation; special permits
Ch. 203, Art. I
ATM, Art. 15 6-21-2010 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
STM, Art.
11
1-31-2011 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601 (footnote
only)
STM, Art.
12
1-31-2011 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A601
STM, Art.
14
1-31-2011 Tax Collector fees repealer Ch. 46, Art. I
(footnote only)
§ DL-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § DL-1
5:359
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM, Art.
15
1-31-2011 Acceptances of General
Laws and Acts
Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 13 6-20-2011 Boards, committees and
commissions: postings,
record of meetings
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. III
ATM, Art. 16 6-20-2011 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 21
STM, Art. 5 2-6-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 180 (table only)
STM, Art. 7 2-6-2012 Boards, committees and
commissions: Civilian Law
Enforcement Review and
Advisory Board
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
STM, Art. 8 2-6-2012 Acceptances of General
Laws and Acts
Ch. A601
STM, Art.
12
2-6-2012 Street acceptances and
discontinuances
Ch. A602
STM, Art.
13
2-6-2012 Boards, committees and
commissions: Finance
Committee amendment
Ch. 18, Art. I
ATM, Art. 16 6-25-2012 Sex offenders: residency
restrictions
Ch. 98, Art. I
ATM, Art. 17 6-25-2012 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 59
Board of
Water
Commissioners
8-1-2012 Water Department rules
and regulations
amendment
Ch. 404
STM, Art.
18
11-26-2012Zoning amendment Ch. 140
Planning
Board
1-15-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 202
Planning
Board
1-15-2013 Solar energy facilities Ch. 204
Planning
Board
1-15-2013 Fee schedule Ch. 205
ATM, Art. 20 6-18-2013 General Law acceptance Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 23 6-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic: winter
parking ban amendment
Ch. 128, Art. II
§ DL-1 BARRE CODE § DL-1
5:360
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 24 6-18-2013 Town meetings: elections
and appropriations
meeting
Ch. 119, Art. II
ATM, Art. 25 6-18-2013 Animals amendment Ch. 11
STM, Art.
11
5-13-2014 Personnel repealer Ch. 84, reference
only
STM, Art.
12
5-13-2014 Street acceptances Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 18 6-17-2014 Animals amendment;
noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment
Ch. 11; Ch. 67
ATM, Art. 19 6-17-2014 Noncriminal disposition of
bylaw violations
amendment; littering
Ch. 67; Ch. 81
ATM, Art. 20 6-17-2014 General Law acceptance Ch. A601
STM, Art. 4 11-18-2014General Law acceptance Ch. A601
ATM, Art. 39 6-21-2016 Street acceptances and
discontinuances
Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 40 6-21-2016 Street acceptances and
discontinuances
Ch. A602
ATM, Art. 41 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 44 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 45 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 46 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 47 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 48 6-21-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 5 6-20-2017 Finance: revolving funds Pending approval by
Attorney General
ATM, Art. 19 6-20-2017 Soil disturbance: digging
and exploration on Town
properties
Ch. 104, Art. I
ATM, Art. 20 6-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 24 6-20-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 140, table only
§ DL-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § DL-1
5:361

ZONING
140 Attachment 1
Town of Barre
Table of Dimensional Requirements
[Amended 6-9-1997 STM, Art. 49; 6-14-2004 ATM, Art. 43; 2-28-2005 STM, Art. 4]
Minimum Minimum Maximum Height
Lot Dimensions Yard Dimensions of Building2 Maximum
District
Area
(square feet)
Frontage
(feet)
Front and Rear
(feet)4
Side (feet)4
Stories Feet
Coverage Including
Accessory Buildings
R-80 Rural Residence 80,000 200 353
253
2 1/2 35 15%
R-20 Open Residence 20,000 120 303
203
2 1/2 35 20%
R-15 General Residence 15,000 110 253
153
2 1/2 35 25%
B-L Limited Business1
30,000 130 50 305
2 1/2 35 30%
B-C Business and Commercial1 No minimum 100 40 205
3 40 35%
IND Industrial1
40,000 130 50 305
3 50 30%
NOTES:

1 All dimensional requirements which are prescribed for Residence R-80 Districts shall apply to dwellings hereafter erected in any type of Business or Industrial District.

2 Height limitations shall not apply to chimneys, towers, ventilators, tanks, silos or ornamental features of buildings, provided such structures are not used for living purposes.

3 Detached accessory buildings and garages, when located in rear yards, shall be placed at least five feet from the rear and side lot lines except as provided in Note 4.

4 When a side yard or rear yard borders on a street, the minimum distance between the right-of-way and any type of building or structure shall equal the distance required in the front yard.

5 Side yard dimensions shall be at least 40 feet when adjacent to a Residence District. In B-L and B-C Districts several retail businesses or consumer services which are complementary to
each other may be placed in the same building with common walls, provided that all yards around that building meet the requirements stated herein and that
appropriate parking spaces are available.
14031
140 Attachment 1:1
08 -15 - 2008