CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 27, 2012 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Leo Robinson/Council President - Councillor at Large 
Daniel Cortell - Council Vice President - Districts 
Calvin T. Brown - Councillor at Large 
Brian Hatleberg - Councillor at Large 
Paul R. Murphy - District 1 
Christopher Cataldo - District 2 
Matthew Frank - District 3 
Paula S. Barton - District 4 
Joseph Perlatonda - District_5 
Giovanni A. Recupero - District 6 
Clifford Cunningham - District 7 
City Council 
____________ 
Jay Ash 
City Manager 
____________ 
Cheryl Anne Watson 
City Solicitor 
____________ 
Deborah Clayman 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS of the CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS 
____________ 
Leo Robinson - Council President - Councillor-at-Large 
Damali Vidot - Council Vice President - Councillor-at-Large 
Roy Avellaneda - Councillor-at-Large 
Paul R. Murphy - District 1 
Luis Tejada - District 2 
Matthew Frank - District 3 
Enio A. Lopez - District 4 
Judith Garcia - District 5 
Giovanni A. Recupero - District 6 
Yamir Rodriguez - District 7 
Daniel Cortell - District 8 
City Council 
____________ 
Thomas G. Ambrosino 
City Manager 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Chelsea, Massachusetts. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through May 10, 2004, and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Cheryl Watson, City Solicitor, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chelsea, Massachusetts. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chelsea, Massachusetts. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Chelsea, Massachusetts. 2012. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Chelsea, Massachusetts," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 34, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 17, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 5. Ordinances adopted after October 17, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 6. This ordinance shall become effective after passage. 
/s/ _________________________    Councillor Leo Robinson  
/s/ _________________________ /s/ _________________________    Councillor Calvin T. Brown    Councillor Paul Murphy /s/ _________________________ /s/ _________________________    Councillor Matt Frank    Councillor Joseph Perlatonda /s/ _________________________ /s/ _________________________    Councillor Clifford Cunningham    Councillor Brian Hatleberg /s/ _________________________ /s/ _________________________    Councillor Christopher Cataldo    Councillor Paula Barton /s/ _________________________ /s/ _________________________    Councillor Giovanni A. Recupero    Councillor Dan Cortell  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 11-22-2010 Included 1 12- 5-2011 Included 1  2-27-2012 Included 1  3-12-2012 Included 1  3-26-2012 Omitted 1  6-18-2012 Included 2  6-25-2012 Included 2  9-24-2012 Omitted 3  3- 4-2013 Included 3  3-18-2013 Included 3  5- 6-2013 Included 3  6- 3-2013(1) Included 3  6- 3-2013(2) Included 3  2-24-2014 Included 4  3-24-2014 Included 4  4- 6-2015(1) Included 5  4- 6-2015(2) Included 5  5- 4-2015(1) Included 6  5- 4-2015(2) Included 6  6-12-2015 Included 7  9-14-2015 Included 7 11-23-2015 Included 8   1-14-2016(Adm. Ord.) Included 8   4-12-2016(Regs.) Included 8   4-25-2016 Included 8  9-13-2016(Regs.) Included 9 10-03-2016(1) Included 9 11- 7-2016(1) Included 9 11-10-2016 
(Charter Ord.) Included 9 11-21-2016(1) Included 9 11-21-2016(2) Omitted 9 11-21-2016(3) Omitted 9 11-21-2016(4) Included 9 11-21-2016(5) Included 9 11-21-2016(6) Included 9 11-21-2016(7) Included 9 11-21-2016(8) Included 9 11-21-2016(9) Included 9 11-21-2016(10) Included 9 11-21-2016(11) Omitted 9 11-21-2016(12) Included 9 12-19-2016(1) Included 9 12-19-2016(2) Included 9  5-10-2004 Included 10 12- 5-2016 
(Adm. Ord.) Included 10  3-13-2017(1) Included 11  3-13-2017(2) Included 11  6-14-2017 
(Adm. Ord.) Included 11  6-19-2017(1) Included 11  6-19-2017(2) Included 11  6-19-2017(3) Included 11  6-19-2017(4) Included 11  3- 7-2016 Included 12  3-13-2017 Included 12  9-11-2017 Included 12 11-20-2017 Included 13 12-18-2017 Included 13 10-24-2017(Regs.) Included 13  2- 8-2018 Included 13  3-26-2018(1) Included 14  3-26-2018(2) Included 14  4-23-2018 Included 14  5-10-2018 Included 15  5-21-2018 Included 15  6- 4-2018(1) Included 15  6- 4-2018(2) Included 15  6- 4-2018(3) Included 15  6- 4-2018(4) Included 15  6- 5-2018 Included 15  6-25-2018 Included 15 12- 3-2018 Included 16 12-17-2018 Included 16  1- 7-2019 Included 16  3-11-2019(1) Included 16  3-11-2019(2) Included 16  3-11-2019(3) Omitted 16  3-25-2019(1) Omitted 16  3-25-2019(2) Omitted 16  4- 8-2019 Included 16  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    The people of the City of Chelsea, desiring to manage their own affairs and conduct their local government so that it is accountable, stable, fiscally responsible and efficient, honest, fair, representative, and according to a code of ethics, and wishing to participate fully in exercising the rights and responsibilities of local government, do adhere to this Charter. 
    We assert our willingness to assume all responsibility for the conduct of matters pertaining to the city, and do by this document earnestly affirm our right as inhabitants of Chelsea, to live and grow in freedom, dignity, tranquility and prosperity. Under God with religious freedom, we secure these qualities to ourselves, realizing them in the community of Chelsea and its government, which provides for a system of law, education, public safety, and public health. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this part is the Charter of the City of Chelsea, Massachusetts, being chapter 103 of the Massachusetts Acts of 1994. The absence of a history note to an amendment indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. At the request of the city, gender specific pronouns have been removed and replaced with gender neutral language. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CHELSEA, MASSACHUSETTS 
Chapter 103 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
    In the year 1994. 
    An act establishing a council manager form of government for the City of Chelsea. 
    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative in General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows: 
Section 1. [Charter established.] 
    The following shall be the Charter for the City of Chelsea. 
PART I. - INCORPORATION, SHORT TITLE, POWERS 

Sec. 1-1. - Incorporation continued. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Chelsea, within its territorial limits as now or may hereafter be established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate, under the name of the City of Chelsea and as such shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers and privileges, and shall be subject to all the duties and obligations, now incumbent upon and pertaining to the said city, as a municipal corporation. 
Sec. 1-2. - Short title. 
    This act shall be cited and known as the City of Chelsea Charter. 
Sec. 1-3. - Division of powers. 
    All legislative powers of the city shall be exercised by a city council. The administration of all fiscal, business and municipal affairs shall be vested in the executive branch under the supervision of the city manager. 
Sec. 1-4. - Powers of the city. 
    The intent and purpose of this Charter is to secure for the voters of the City of Chelsea, through the adoption of this Charter, all the powers possible to secure for their government under article LXXXIX of the amendments to the Constitution of the commonwealth and laws of the commonwealth, as fully and as though each such power were specifically and individually enumerated herein. 
Sec. 1-5. - Interpretation of powers. 
    The powers of the city under this Charter shall be construed and interpreted liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of any particular power is not intended to limit in any way the general powers of the city as stated in section 1-4. 
Sec. 1-6. - Intergovernmental cooperation. 
    The city may enter agreements with any other unit of government to perform jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, any of its powers or functions, as authorized by the laws of the commonwealth. 
PART II. - LEGISLATIVE 

Sec. 2-1. - Composition; eligibility; election and term. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a city council composed of 11 members which shall exercise the legislative powers of the city. Three members, to be known as councillors-at-large, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters at large. Eight members, to be known as district councillors, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters of each district, one such district councillor to be elected from each of the eight council districts into which the city is divided in accordance with section 7-4. 
(b)  Eligibility. Except as otherwise provided in this act, any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of councillor-at-large; a district councillor shall be a voter and resident of the district from which the councillor is elected. 
    A councillor-at-large who shall remove from the city during the term for which such councillor-at-large was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of councillor-at-large and the office shall be considered vacant. A district councillor who shall remove from one district to another during the term of office for which such district councillor was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of district councillor and the office shall be considered vacant. Any vacancy in the office of councillor-at-large or district councillor shall be filled in accordance with section 2-4. 
(c)  Election and term. The term of office of city council members shall be for two years beginning on the first city business day of January in the year following election, and continuing until their successors are qualified. 
Sec. 2-2. - City council organization. 
    After the councillors-elect have taken the oath of office, the city council shall be called together by the city clerk for the purpose of conduct in an election among city council members for the office of city council president and vice-president to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The president shall preside at all meetings of the city council, perform ceremonial functions and perform such other functions as may be assigned by this Charter, by ordinance or by vote of the city council. The vice-president shall perform all duties of the president during the president's absence or disability. The city council shall elect from among its members one councillor to sit as a nonvoting member of the school committee; this member shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
Sec. 2-3. - General powers and duties. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the city council that shall provide for their exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
Sec. 2-4. - Filling of vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of a city councilor, whether by failure to elect or otherwise, the remaining councilors shall, not more than 30 days after the date on which that vacancy is declared to exist, act to fill the vacancy. The city council shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term by choosing the defeated candidate for that seat from the last regular city election; provided, however, that the defeated candidate shall have received not less than 30 per cent of the total ballots cast for the seat being vacated. For the purpose of this section, the 30 per cent minimum threshold shall be calculated as a ratio of ballots cast for the office being vacated to votes obtained by the defeated candidate. If there was no other candidate for the office or if the defeated candidate did not receive at least 30 per cent of the total ballots cast, the city council shall at its discretion choose an individual, who may be the defeated candidate, from among the voters entitled to vote for that office to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. A person so chosen shall take the oath of office and commence to serve forthwith. No vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this section if a regular city election is to be held not more than 180 days after the date the vacancy is declared to exist. In an election held to elect a candidate to a seat that is vacant at the time of the election, the candidate deemed the winner of that election shall be sworn in to serve the remainder of the term previously vacated at the first regularly scheduled city council meeting after the date the election results are officially certified. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 1; Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 1) 
Sec. 2-5. - Exercise of powers; quorum; rules of procedure. 
(a)  Exercise of powers. Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth or this Charter, the legislative powers of the city council may be exercised in a manner determined by it. 
(b)  Quorum. A quorum shall be a majority of the full city council. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full city council shall be necessary to adopt any appropriation order. An affirmative vote of two-thirds of the full city council shall be necessary to adopt any loan authorization. Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth or this Charter, any other motion or measure may be adopted by a majority vote of those present. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The city council shall from time to time adopt rules for its proceedings. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at a time and place fixed by ordinance, but shall be not less frequent than once monthly; provided, however, that the city council president may suspend meetings during the months of July and August. Special meetings of the city council may be held on the call of the president of the city council, or on the call of any five or more members; by written notice delivered to the city clerk at least 48 hours in advance of the time set. Except as otherwise authorized by the laws of the commonwealth, all sessions of the city council shall be open to the public and the agenda of any regular or special city council meeting shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk and posted on the city bulletin board at least 48 hours prior to any such meeting. Such posting shall not preclude the city council from the introduction of additional agenda items as allowed by the city council's rules of procedure. Every matter coming before the city council for action shall be put to a vote, the result of which shall be duly recorded. All city council votes on ordinances, appropriation orders, or loan authorizations shall be taken by roll call vote, and shall be duly recorded. A full, accurate, and up-to-date record of the proceedings of the city council shall be kept by the clerk of the city council and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(d)  Public comment. Regular meetings of the city council shall provide for a period of public comment; provided, however, the city council may regulate such period of public comment and method of city council response as deemed appropriate. 
Sec. 2-6. - City council staff. 
    The city council shall appoint a clerk to the city council and may employ such staff and retain such assistance as is necessary to conduct the business of the city council. The city council shall establish the compensation of such staff. 
Sec. 2-7. - Measures; emergency measures; objection; publication of measures. 
(a)  In general. No ordinance, appropriation or loan authorization shall be passed finally on the date on which it is introduced, except in cases of emergency measures involving the health or safety of the people or their property. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, every adopted measure shall become effective at the expiration of 14 days after adoption or at any later date specified therein. Measures not subject to referendum shall become effective upon adoption. No ordinance shall be amended or repealed, except by another ordinance adopted in accordance with this Charter, or as provided in the initiative and referendum procedures. 
(b)  Emergency measures. An emergency measure shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for measures generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency measure and shall contain statements after the enacting clause declaring that an emergency exists and describing its scope and nature in clear and specific terms. A preamble that declares and defines the emergency shall be separately voted on and shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the city council. An emergency measure may be passed with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. No measure making a grant, renewal or extension, whatever its kind or nature, or a franchise or special privilege shall be passed as an emergency measure, and except as provided by the laws of the commonwealth, no such grant, renewal or extension shall be made otherwise than by ordinance. After its adoption, an emergency measure shall be published as prescribed for other adopted measures. An emergency measure shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. 
(c)  Objection. On the first occasion that the question on adoption of a measure is put to the city council, if a single member objects to the taking of the vote, the vote shall be postponed until the next meeting of the city council whether regular or special. If three members shall object, such postponement shall be until the next regular meeting; but for an emergency measure at least four members must object. This procedure shall not be used more than once for any measure notwithstanding any amendment to the original measure. 
(d)  Publication of measures. Upon final passage, notice of every ordinance, appropriation order, or loan authorization shall be published by the city clerk in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city within 14 days, and posted on the city bulletin board. Any such publication notice required shall state the summary of the finally enacted ordinance or ordinances, appropriation order, or loan authorization, and the times and places at which copies of such measures may be obtained or reviewed by the public. 
(Acts 1996, c. 165, § 1) 
Sec. 2-8. - Inquires and investigations. 
    The city council shall have the authority to require any officer, employee or member of a multiple-member body to appear and give such information as required in relation to the function and performance of the office or position held by such person. The city council shall give at least 48 hours written notice of the general scope of the inquiry which is to be made to any person it shall require to appear before it under this section. 
    The city council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and into the conduct of any city agency, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. 
Sec. 2-9. - Prohibitions. 
    No councillor shall, while a member of the city council, hold any other office, including membership on a multiple-member body, or other position under the city. No former councillor shall hold any compensated appointive office or employment under the city until one year after the expiration of the councillor's service on the city council. This provision shall not prevent a city officer or employee who has been granted a leave of absence from such duties in order to serve as a member of the city council from returning to such office or employment following service as a member of the city council. 
    Any person who has been finally convicted of a state or federal felony shall not be eligible to petition for or serve in any elective or appointive office or position under the city. Any councillor who has been finally convicted of a state or federal felony shall be deemed to have vacated said office and shall be disqualified from serving in any other elective or appointive office or position under the city. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 2) 
Sec. 2-10. - Compensation. 
    The city council shall by ordinance, establish an annual salary for its members. Except as provided by this section, members of the city council shall receive no other compensation or benefits from the city. Members of the city council shall be eligible for membership in the retirement system. 
    No ordinance increasing such salary shall be effective, however, unless it shall have been adopted by a two-thirds vote of the full city council during the first 18 months of the term for which councillors are elected, and the revised salary schedule is to be effective upon the commencement of the terms of office of the next city council to be elected. 
Sec. 2-11. - Relationship of the city manager and the city council. 
    The city manager shall be the primary officer responsible for the implementation of city council policy, as reflected by the city council's votes and resolutions, enactment of ordinances, appropriation orders and loan authorizations. 
    Except as may be otherwise authorized by this Charter, no member of the city council, nor any committee of the city council, shall directly involve themselves in the conduct of the administrative business of the city. 
PART III. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 

Sec. 3-1. - Composition; eligibility: election and term; powers and duties. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a school committee composed of nine members. One member, to be known as the at-large school committee member, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters at large. Eight members, to be known as district school committee members, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters of each district, one such member to be elected from each of the eight districts into which the city is divided in accordance with section 7-4. 
(b)  Eligibility. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of at-large school committee member, and a district school committee member shall be a voter and resident of the district from which the school committee member is elected. An at-large school committee member who shall remove from the city during the term for which such school committee member was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of at-large school committee member and the office shall be considered vacant. A district school committee member who shall remove from the district during the term of office for which such district school committee member was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of district school committee member and the office shall be considered vacant. Any vacancy in the office of at-large school committee member or district school committee member shall be filled in accordance with section 3-2. 
(c)  Election and term. The term of office of school committee members shall be for two years beginning on the first city business day of January in the year following election, and continuing until their successors are qualified. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The school committee shall have all the powers and duties given to school committees by the laws of the commonwealth. The school committee shall have general charge of the public schools of the city. The school committee shall have the power to select and to terminate a superintendent of schools, establish educational goals and policies for the schools consistent with the requirements of the laws of the commonwealth and standards established by the commonwealth. 
(Acts 2004, c. 86, § 1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Filling vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the school committee whether by failure to elect or otherwise, the president of the city council shall, not more than 30 days after the date on which that vacancy is declared to exist, call a joint meeting of the city council and the school committee to act to fill the vacancy. At the joint meeting, a majority of those present and voting shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term by choosing the defeated candidate for the seat at the last regular city election; provided, however, that the defeated candidate shall have received not less than 20 per cent of the ballots cast for the seat being vacated. For the purpose of this section, the 20 per cent minimum threshold shall be calculated as a ratio of ballots cast for the office being vacated to votes obtained by the defeated candidate. If there was no other candidate for the office or the defeated candidate did not receive at least 20 per cent of the total ballots cast, the city council and the school committee shall at their discretion choose an individual, who may be the defeated candidate, from among the voters entitled to vote for that office for the remainder of the unexpired term. A person so chosen shall take the oath of office and commence to serve forthwith. No vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this section if a regular city election is to be held not more than 180 days after the date the vacancy is declared to exist. In an election being held to elect a candidate to a seat that is vacant at the time of the election, the candidate deemed the winner of the election to that seat shall be sworn in to serve the remainder of the term previously vacated at the first regularly scheduled school committee meeting after the date the election results are officially certified. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 3; Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Prohibitions. 
    No school committee member shall, while a member of the school committee, hold any other office, including membership on a multiple-member body, or position under the city. No former school committee member shall hold any compensated appointive office or employment under the city until one year after the expiration of service on the school committee. This provision shall not prevent an officer or employee who has taken a leave of absence from such duties in order to serve as a member of the school committee from returning to such office or employment following service as a member of the school committee. 
    Any person who has been finally convicted of a state or federal felony shall not be eligible to petition for or serve in any elective or appointive office or position under the city. Any school committee member who has been finally convicted of a state or federal felony shall be deemed to have vacated said office and shall be disqualified from serving in any other elective or appointive office or position under the city. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 4) 
Sec. 3-4. - Compensation. 
    The school committee shall by vote establish an annual salary for its members. Except as provided by this section, members of the school committee shall receive no other compensation or benefits from the city. School committee members shall be eligible for membership in the retirement system. 
    No vote increasing such salary shall be effective however, unless it shall have been adopted by a two-thirds vote of the full school committee during the first 18 months of the term for which school committee members are elected, and the revised salary schedule is to be effective upon the commencement of the terms of office of the next school committee to be elected. 
PART IV. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 4-1. - Appointment; qualifications. 
    The city council shall appoint and may remove by an affirmative vote of seven members the city manager. The city manager shall be a person of proven administrative ability, especially qualified by education and training with at least five years prior experience as a city or town manager, or an assistant city or town manager or the equivalent public or private sector level experience, and shall hold a bachelors degree or similar or higher level degree from a recognized, accredited college or university. The city council may from time to time establish such additional qualifications as deemed necessary and appropriate. 
    The city council shall enter into an employment agreement with the city manager. Said employment agreement and any renewals of said employment agreement shall be for a period of at least two years. 
    The city manager shall devote full time to the duties of the office and shall not hold any other elective or appointive office, nor shall the city manager engage in any other business unless such action is approved in advance in writing by the city council. 
    The city manager need not be a resident of the city or of the commonwealth at the time of appointment, but shall establish residence within the city within 12 months following appointment, unless the city council shall waive such requirement. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 5) 
Sec. 4-2. - Powers of appointment. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city manager shall appoint, based upon merit and fitness alone, all officers and employees for whom no other method of selection is provided in this Charter, except for employees of the school department. 
    The city manager shall appoint all members of multiple-member bodies provided, however, that appointments made by the city manager shall become effective on the thirtieth day after the day on which notice of the proposed appointment is filed with the city council, unless the city council votes, within that period, by majority of the full city council to reject the appointment or unless the city council has sooner voted to affirm it. If the notice of appointment is filed after the city council has recessed for longer than 30 days, the appointment, if not acted upon, shall become effective the day after the next scheduled city council meeting; provided however, that the city manager may make a temporary appointment if the city manager determines that the position shall be filled to assure continuity of services or effective and prompt response to the city's emergency needs. 
( Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 3) 
Sec. 4-3. - Administrative powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper operation of city affairs for which the city manager is given responsibility under this Charter. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the city manager shall include, but are not intended to be limited to, the following: 
(a)  To supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all officers and employees appointed by the city manager and their respective departments and of all functions for which the city manager is given responsibility, authority or control by this Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the city council; 
(b)  To administer either directly or through a person or persons supervised by the city manager, in accordance with this Charter, all provisions of general or special laws applicable to the city, all ordinances, and all regulations established by the city council; 
(c)  To coordinate all activities of city departments or agencies; 
(d)  To attend all regular and special meetings of the city council, unless excused, and to answer all questions addressed to the city manager which are related to matters under the general supervision of the city manager; 
(e)  To keep the city council fully informed as to the needs of the city, and to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures requiring action by them as the city manager deems necessary or expedient; 
(f)  To ensure that complete and full records of the financial and administrative activity of the city are maintained and to render reports to the city council as may be required; 
(g)  To be responsible for the rental, use, maintenance and repair of all city facilities, except those under the jurisdiction of the school committee. Rental agreements of more than five years in duration shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
(h)  To act as the chief procurement officer and be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, materials, and equipment. The city manager may delegate this function to some other officer or employee as deemed necessary; 
(i)  To prepare and maintain a full and complete inventory of all city owned real and personal property; 
(j)  To administer personnel policies, practices, or rules and regulations, any compensation plan and any related matters for all city officers and employees and to administer all collective bargaining agreements, except for school department agreements, entered into by the city; 
(k)  To fix the compensation of all city officers and employees appointed by the city manager within the limits established by appropriation and any applicable compensation plan or collective bargaining agreement; 
(l)  To be responsible for the negotiation of all collective bargaining agreements with city employees over wages, and other terms and conditions of employment. The city manager may employ special counsel to assist in the performance of these duties. Cost items of collective bargaining agreements shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
(m)  To prepare and submit an annual operating budget, capital improvement program and a long term financial forecast; 
(n)  To keep the city council fully informed as to the financial condition of the city and to make recommendations to the city council as the city manager determines necessary or expedient; 
(o)  To inquire into the affairs of any city department, agency or office; 
(p)  To delegate, authorize or direct any subordinate officer or employee of the city to exercise any power, duty or responsibility which the office of city manager is authorized to exercise, provided that all acts that are performed under such delegation shall be considered to be the acts of the city manager; 
(q)  To perform such other duties as necessary or as may be assigned by this Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the city council. 
Sec. 4-4. - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation for services as the city council shall determine, but such compensation shall be within the limits of available appropriations. 
Sec. 4-5. - Vacancy in office. 
    Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filled as soon as possible by the city council. Pending appointment of the city manager or the filling of any vacancy, the city council shall forthwith appoint some other person to perform the duties of the city manager. The appointment of the acting city manager shall be for a term not to exceed three months; provided, however, that a renewal, not to exceed an additional three months may be provided. 
Sec. 4-6. - Temporary absence. 
    The city manager shall designate by letter filed with the city council and city clerk a qualified officer or employee of the city to perform the duties of the city manager during a temporary absence or disability, such officer or employee to be approved by vote of the city council. In the event of failure of the city manager to make such designation or if the officer or employee so designated is for any reason unable to serve, the city council may designate some other qualified officer or employee to perform the duties of the city manager until the city manager shall return. 
Sec. 4-7. - Powers of the acting or temporary city manager. 
    The powers of the acting city manager under section 4-5 and the temporary city manager under section 4-6 shall be limited to matters not admitting of delay; provided, however, that no temporary city manager under section 4-6 shall have the power to make any permanent appointment to, or removal from, any office or position under the city. 
Sec. 4-8. - Annual review of the city manager. 
    Annually the city council shall prepare and deliver to the city manager a written evaluation of the city manager's performance. The President of the Chelsea City Council shall annually appoint a committee to perform the city manager's evaluation. 
    The city council shall publish in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice stating the date and time of the city council meeting when the city manager's annual review shall be scheduled. Such notice shall appear at least 14 days before said meeting. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 6) 
PART V. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 5-1. - Annual budget policy. 
    The president of the city council shall call a joint meeting of the city council and school committee prior to the commencement of the budget process to review the financial condition of the city, revenue and expenditure forecasts, and other relevant information prepared by the city manager in order to develop a coordinated budget. The superintendent of schools and the city manager shall be present at any such meeting. 
Sec. 5-2. - Submission of operating budget; budget message. 
    At least 60 days before the commencement of the ensuing fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for all city agencies, which shall include the school department, for the ensuing fiscal year with an accompanying budget message and supporting documents. The budget message submitted by the city manager shall explain the operating budget in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs for all city agencies. It shall outline the proposed fiscal policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe important features of the proposed operating budget and indicate any major variations from the current operating budget, fiscal policies, revenues and expenditures together with reasons for such change. The proposed operating budget shall provide a complete fiscal plan of all city funds and activities and shall be what the city manager deems desirable. 
    The school budget as adopted by the school committee shall be submitted to the city manager at least 30 days prior to the submission of the proposed operating budget to the city council. The city manager shall notify the school committee of the date by which the budget of the school committee shall be submitted to the city manager. The city manager and the superintendent of schools shall coordinate the dates and times of the school committee's budget process in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth. 
Sec. 5-3. - Action on the operating budget. 
(a)  Public hearing. The city council shall publish in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city a summary of the proposed operating budget as submitted by the city manager by a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the entire proposed operating budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
(2)  The date, time and place not less than 14 days after such publication when a public hearing on said proposed operating budget will be held by the city council. For the purpose of this section the summary of the proposed operating budget that is required to be published shall contain proposed appropriations, funding sources and any narrative summary deemed necessary by the city council. 
(b)  Adoption of the budget. The city council shall adopt the operating budget, with or without amendments, within 45 days following the date the budget is filed with the clerk of the city council. In amending the operating budget, the city council may delete or decrease any amounts except expenditures required by law, but except on the recommendation of the city manager, the city council shall not increase any item in, or the total of, the proposed operating budget, unless otherwise authorized by the laws of the commonwealth. 
    If the city council fails to take action with respect to any item in the operating budget within 45 days after receipt of the budget, such amount shall, without any action by the city council, become a part of the appropriations for the year, and be available for the purposes specified. 
Sec. 5-4. - Capital improvements program. 
(a)  Preparation. The city manager shall annually submit a capital improvements program to the city council at least 90 days prior to the date for submission of the operating budget, unless some other time is provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Contents. The capital improvements program shall include: 
(1)  A clear summary of its contents; 
(2)  An itemization of all capital improvements, including those of the school department, proposed to be undertaken during the next five or more fiscal years with supporting data; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities included. 
(c)  Public hearing. The city council shall publish in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city a summary of the capital improvements program and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where entire copies of the capital improvements program are available for inspection by the public; and 
(2)  The date, time and place not less than 14 days after such publication, when a public hearing on said plan will be held by the city council. 
(d)  Adoption. At any time after the public hearing but before the first day of the last month of the current fiscal year, the city council shall by resolution adopt the capital improvements program with or without amendment, provided that each amendment must be voted separately and that any increase in the capital improvements program as submitted must clearly identify the method of financing proposed to accomplish such increase. 
Sec. 5-5. - Long-term financial forecast. 
    The city manager shall annually prepare a long-term financial forecast of city revenue, expenditures and the general financial condition of the city. The forecast shall include, but not be limited to, an identification of factors which will impact on the financial condition of the city, revenue and expenditure trends, potential sources of new or expanded revenues and any long or short term actions that may be taken to enhance the financial condition of the city. The forecast shall be submitted to the city council and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
Sec. 5-6. - Annual audit. 
    The city council shall provide for an annual audit of the books and accounts of the city to be made by a certified public accountant, or firm of certified public accountants, who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its agencies. 
    The city council shall publish in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice stating the availability of the final audit report for public inspection. 
PART VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 6-1. - Organization of city agencies. 
(a)  Methods of organization. The organization of city government into operating agencies for the provision of services and the administration of government shall be the responsibility of the city manager. Subject only to the express prohibitions by law or this Charter, the city manager may, by administrative order, reorganize, consolidate, create, merge, divide or abolish a city department or agency, in whole or in part, establish a new city agency as the city manager deems necessary or advisable, and prescribe the functions and the administrative procedures to be followed by all such agencies. 
    Administrative orders made by the city manager shall become effective on the thirtieth day after the day on which notice of the proposed administrative order is filed with the city council, unless the city council votes, within that period, by a majority of the full city council, to reject the administrative order or unless the city council has sooner voted to affirm it. If the notice of proposed administrative order is filed after the city council has recessed for longer than 30 days, the order shall become effective, if not acted upon, the day after the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(b)  Publication of administrative code. For the convenience of the public, the administrative orders establishing the nature of the city organization and any amendments thereto shall be printed as an appendix to, but not be an integral part of, the ordinances of the City of Chelsea. 
( Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 4) 
Sec. 6-2. - Licensing commission. 
(a)  Establishment; composition of commission. Until such time as provided by paragraph (a) of section 6-1, there shall be a licensing commission which shall consist of four residents of the city and the director of inspection services. One resident member shall serve as chair. The four resident members shall be appointed in accordance with section 4-2. 
(b)  Powers and duties. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the licensing commission shall act as the licensing authority for the city with all power to grant, suspend or revoke licenses and permits for intoxicating liquors, and all licenses and permits now or hereafter vested by law in the mayors and city councils of cities of the commonwealth. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 7) 
Sec. 6-3. - Traffic and parking commission. 
(a)  Establishment and composition of commission. Until such time as provided otherwise pursuant to paragraph (a) of section 6-1, there shall be a traffic and parking commission which shall consist of the police chief, who shall serve as chairperson, the fire chief, the director of public works, the director of community development, or their designees, and 3 resident members appointed in accordance with section 4-2. The officer or employee appointed as parking clerk shall serve as clerk to the traffic and parking commission. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The traffic and parking commission shall have exclusive authority, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, to adopt, amend, alter and repeal rules and regulations, consistent with the General Laws, relative to vehicular traffic in the city and relative to the movement, stopping or standing of vehicles on, and their exclusion from, streets, ways, highways, roads and parkways under the control of the city. The commission's authority shall extend to rules and regulations designating a way or part of a way under the city's control as a through way pursuant to section 9 of chapter 89 of the General Laws and to prescribing penalties for a violation of a rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section. 
    All rules and regulations promulgated by authorized vote of the traffic and parking commission, except temporary or emergency rules and regulations promulgated for less than 30 days, shall become effective on the thirtieth day after the day on which notice of the proposed rule or regulation is filed with the city council, unless the city council votes within that period by majority of the full city council to reject the rule or regulation or unless the city council sooner votes to affirm it. If the notice of proposed rule or regulation is filed after the city council has recessed for longer than 30 days, then the rule or regulation, if not acted upon, shall become effective the day after the next scheduled city council meeting; provided, however, that the traffic and parking commission may make a temporary rule or regulation if the commission determines that the position shall be filled in order to assure continuity of services or effective and prompt response to the city's emergency needs. 
    Ten residents of the city, who are not less than 18 years of age, may petition the traffic and parking commission relating to a rule or regulation adopted or proposed to be adopted provided the rule or regulation has not been in effect for 90 days or less. The traffic and parking commission shall hold a public hearing on the petition not more than 30 days after its filing with the traffic and parking commission. 
    If a public hearing shall be held on a proposed rule or regulation, the proposed rule or regulation shall not be adopted until the public hearing has been concluded. After the public hearing has been held, any vote on the subject matter shall be passed by a majority of the full membership of the traffic and parking commission. 
    All rules and regulations adopted after a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 8; Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 5) 
Sec. 6-4. - Personnel administration. 
    The city manager shall adopt rules and regulations establishing a personnel system. The personnel system shall make use of current concepts of personnel management and may include, but not be limited to, the following elements: a method of administration; personnel policies indicating the rights, obligations and benefits of employees; a classification plan; a compensation plan; a method of recruiting and selecting employees based upon merit principles; a centralized record keeping system; a performance evaluation system; disciplinary procedures; and other elements that are determined necessary. 
    The city manager may establish procedures for the selection of department heads, including but not limited to, the establishment of selection or screening committees; provided, however, that the provisions of section 4-2 of this Charter are followed. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all city agencies and positions shall be subject to the rules and regulations adopted under this section excluding those of the school department. Personnel rules and regulations shall be made available to the city council. 
PART VII. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 7-1. - City elections; preliminary and general. 
    The regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
    On the sixth Tuesday preceding every regular city election, there shall be held a preliminary election for the purpose of nominating candidates. 
Sec. 7-2. - Preliminary elections. 
(a)  Signature requirements. The number of signatures of voters required to place the name of a candidate on the official ballot to be used at a preliminary election shall be as follows: 
    For the office of councillor-at-large the signature requirement shall be not less than 50. For the office of at-large school committee member, the signature requirement shall be not less than 50. For the office of district councillor the signature requirement shall be not less than 50. For the office of district school committee member the signature requirement shall be not less than 50. 
(b)  Ballot position. The order in which names of candidates appear or the ballot for each office shall be determined by a drawing by lot conducted by the city clerk in the presence of such candidates or their representatives as may choose to attend such drawings. The city clerk shall provide notice to candidates of their ballot position. 
(c)  Determination of candidates for election. The two persons receiving at a preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for an office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names may be printed in the official ballot to be used at the regular election at which such office is to be filled, and no acceptance of a nomination at a preliminary election shall be necessary to assure its validity. 
    If two or more persons are to be elected to the same office at such regular election, the several persons in number equal to twice the number to be so elected receiving at such preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for that office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names may be printed on the official ballot. 
If the preliminary election results in a tie vote among candidates for nomination receiving the lowest number of votes, which but for said tie vote would entitle a candidate receiving the same to have such candidate's name printed upon the official ballot for the election, all candidates participating in said tie vote shall have their names printed upon the official ballot, although in consequence thereof, there be printed on such ballots the names of candidates exceeding twice the number to be elected. 
(d)  Nomination of candidates. If at the expiration of the time for filing petitions of candidates to be voted for at any preliminary election, not more than twice as many such petitions have been filed with the city clerk for an office as are to be elected to such office, the candidates whose petitions have thus been filed shall be deemed to have been nominated to said office and their names shall be voted on for such office at the succeeding regular election, and the city clerk shall not print said names upon the ballot to be used at said preliminary election and no other nomination to said office shall be made. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 9; Acts 2004, c. 86, § 2) 
Sec. 7-3. - General elections. 
(a)  Information to voters. If the candidate in a regular city election is an incumbent of the office to which the candidate seeks election, against the candidate's name shall appear the phrase "candidate for re-election." 
(b)  Ballot position. The order in which names of candidates appear on the ballot for each office in a regular city election shall be determined by a drawing by lot conducted by the city clerk in the presence of such candidates or their representatives as may choose to attend. The city clerk shall provide notice to candidates of their ballot position. 
Sec. 7-4. - Districts. 
    The territory of the city shall be divided into districts so established as to consist of as nearly equal a number of inhabitants as it is possible in compact and contiguous territory; bounded insofar as possible by the center line of known streets or ways or by other well-defined limits. 
Sec. 7-5. - Application of state law. 
    Except as expressly provided in this Charter and authorized by laws of the commonwealth, all city elections shall be governed by the laws of the commonwealth relating to the right to vote, the registration of voters, the nomination of candidates, the conduct of preliminary and regular elections, the submission of Charter amendments and other propositions, the counting of votes and the declaration of results. 
PART VIII. - CITIZEN PARTICIPATION MECHANISMS 

Sec. 8-1. - Free petition. 
    The city council or the school committee shall hold a public hearing and act with respect to every petition which is addressed to it, which is signed by 150 voters or more, and which seeks the passage of a measure. The hearing shall be held by the city council or the school committee, or, in either case, by a committee or subcommittee thereof, and the action by the city council or the school committee shall be taken not later than six weeks after the petition is filed with the clerk of the city council or the secretary of the school committee, as may be appropriate. Hearings on two or more petitions filed under this section may be held at the same time and place. The clerk of the city council or the secretary of the school committee shall mail notice of the hearing to the ten persons whose names appear first on the petition at least seven days prior to the hearing. Notice, by publication, of all such hearings shall be at public expense. 
Sec. 8-2. - Citizen initiative measures. 
(a)  Commencement of proceedings. Initiative procedures shall be commenced by the filing of an initiative petition with the city clerk. The petition shall be addressed to the city council or the school committee, shall contain a request for passage of a particular measure set forth in the petition and shall be signed by not less than 20 percent of the total number of voters. 
    Signatures to initiative petitions need not be all on one paper. All such papers pertaining to any one measure shall be fastened together and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument, with the endorsement thereon of the names and addresses of the persons designated as filing the same. With each signature to the petition shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number, if any. 
    Within ten days of the filing of said petition the registrars of voters shall ascertain by what number of voters the petition is signed, and shall attach thereto their certificate showing the result of such examination. 
    The city clerk shall forthwith transmit the said certificate with the said petition to the city council or to the school committee, as appropriate, and at the same time shall send a copy of said certificate to the persons designated on the petition as filing the same. 
    When such certificate has been so transmitted, said petition shall be deemed to be valid unless written objections are made with regard to the signatures thereon by a voter within 48 hours after such certification by filing such objections with the city council or the school committee, and a copy thereof with the registrars of voters. Any such objection shall be determined forthwith. 
(b)  Referral to city solicitor. If the city clerk determines that a sufficient number of signers are voters, the city clerk shall transmit a copy of the petition to the city solicitor. 
    Within 15 days after receipt by the city solicitor of the petition the city solicitor shall advise the city clerk in writing whether the measure may be proposed by initiative procedures, and whether it may be lawfully passed by the city council or the school committee. If the opinion of the city solicitor is that the measure may not lawfully be passed, the city solicitor shall state the reason or reasons therefor in said reply. The city clerk shall forthwith furnish a copy of the city solicitor's opinion to the person designated on the petition as filing the same. 
(c)  Initiative petition; requirements for passage and submission to electorate. If any initiative petition is signed by voters equal in number to at least 20 percent of the total number of voters, and in the opinion of the city solicitor, such measure may be lawfully passed by the city council or school committee, the city council or school committee within 30 days after the date of the certificate of the registrars to that effect: 
(1)  May pass said measure without alteration, subject to the referendum vote provided in this Charter; or 
(2)  The city council shall call a special election to be held at a date fixed by it not less than 60 days after the date of the certificate herein mentioned, and shall submit the proposed measure without alteration to a vote of the voters at that election; provided, however, that if any city election is otherwise to occur within 120 days after the date of said certificate, the city council may, at its discretion, omit the calling of a special election and submit the proposed measure to the voters at such approaching election. 
The ballots used when voting upon a proposed measure under this section shall state the nature of the measure in terms sufficient to show the substance thereof. 
(d)  Ballot question. The ballots used when voting upon a proposed measure under this section shall state the nature of the measure in terms sufficient to show the substance thereof by preparation of a fair, concise summary by the city solicitor and approved by the registrars of voters. 
    The full text of the measure shall be published in a least one newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven days before the election at which the question shall appear on the ballot. 
    The ballot used when voting upon a proposed measure under this section shall contain the question in substantially the following form: 
    Shall the following measure which was proposed by an initiative petition take effect? 
    (Text of measure summary) 
    YES _______ NO _______ 
    If a majority of the votes cast on the question is in the affirmative the measure shall be deemed to be effective forthwith, unless a later date is specified in the measure. 
Sec. 8-3. - Citizen referendum procedures. 
    If within ten days after the final passage of any measure a petition signed by voters equal in number to at least five percent of the total number of voters, and addressed to the city council or to the school committee, as the case may be, protesting against such measure or any part thereof taking effect, is filed with the city clerk, the same shall thereupon and thereby be suspended from taking effect; and the city council or the school committee, as the case may be, shall immediately reconsider such measure or part thereof; and if such measure or part thereof is not entirely rescinded, the city council shall submit the same, by the method herein provided, to a vote of the voters either at the next regular city election, or at a special election which may, in its discretion, be called for the purpose and such measure or part thereof shall forthwith become null and void unless a majority of the voters voting on the same at such election vote in favor thereof. The petition described in this section shall be termed a referendum petition and paragraph (a) of section 8-2 shall apply to the procedure in respect thereto, except that the words "measure or part thereof protested against" shall for this purpose be understood to replace "measure" in said section whenever it may occur, and "referendum" shall be understood to replace the word "initiative" in said section. 
Sec. 8-4. - Required voter participation. 
    For any measure to be effective under initiative or referendum procedures at least 30 percent of the voters shall vote at an election upon which an initiative or referendum question is submitted to the voters. 
Sec. 8-5. - Measures not subject to initiative and referendum. 
    Measures which include the following subject matter shall not be subject to initiative and referendum procedures: 
(a)  Revenue loan orders; 
(b)  Appropriations for the payment of debt or debt service; 
(c)  Internal operational procedures of the city council and the school committee; 
(d)  Emergency measures; 
(e)  The city budget or any appropriation contained therein; 
(f)  The school committee budget or any appropriation contained therein; 
(g)  The capital improvements program or any item contained therein; 
(h)  Appropriation of funds to implement a collective bargaining agreement; 
(i)  Procedures relating to election, appointment, removal, discharge or any other personnel action; and 
(j)  Proceedings providing for the submission or referral of a measure to the voters at an election. 
Sec. 8-6. - Submission of proposed measure to voters. 
    The city council may, of its own motion, and shall, upon request of the school committee if a measure originates with that committee and pertains to the affairs under its administration, submit to a vote of the voters for adoption or rejection at a general or special city election any proposed measure, or a proposition for the repeal or amendment of any measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as are hereby provided for submission on petition. 
Sec. 8-7. - Measures with conflicting provisions. 
    If two or more proposed measures passed at the same election contain conflicting provisions, only the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall take effect. 
Sec. 8-8. - Recall of elected officials. 
(a)  Application. Any person who holds an elected city office with more than six months remaining of the term of office at the time of the filing of the affidavit may be recalled from the office by the voters in the manner provided in this section. No recall petition may be filed against an elected official within six months after taking office. 
(b)  Recall petitions. A recall affidavit signed by at least 300 for any official elected at large and by at least 100 for any officer elected by district may be filed with the city clerk containing the name of the office whose recall is sought and a statement of the grounds for recall. The board of registrars of voters shall certify such petitions with regard to the sufficiency and validity of the signatures of voters and within five working days following such filing the city clerk shall deliver to the ten persons first named on such petitions, petition blanks demanding said recall, printed forms of which the city clerk shall keep available. The blanks may be completed by printing or typewriting; they shall be addressed to the city council; they shall contain the names of the ten persons to whom they are issued and the grounds for the recall as stated in the affidavit; they shall be dated and signed by the city clerk. A copy of the petition shall be entered into the records kept in the office of the city clerk. 
    The recall petitions shall be returned to the office of the city clerk within 20 days following the date they are issued, signed by at least 20 percent of the total number of persons who voted at the most recent municipal election for officials elected at large, and for officials elected by district, signed by at least 20 percent of the total number of persons who voted at the most recent municipal election from the district the official sought to be recalled represents. 
    The city clerk shall forthwith submit the petition to the registrars of voters, and the registrars shall within five working days certify thereon the names of the registered voters of the city, or from the district represented by the official sought to be recalled. 
(c)  Recall election. If the petition shall be found and certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the city clerk shall submit the same with such certificate to the city council within five working days, and the city council shall forthwith give written notice of the receipt of the certificate to the official sought to be recalled, and shall, if the official does not resign within five days thereafter, order an election to be held on a date fixed by them not less than 60 days after the date of the city clerk's certificate; provided, however, that if any city election is otherwise to occur within 120 days after the date of said certificate, the city council may, at its discretion, omit the calling of a special election and submit the proposed recall to the voters at such approaching election. The recall election for any official elected by district shall only be held in the district that the official represents. 
    If a vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election shall not proceed as provided in this section. 
(d)  Office holder. The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of the office until the recall election. If said incumbent is not recalled, the incumbent shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term subject to recall as before. If recalled, the official shall be deemed removed and the office vacant. The vacancy created thereby shall be filled in accordance with this Charter. Any person appointed to fill the vacancy caused by such recall shall hold office for the unexpired term of the official recalled. 
(e)  Ballot question. The form of the question to be voted upon shall be substantially as follows: "Shall - here insert the name and title of the elected official whose recall is sought - be recalled?" If a majority of the votes cast upon the question of call is in the affirmative, such elected official shall be recalled. 
    No recall election shall be effective unless at least 40 percent of those entitled to vote shall have voted. 
(f)  Repeat of recall. In the case of an official subjected to a recall election and not recalled thereby, no recall petition shall be filed against such an official until at least 60 days after the election at which the official's recall was submitted to the voters of the city. 
(g)  Office holder recalled. No person recalled from office, or who has resigned from office while recall proceedings were pending against such person, shall be appointed to any office or employment under the city within two years after such recall or resignation. 
PART IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-1. - Revision or amendment of act. 
    This act may be replaced, revised or amended in accordance with any procedure made available by article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution of the commonwealth and any laws of the commonwealth enacted to implement said constitutional amendment. 
Sec. 9-2. - Rules of interpretation. 
    The following rules shall apply when interpreting the Charter: 
(a)  Specific provisions to prevail. To the extent that any specific provision of the Charter shall conflict with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provision shall prevail. 
(b)  Computation of time. In computing time under this Charter, if seven days or less, only business days, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays, shall be counted; if more than seven days, every day shall be counted. 
Sec. 9-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Charter the following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Charter," this Charter and any amendments to it made through any methods provided under article LXXXIX of the amendments to the Constitution of the commonwealth. 
(b)  "City," the City of Chelsea. 
(c)  "City agency or agency," any board, commission, committee, department or office of city government, whether elected, appointed or otherwise constituted. 
(d)  "City bulletin board," the bulletin board located outside the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  "Emergency," a sudden, unexpected, unforeseen happening, occurrence or condition which necessitates immediate action. 
(f)  "Majority vote," a majority of those present and voting, provided a quorum is present when a vote is taken, unless a higher number is required by law, this Charter, or by the city council's own rules. 
(g)  "Multiple-member body," any board, commission or committee, except advisory bodies, appointed by the city manager. 
(h)  "Resident," an inhabitant of the city. 
(i)  "Remove from the district," a person's place of regular domicile is not within the territorial limits of the district. 
(j)  "Remove from the city," a person's place of regular domicile is not within the territorial limits of the city. 
(k)  "Voters," registered voters of the city as defined by the laws of the commonwealth, including but not limited to, the residency, age, and citizenship requirements of voters. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 10) 
Sec. 9-4. - Inspection of documents. 
    All documents cited in this Charter as available for public inspection shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and in the Chelsea Public Library. The city clerk shall provide copies of documents to the Chelsea Public Library. 
Sec. 9-5. - Multiple-member bodies. 
(a)  Multiple-member bodies; composition; terms of office. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, all multiple-member bodies shall consist of three or more members appointed for terms of three years each, so arranged that the term of one-third of the members, or as nearly that number as may be possible, shall expire each year. All members of multiple-member bodies shall take the oath of office within four weeks of their appointment and must take the oath of office prior to entering upon the duties of their office. Unless a member of a multiple-member body serves by virtue of office or employment, all members shall be residents of the city. This requirement may be waived upon the recommendation of the city manager with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Method of appointment. All appointments to multiple-member bodies shall become effective in accordance with section 4-2. 
    Any officials appointed to serve on multiple-member bodies may be removed from office by the city manager for such cause as the city manager deems sufficient and such cause shall be stated in the order of removal. A member of a multiple-member body shall be deemed to have vacated office if said member fails to attend regularly scheduled meetings for a period of three consecutive months without express leave from the chair of such multiple-member body or if such member is absent from such duties for the period of one year notwithstanding the permission from the chair to be absent. Any member of a multiple-member body shall be deemed to have vacated office if such member is finally convicted of any felony and shall not be eligible to serve in any other elective or appointive office or position under the city. 
(c)  Uniform procedures applicable to multiple-member bodies. In order to acquaint new members of multiple-member bodies with the affairs which will come before them, the chair of each such multiple-member body shall make available to each new member the minutes of the meetings of the two prior years and copies of any applicable laws, rules, or regulations governing such multiple-member body. 
    All multiple-member bodies shall meet regularly at such times and places as they shall determine, unless some other provision is made by administrative order. Special meetings of any multiple-member body shall be held on the call of the chair or by a majority of its members, by written notice delivered in hand or to the place of residence of each member and which contains notice of the matters to be acted upon. Except in the case of any emergency, all notices shall be delivered at least 48 hours in advance of the time set for such meeting. A copy of such notice shall, forthwith, be posted upon the city bulletin board. 
    Each multiple-member body shall determine its own rules of order of business unless another provision is made by administrative order, and shall provide for the keeping of a journal of its proceedings. Such rules and journals shall be available for public inspection. 
    If requested by any member, any vote of any multiple-member body shall be taken by a call of the roll and the vote shall be recorded in the journal; provided, however, if the vote is unanimous, only that fact need be recorded. 
    A majority of the members of a multiple-member body shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time. 
(d)  Notice of vacancies. Whenever a vacancy occurs on a multiple-member body, whether because of death, resignation, removal from the city, removal by the city manager or the pending expiration of a term for which a person has been appointed, public notice of the vacancy or pending expiration of the term shall be given in the following manner: by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city, by title, length of term, brief description of duties and a general indication of the qualifications desired of candidates. Such notice shall also state the time in which persons who desire to be considered for appointment of such offices shall file a statement of interest, with whom, and shall indicate the form in which such applications should be made. A copy of all such notices shall be posted on the city bulletin board and in one or more public places within the city. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 11) 
Sec. 9-6. - Disqualification from office. 
    Any person who has been finally convicted of a state or federal felony shall not be eligible to petition for or serve in any elective or appointive office or position under the city. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 11) 
Sec. 9-7. - Charter review. 
    In every year ending in zero the city council shall establish a Charter review committee consisting of members of the city council, the school committee and residents of the city to examine and review the Charter and report to the city council findings, conclusions and recommendations. 
(Acts 2002, c. 191, § 13) 
Sec. 9-8. - Reenactment and publication of ordinances. 
    In the year following the initial review as referenced in section 9-7, and at five-year intervals thereafter, the city council shall cause to be prepared a proposed revision or recodification of all city ordinances which shall be submitted to the city council for reenactment. The city council shall adopt the proposed revision or recodification with or without amendment prior to the expiration of the calendar year in which it is submitted to them. Such revisions or recodification shall be prepared under the supervision of the city solicitor, or if the city council so directs by special counsel retained for such purposes. Copies of the revised or recodified ordinances shall be made available for distribution; provided, however, that a charge not to exceed the actual cost per copy of reproduction may be charged. 
    In each year between such reenactments, an annual supplement shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall contain all ordinances and amendments to ordinances adopted in the preceding year. 
PART X. - TRANSITION PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Continuation of existing laws. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and votes of the city council and all administrative orders adopted by the receiver which are in force at the time this Charter is adopted, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, shall continue in full force until amended or repealed. 
    Where provisions of this Charter conflict with provisions of city ordinances, rules, regulations, orders, and special acts and acceptances of laws of the commonwealth, the provisions of this Charter shall govern. All provisions of city ordinances, rules, regulations, orders and administrative orders of the receiver not superseded by this Charter shall remain in force. 
( Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 6) 
Sec. 10-2. - Continuation of obligations. 
    All official bonds, obligations, contracts and other instruments entered into or executed by or to the city before the adoption of this Charter and all taxes, special assessments, fines, penalties, forfeitures incurred or imposed, due or owing to the city, shall be enforced and collected and all writs, prosecutions, actions and causes of action, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall continue and remain unaffected by this Charter. No legal act done by or in favor of the city shall be rendered invalid by the adoption of this Charter. 
( Acts 2016, c. 312 , § 6) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location in the Charter of amendments thereto. The Charter is derived from chapter 103 of the Massachusetts Acts of 1994. 
Act Year Chapter Section Section 
this Charter 1996 165 1 2-7 2002 191 1 2-4 191 2 2-9 191 3, 4 3-2, 3-3 191 5 4-1 191 6 4-8 191 7, 8 6-2, 6-3 191 9 7-2 191 10 9-3 191 11 9-5, 9-6 191 13 9-7 2004 86 1 3-1 86 2 7-2 2016 312 1 2-4 312 2 3-2 312 3 4-2 312 4 6-1 312 5 6-3 312 6       Dltd 10-1-10-6       Added 10-1, 10-2  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Citation of ordinances. 
    The ordinances contained in this chapter and the chapters following shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Chelsea, Massachusetts" and shall be so cited. 
(Code 1994, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
    Administrative Code. The term "administrative code" means the administrative code of the city, enacted pursuant to section 6-1 of the city Charter as most recently amended, and shall refer to the organization, functions and procedures of the city agencies (see app. A to this Code). 
    Agency. The term "agency" means any appointed multiple member body, department, other administrative unit or other division of the government of the city. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the city Charter, being chapter 103 of the Acts of 1994 , as amended. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Chelsea, Suffolk County, Massachusetts. 
    City manager or manager. The term "city manager" or "manager" means the city manager of the City of Chelsea. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Chelsea, Massachusetts, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR). The abbreviation "CMR" or the term "Code of Massachusetts Regulations" means the official administrative regulations of the state, as amended. 
    Commonwealth or state. The term "commonwealth" or "state" means the commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last calendar day. If the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation. 
    Conflicting provisions. If any provisions of this Code conflict with one another, accepted rules of statutory construction shall be applied to resolve the conflict. 
    Council. The term "council" means the city council of the City of Chelsea. 
    County. The term "county" means Suffolk County, Massachusetts. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of these ordinances appears requiring the head of a department or some other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right to such official, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right. 
    Employee. The term "employee" means an individual, other than an official, compensated by the city or any city agency, whether part-time or full-time, whether as a common law employee or independent contractor. 
    Following. The term "following" means next after. 
    Gender. A word importing only the male gender shall extend and be construed as to apply to the female gender and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. A word importing the female gender only shall extend and be construed as to apply to the male gender and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to females. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to grant joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
    Oath. The term "oath" is an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official or officer. The term "officer" or "official" means any person holding any elected office of the city or any appointed position of the city, including members of all city boards and commissions. 
    Owner. The term "owner" means every person who alone or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any building or land; 
(2)  Has care, charge, or control of any building or land in any capacity, including, but not limited to, agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of the legal title; 
(3)  Is a lessee under a written letting agreement; 
(4)  Is a mortgagee in possession; or 
(5)  Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts. 
    Person. The term "person" means individuals, associations, businesses, corporations, firms, partnerships, committees, unions, limited liability companies, governmental entities and bodies politic and corporate. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means species of property, except real property. 
    Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
    Real property. The term "real property" means land, together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof. 
    References to officers, employees, boards, etc. All references to officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or committees are to officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or committees of the city. 
    Regulation. The term "regulation" means any rule of any officer, board or commission, excluding the city council, that is designed for the permanent regulation of any matter within the jurisdiction of the board, commission, or officer as laid down by the city Charter, the administrative code or ordinance. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
    Singular, plural. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
    Statute references. The abbreviation "M.G.L." refers to the Massachusetts General Laws, as now or hereafter amended. Any reference to an act found in the Massachusetts General Laws by short title is a reference to such act as now or hereafter amended. 
    Street, way or highway. The term "street," "way" or "highway" includes any street, highway, avenue, road, alley, sidewalk, lane, viaduct or other public way in the street, including any bridge which is part thereof, all of which shall have been decreed, dedicated or accepted by the city. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Time. Words stating a time or hour of a day mean the official time of the city. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" means any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-2, 1-3; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
State Law reference- General statutory definitions, M.G.L. c. 4, §§ 6, 7. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of these ordinances printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed to be taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part thereof nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1994, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, nor an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- General statutory definitions, M.G.L. c. 4, § 6. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Chelsea, Massachusetts, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section, chapter, article, division, or subdivision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Chelsea, Massachusetts, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered (insert number), that reads as follows:...." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1994, § 1-16; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Territorial applicability. 
    These ordinances shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or Charter provisions or any law. 
(Code 1994, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; criminal and noncriminal disposition. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these ordinances or of any ordinance of the city, whether included in these ordinances or any hereafter enacted, whereby any act or thing is enjoined, or prohibited or required, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, be liable for a penalty as set forth in subsection (c) of this section for each offense; provided, however, that whenever a higher penalty is permitted under the Massachusetts General Laws, such higher penalty shall be the maximum penalty for each offense; and provided, further, that this section shall not preclude the city from proceedings to restrain the violation of any provision of these ordinances by injunction where such proceeding is more apt. In all instances, except as otherwise provided, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Whoever violates any provision of these ordinances, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may also be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or department which is subject to a specific penalty. In the absence of a specific schedule of penalties, as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, all ordinances, whether included in these ordinances or any hereafter enacted, may be enforced by police officers through noncriminal disposition as deemed appropriate according to the following schedule: 
GENERAL SCHEDULE OF NONCRIMINAL FINES 
First offense $50.00 Second offense 150.00 Third offense 300.00  
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section (a) or (b) of this section, it is the intention of this subsection that the following ordinances and regulations are to be included within the scope of the noncriminal disposition for violation of ordinances according to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. The specific penalties, as listed in this subsection, shall apply in such cases. The municipal personnel set forth in the table shall be the enforcing persons for the purposes of this subsection. The following enforcing persons may, in their sole discretion, issue a written warning, in lieu of a fine, for first time violations: 
Ordinance Fine Enforcing Personnel Animal control, chapter 4 $25.00 first offense Animal control officer, police officers 50.00 second offense 75.00 third offense 100.00 fourth offense Building code, section 6-27 $50.00 first offense Building inspectors 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Electrical permits, sections 6-50, 6-51 $50.00 first offense Electrical inspector 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Certificate of habitability, section 6-2 $50.00 first offense Building inspectors 
Code enforcement inspectors 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Dumpsters, chapter 22, article V $50.00 first offense Building inspectors 
Code enforcement inspectors 
Police officers, fire prevention 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Duty to keep property clean, sections 22-24, 22-32 $50.00 first offense Building inspectors 
Code enforcement inspectors 
Police officers, fire prevention officer 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Toxic or hazardous materials, chapter 22, article IV $50.00 first offense Code enforcement inspectors 
Fire department personnel or designee 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Liquefied gases, section 6-93 $50.00 first offense Code enforcement inspectors 
Fire department personnel or designee 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Hydrant use, sections 30-102, 30-103 $50.00 first offense Public works department personnel or designee 
Fire department personnel or designee 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Licensing, chapter 14 $25.00 first offense Licensing commission 
Police officers 
Building inspectors, code enforcement inspectors 50.00 second offense 100.00 third offense Marijuana establishment regulations $50.00 first offense Building inspectors, code enforcement inspectors, police officers, licensing administrator $150.00 second offense $300.00 third or subsequent offense Noise ordinance, section 16-99 Warning first offense Police officers $50.00 second offense 150.00 third offense 300.00 fourth offense Open containers, section 16-98 $100.00 first offense Police officers 200.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Public works, chapter 30 $50.00 first offense Public works department personnel or designee 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Restrictions on the sale of tobacco products and nicotine delivery products, part III, article I $100.00 first offense Inspectional services, HHS and board of health $200.00 second offense 
(if within 24 months of first offense) $300.00 third offense 
(if within 24 months of first offense) Restrictions on smoking at the workplace, part III, article I $100.00 first offense lnspectional services, HHS and board of health and its designees $200.00 second offense 
(if within 24 months of first offense) $300.00 third offense 
(if within 24 months of first offense) Regulation for the operation of public and semi-public swimming pools, part III, article I $50 first offense HHS and board of health and its designees $100.00 second offense $300.00 third offense Sanitary code, section 10-1 $50.00 first offense Building inspectors 
Code enforcement inspectors 
Police officers 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Streets and sidewalks, chapter 24 (article IV excepted) $50.00 first offense Public works department personnel or designee 
Police officers 
Fire prevention officer 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Solid waste collection, chapter 22, article III $50.00 first offense Public works department personnel or designee 
Police officers 
Code enforcement inspectors 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense Zoning ordinance, chapter 34 $50.00 first offense Zoning enforcement officer 
Building inspectors 150.00 second offense 300.00 third offense  
(d)  When an act is prohibited by an ordinance, not only the persons actually doing the prohibited act, but also the employers and all other persons concerned therein, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed therefor. 
(e)  All fines and penalties provided for pursuant to or included in these ordinances, except otherwise specially provided for, shall inure to the use and benefit of the city, and shall be credited to the general revenue account. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) through (e) of this section, it is the intention of this subsection that the following ordinances and regulations to be included within the scope of the City of Chelsea's Green Tickets issued pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40U. The specific penalties, as listed in this subsection are enforced by the department of public works, board of health, and the department of inspectional services. All Green Tickets are appealed to the city's municipal hearing officer and are pursuant to the following schedule: 
Section 18-1 Graffiti Section 16-50 Posting bills Section 16-51 Shopping carts Section 10-1 Sanitary code Section 10-2 Sanitation standards for food establishments Section 6-2 Certificate of habitability Section 6-3 Single room occupancy/rooming houses Chapter 22 Solid waste/dumpsters Section 24-1 Snow and ice removal Part III, Article I, Board of Health Regulations Solid waste regulations  
(Code 1994, §§ 1-7-1-9; Ord. of 6-8-1998; Ord. of 10-16-1995; Ord. of 11-23-2015 , §§ I, II; Ord. of 6-4-2018(4) ) 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21; municipal fines, M.G.L. c. 40U. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of these ordinances. 
(Code 1994, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering or tampering with Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of these ordinances, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00. 
(Code 1994, § 1-15) 
State Law reference- Altering public records, M.G.L. ch. 267, § 1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal described. 
    The following shall be the device of the corporate seal of the city: A representation within a circle of a shield surmounted by a star, the shield bearing upon it the representation of an American Indian chief and wigwams; at the right of the shield, a sailboat such as was formerly used for ferriage; at the left of the shield, a view of the city and a steam ferryboat; under the shield, the word "Winnisimmet;" around the shield, the words "Chelsea, settled 1624; a Town 1739; a City 1857." 
(Code 1994, § 1-17) 
State Law reference- City seal, M.G.L. c. 40, § 47. 
Sec. 2-2. - City clerk to be custodian of seal. 
    The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal. 
(Code 1994, § 1-18) 
Sec. 2-3. - Name designation of city-owned property. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to recommend and designate a name for all city-owned property. The city manager must submit the designation to the city council for approval or rejection. That designation shall become effective on the 30th day following the day the notice of designation is filed with the city council, unless the city council shall within such period, by majority of full city council vote, reject such designation or shall sooner vote to affirm it. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2008) 
Secs. 2-4-2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-25. - Enactment clause of ordinances. 
    All ordinances of the city shall be denominated ordinances, and the enacting style shall be, "Be it ordained by the city council of the City of Chelsea, as follows:...." 
(Code 1994, § 1-11) 
Sec. 2-26. - Forms of expression used by the city council. 
    Whenever the city council expresses anything by way or command, the form of expression shall be "ordered," and when such council expresses opinions, principles, facts or purposes, the form shall be "resolved." 
(Code 1994, § 1-12) 
Sec. 2-27. - Recordation and preservation of ordinances. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded legibly by the city clerk without interlineations or erasure in a book to be kept for that purpose made of suitable paper with proper margins and index, which book shall be preserved in the office of the city clerk, and open for public inspection during the business hours of city hall. 
(Code 1994, § 1-13) 
Secs. 2-28-2-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-58. - City clerk to determine eligibility for elected office. 
    The city clerk shall perform criminal offender record checks with the criminal history systems board on all candidates and elected officials for city council and school committee to determine eligibility for elected office, pursuant to sections 2-9 and 3-3 of the Charter. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to be in conflict with state or federal law. 
(Code 1994, § 1-19; Ord. of 2-23-2004) 
Sec. 2-59. - Right of entry of employees into buildings and premises. 
    To the extent allowed by law, any person in the performance of duties or having any duty to perform under the provisions of this Code and/or state and federal statutes may enter any building or premises in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-1) 
Sec. 2-60. - Compensation of city councillors. 
(a)  Effective upon the city council term commencing January of the year 2014, members of the city council shall receive an annual salary of $14,000.00. 
( Ord. of 5-6-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-61. - Residency for Chelsea Police Department and Chelsea Fire Department Civil Service Employees. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any administrative order to the contrary, all police and fire department civil service personnel hired after April 1, 2018, who live in Chelsea at the time of hire shall maintain residency in the City of Chelsea for a period of five years from the date of hire. Any employee who fails to maintain such residency during this period shall be subject to immediate termination. 
(b)  For any police or fire civil service employee hired after April 1, 2018, who, at the time of hiring pursuant to civil service rules, is not at such time a resident of the City of Chelsea, such employee shall have six months in which to relocate to Chelsea. For such employees, the five-year period of residency shall commence on the date of relocation to Chelsea. Any such employee who fails to relocate to Chelsea within this initial six-month period, or fails to maintain such residency during the ensuring five years, shall be subject to immediate termination. 
( Ord. of 5-21-2018 ; Ord. of 1-7-2019 ) 
Secs. 2-62-2-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State ethics law, M.G.L. c. 268A. 

Sec. 2-77. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    City contractor means any person (including agents or employees acting within the scope of their employment) who is paid from the city treasury or under city auspices for goods or services, regardless of the nature of the relationship of such person to the city for purposes other than this division. 
    Contract management authority means personal involvement in or direct supervisory responsibility for the formulation or execution of a city contract, including, without limitation, the preparation of specifications, evaluation of bids or proposals, negotiation of contract terms or supervision of performance. 
    Economic interest means a financial interest, whether vested or contingent, legal or beneficial, with a present fair market value of greater than $250.00, which is distinguishable from that of the public generally. 
    Gift. 
(1)  The term "gift" means a delivery of goods, payment, entertainment, subscription, advance services or anything of value, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received. If items are furnished or services are rendered for less than the fair market value, the difference between the fair market value and the prices shall be treated as a gift. 
(2)  The term "gift" does not include a political contribution reported as required by law, a commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business, anything of value received by inheritance or a gift received from a family member or from a relative within the third degree of consanguinity of the reporting person or of the reporting person's spouse or from the spouse of any such relative. 
    Relative means a person who is related to an official or employee as spouse, as a descendent of any grandparent of such official or employee, whether by the whole- or half-blood or by adoption, or as spouse of any of the relations set forth in this definition and any person who resides with an employee or an official. 
    State ethics law means and refers to M.G.L. c. 268A. 
(Code 1994, § 1-26) 
Sec. 2-78. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any employee or official who violates this division shall be subject to appropriate discipline by the appointing authority including suspension, termination or censure, consistent with any requirements of the state civil service law and the city Charter, as well as to civil or criminal prosecution under any other applicable state laws. 
(b)  Alleged violations of the state ethics law or this division by the city councilors, members of the school committee, the superintendent of schools, and the city manager shall be directly filed with the state ethics commission. 
(c)  Any city councilor who has been convicted of a knowing or willful violation of the state ethics law or this division shall be deemed to have vacated the office from the date of conviction, and shall not be eligible to serve in any other elective or appointive office or position under the city. 
(d)  Any officer or employee not otherwise provided for by this division shall immediately forfeit the office or position upon conviction for a knowing or willful violation of this division. 
(e)  All city contracts shall include therein a clause for termination in the event of a violation of this division in connection with the bidding, awarding, administration or performance of the contract. 
(f)  Any permit, license, ruling, determination or other official action taken in violation of this division shall be void; provided, however, that in the event that voiding would substantially damage the city or innocent third parties, then the city entity responsible for such official action may, subject to the prior approval of the city manager, preserve, in whole or in part, the permit, license, ruling, determination or other action. 
(g)  A knowing or willful violation of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 per offense. 
(Code 1994, § 1-37) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
Sec. 2-79. - Other remedies. 
    The city or any city agency may maintain an action for an accounting for any economic benefit received by any person in violation of this division or other law, and may recover damages for violation of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 1-38) 
Sec. 2-80. - Division supplemental. 
    This division establishes detailed standards of conduct for officials and employees of the city, supplemental to M.G.L. c. 268A, § 23. The basic rules of conduct set forth in M.G.L. c. 268 and 268A also apply to all city officials and employees. 
(Code 1994, § 1-25) 
Sec. 2-81. - Conflict with other laws. 
    In the event of any conflict or inconsistency of this division with any state law, the provision of the broadest or most strict coverage shall control. No provision of this division shall be construed so as to be inconsistent with state law. 
(Code 1994, § 1-39) 
Sec. 2-82. - Distribution of code of ethics; training provisions. 
(a)  The city clerk shall cause a copy of this division to be distributed to every elected and appointed public official within 30 days of their entering upon the duties of their office or employment. The personnel director shall cause a copy of this division to be distributed to all other employees of the city within 30 days of their entering upon the duties of their employment. 
(b)  In order to ensure that all officers and employees of the city are familiar with their responsibilities and obligations under this division and the state ethics law, the city manager shall at regular intervals provide for training on the meaning and application of the ethics code, and every elected and appointed public official shall be required to attend at least one such session upon appointment or election to municipal office. 
(Code 1994, § 1-40) 
Sec. 2-83. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  Any city employee or official shall be entitled to the opinion of the city solicitor upon any question arising under this division relating to the duties, responsibilities and interests of such person. All requests for such opinions by a subordinate municipal employee shall be made in confidence directly to the city manager, who shall in turn request in confidence such opinion of the city solicitor on behalf of such person, and all members of boards or commissions and chief officers or heads of municipal agencies may make direct confidential requests for such opinions on their own account. The city solicitor shall file such opinion in writing with the city clerk and such opinion shall be a matter of public record; however, no opinion will be rendered by the city solicitor except upon the submission of detailed existing facts which pertain to a question of actual or prospective violation of any provision of this division. 
(b)  Any person who acts in reliance on an opinion of the city solicitor shall be exempt from the penalties provided herein if that person has made a good faith disclosure of all material facts related to the opinion. 
(Code 1994, § 1-36) 
Sec. 2-84. - Retaliatory action. 
    No official or employee shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or otherwise take adverse action against any individual who in good faith makes a complaint to the city manager or the state ethics commission regarding any alleged violation of this division or the state ethics code by any official or employee of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 1-27) 
Sec. 2-85. - Improper influence. 
    No official or employee shall make, participate in making or in any way attempt to use such official's or such employee's position, influence or power to influence or affect any city governmental decision or action in which such official or employee knows or has reason to know that such official or employee has any economic interest distinguishable from its effect on the public generally or, with respect to the city council, any economic interest distinguishable from its effect on all councilors generally. 
(Code 1994, § 1-28) 
Sec. 2-86. - Illegal gifts surrendered to city treasurer/collector. 
    Any gift given in violation of the provisions of M.G.L. c. 268A shall be surrendered to the treasurer/collector, who shall add the gift to the inventory of city property. 
(Code 1994, § 1-29) 
Sec. 2-87. - City-owned property. 
    No official, employee or city contractor shall engage in or permit the unauthorized use of city-owned property or any other property being held by the city for public purposes. 
(Code 1994, § 1-30) 
Sec. 2-88. - Use or disclosure of confidential information. 
    No current or former official or employee shall use or disclose, other than in the performance of official duties and responsibilities, or as may be required by law, confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of position or employment. For purposes of this section, the term "confidential information" means any information that is not made available to the general public on request or could not be obtained pursuant to the Massachusetts Public Records Act (M.G.L. c. 66). 
(Code 1994, § 1-31) 
Sec. 2-89. - Interest in city business. 
(a)  No elected official or spouse thereof shall have a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in the name of the official or employee or in the name of any other person in any contract, work or business of the city or in the sale to the city of any property or service, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid with funds belonging to or administered by the city, or is authorized by ordinance. Compensation for property taken pursuant to the city's eminent domain power shall not constitute a financial interest within the meaning of this section. Unless sold pursuant to a process of competitive bidding following public notice, no elected official or employee shall have a financial interest in the purchase of any property that: 
(1)  Belongs to the city or a city agency; 
(2)  Is sold for taxes or assessments; or 
(3)  Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the city. 
(b)  No employee or appointed official nor their spouse shall engage in a transaction described in this section, unless the matter is wholly unrelated to the employee's or official's city duties and responsibilities. 
(Code 1994, § 1-32) 
Sec. 2-90. - Employment of relatives. 
(a)  No official or employee may appoint or advocate for employment, in any city agency in which said official or employee serves, or over which said official or employee exercises authority, supervision, or control, any person: 
(1)  Who is a relative of said official or employee; or 
(2)  In exchange for or in consideration of the employment of any of said official's or employee's relatives by any other official or employee. 
(b)  No official or employee shall exercise contract management authority over a contract involving any relative of the official or employee. 
(c)  No official or employee shall use or permit the use of such person's position to assist any relative in securing employment or contracts with persons over whom the employee or official exercises contract management authority. The employment of or contracting with a relative of such a city official or employee by such a person within six months prior to, during the term of, or six months subsequent to the period of a city contract shall be evidence that said employment or contract was obtained in violation of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 1-33) 
Sec. 2-91. - Prohibited acts by members of the city council. 
    Members of the city council shall not make loans, gifts of value equal to or exceeding $50.00, or offers of employment or future employment or of business or investment opportunities to the city manager, to the manager's assistants, to heads of city departments or agencies, to the city solicitor and assistant city solicitors or to members of boards or commissions involved in the granting of variances, permits, licenses or other such discretionary or adjudicatory functions. 
(Code 1994, § 1-34) 
Sec. 2-92. - Prohibited acts by school committee members. 
    School committee members shall not make loans, gifts of value equal to or exceeding $50.00, offers of employment or future employment, except within the discharge of their official capacity as a school committee, or of business or investment opportunities to the superintendent, assistant superintendents, the business manager, the personnel director, the principals of the city public schools, consultants or legal advisers contracted to the school department, or to any other city employees. 
(Code 1994, § 1-35) 
Secs. 2-93-2-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-113-2-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 2-138. - Records. 
    The department of municipal inspections shall keep a register of all persons obtaining a license, or permit from said department pursuant to state law or local ordinance. 
(Code 1994, § 4-2) 
Secs. 2-139-2-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Police generally, M.G.L. c. 147; police departments, M.G.L. c. 41, § 96A et seq. 

Sec. 2-160. - Bond of chief required. 
    The chief of police, before assuming office, shall give a bond of a state surety company for the sum of $1,000.00 to be approved by the city manager for the faithful performance of official duties. 
(Code 1994, § 7-6) 
Sec. 2-161. - Special police. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code), special police officers may be appointed to serve with or without pay for special duty during times of local emergency, and may limit their sphere of duty and their time of service. 
(b)  The persons so appointed shall be subject to the provisions of the city ordinances and state laws, so far as the same are applicable, and to all rules and regulations prescribed for the administration of the police department, if and when they receive compensation as such officers, from the city. 
(Code 1994, § 7-3) 
State Law reference- Police reserves, M.G.L. c. 147, § 11 et seq. 
Secs. 2-162-2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, M.G.L. c. 44. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-191. - Bills, accounts, and claims. 
(a)  All bills, accounts and claims of any nature for moneys payable to persons having demands against the city shall first be presented to the board, commission, officer or department head to which the bills, accounts and claims pertain. 
(b)  At least once per month, the boards, commissions, officers and department heads shall examine all bills and accounts pertaining to their departments and shall have approved bills and accounts recorded in detail on forms prescribed by the city auditor. 
(c)  Schedules of approved bills and accounts of persons having demands against the city shall be certified by individual officers having charge of the department, by a majority of the full membership of boards and commissions, except that schedules of the school committee need be certified only by the chairperson, or vice-chairperson, in the event of the absence of the chairperson. No bills or accounts shall be approved by any administrative board or commission, except at a meeting of which all of the members have been notified and at which a majority of the board or commission are present. 
(Code 1994, § 3-1) 
State Law reference- Certification of claims, M.G.L. c. 40, § 46. 
Sec. 2-192. - Execution of deeds, contracts and other legally binding documents. 
    All contracts, deeds, conveyances, leases and other documents of a legally binding nature upon the city which must be signed, sealed, or acknowledged, or any combination thereof, shall, in order to be valid, have the signature of the city by the city manager. Any rental agreement for city facilities over five years must be presented to the city council for their approval, prior to signature by the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 3-2) 
Sec. 2-193. - Payment of gifts, grants, etc., received. 
(a)  Each gift, legacy, bequest or trust fund shall be known by the name of the donor, unless otherwise specified by the language of the legacy, bequest, gift or trust fund. The city council shall authorize the acceptance of each gift, legacy, bequest or trust fund, unless otherwise expressly provided for by law. 
(b)  All city officials, departments, boards and commissions which receive gifts, grants, properties and securities given, devised or bequeathed to or deposited with the city for any specified or unspecified reason shall pay the same to the city treasurer/collector upon receipt, and at the same time shall transmit to the city auditor a true statement of the amount so paid to the treasurer/collector, and for what it was received. 
(c)  Unless the donors have otherwise directed, the city manager shall act as the trustee of said funds; however, in all cases the city manager shall act as custodian of said funds. 
(d)  Each such fund shall be itemized by department, board or commission in the financial documents submitted to the city council, required by part V of the city Charter. Such itemization shall be by fund, principal and the interest thereon. Such itemization shall be set apart and clearly marked as being for information purposes only and not for the purposes of appropriation. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to conflict with M.G.L. c. 44, § 53A. 
(e)  The treasurer/collector, subject to the approval of the trustees, shall invest the principal thereof in such bonds and notes, as may be permitted by law for the investment of the funds of savings banks in the state, and all bonds shall be registered, at least as to the principal thereof, in the name of, and all notes shall be made payable to the order of, the city, and shall be sold and transferred only with the written authorization of the city treasurer/collector. 
(f)  Except as by the lawful application of the doctrine of cy pres, all such funds shall be expended in accordance with the terms and provisions of the gift, legacy, bequest or trust fund whenever the same shall be necessary, but for no other purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 3-5; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Grants and gifts, M.G.L. c. 44, § 53A et seq. 
Sec. 2-194. - Department, pension and veterans' benefit payrolls. 
(a)  Department, pension and veterans' benefits payrolls shall be prepared under the direction of and certified by individual officers having charge of the department, and a majority of the full membership of boards and commissions, except that payrolls of the school committee and of the trustees of public libraries need be certified only by the chairpersons of the respective boards. Payrolls of the city council shall be certified by the president of the council. All department payrolls certified in accordance with this section shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 41, § 42. 
(b)  The city auditor shall cause a careful examination and verification of all departmental, pension and veterans' benefit payrolls submitted to the auditor by administrative boards, commissions, officers or the city council, and after approval by the auditor, the auditor shall cause a warrant to be prepared in prescribed form, authorizing the city treasurer/collector to make payments thereon, subject to the approval of the city manager. The approved warrants for department, pension and veterans' benefit payrolls shall be retained by the city treasurer/collector. 
(Code 1994, § 3-7) 
State Law reference- Payrolls, M.G.L. c. 147, § 41 et seq. 
Sec. 2-195. - Manner of funding debt; payment of interest. 
    The funded debt of the city shall be in coupon or registered bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness, with interest payable semiannually, and the city treasurer/collector is authorized to issue registered bonds in exchange for coupon bonds and to register the transfer of registered bonds in accordance with M.G.L. c. 107. 
(Code 1994, § 3-8) 
State Law reference- Issuance of registered bonds, M.G.L. c. 107, § 4. 
Sec. 2-196. - Loans authorized by city council. 
    Whenever a loan shall be authorized by the city council, bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness of the city shall be issued therefor by the city treasurer/collector, subject to the approval of the city manager. All such bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness shall be signed in the name of and in behalf of the city by the city treasurer/collector and countersigned by the city manager and the city auditor, and shall bear the seal of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 3-9) 
Sec. 2-197. - Collection of taxes, accounts and other money due the city. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall collect all taxes, accounts and other sums payable to the city, not otherwise specifically provided for, together with interest, costs and charges thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 3-125) 
Sec. 2-198. - Statement filed with city auditor by the city treasurer/collector of all moneys collected. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall, at least once in each week, file with the city auditor a statement of all moneys received or collected since the previous statement on account of taxes, accounts or other sums, together with interest and costs and charges thereon, accompanied by a statement of the purposes for which the moneys were received or collected. Such statement shall include all fees, charges, costs and commissions allowed by law, received or collected by or for the city treasurer/collector or by any deputy treasurer/collector, clerk, sheriff, deputy sheriff or constable acting under authority of law by appointment, and shall certify that all moneys so received or collected have been deposited to the account of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 3-126) 
Sec. 2-199. - Licenses and permits of delinquent taxpayers. 
(a)  Tax collector to provide name of delinquent taxpayers. The treasurer/collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges (hereinafter referred to as the treasurer/collector) shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each department, board or commission which issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers (hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority), a list of any person, corporation or enterprise (hereinafter referred to as party) that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, and which has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board. 
(b)  Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit. Any licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on the list furnished to the licensing authority from the treasurer/collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the treasurer/collector, as required by applicable provisions of law. Upon written request, a party shall be given a hearing by the treasurer/collector, to be held not earlier than 14 days after such notice, unless agreed to by all parties. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation, or suspension of the license or permit to any party. 
(1)  The treasurer/collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the treasurer/collector with respect to such license or permit denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purpose of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license or permit denial, revocation or suspension. 
(2)  Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority or permit granting authority receives a certificate issued by the treasurer/collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate. 
(c)  Payment agreement. Any party may be given the opportunity to enter into a payment agreement with the treasurer/collector, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a license. The validity of such license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with such agreement. Failure to comply with such agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of such license or permit; provided, however, that the holder shall be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law shall be held. 
(d)  Waiver. The city manager may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if the city manager finds that the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of the immediate family of the property owner, its officers or stockholders, as the term "immediate family" is defined in M.G.L. c. 268A § 1, has no direct or indirect business interest in the business or activity conducted in or on such property. 
(e)  Exclusion of certain licenses and permits. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Open burning permissions under M.G.L. c. 48, § 13; 
(2)  Sales of articles for charitable purposes licenses issued under M.G.L. c. 101, § 33; 
(3)  Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses under M.G.L. c. 140, § 21E; 
(4)  Dog licenses under M.G.L. c. 140, § 137; 
(5)  Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses under M.G.L. c. 131, § 12; 
(6)  Marriage licenses under M.G.L. c. 207, § 28; and 
(7)  Theatrical events, public exhibition permits under M.G.L. c. 140, § 181. 
(Code 1994, § 3-128; Ord. of 6-28-1999; Ord. of 12-19-2016(2) ) 
State Law reference- Liens for municipal charges, M.G.L. c. 40, § 57 
Secs. 2-200-2-221. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUDITOR AND AUDITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- City auditor, M.G.L. c. 41, § 48 et seq. 

Sec. 2-222. - Filing of records, reports, etc., of boards, commissions, etc. 
    All boards, commissions, officers and department heads shall keep such records and reports of bills, payrolls and accounts as may be prescribed by the city auditor and in such form as the city auditor may determine, consistent with the uniform municipal accounting system prescribed by M.G.L. c. 44, § 38. The administrative boards, commissions and officers shall furnish to the city auditor such records and reports as may be required by the city auditor. 
(Code 1994, § 3-75) 
Sec. 2-223. - Filing of schedule of bills for collection. 
    All boards, commissions, officers, and department heads shall file with the city auditor a schedule of bills, which are to be committed to the city treasurer/collector for collection by the city treasurer/collector. The city treasurer/collector shall report to the city auditor, in prescribed detail, collections to be credited thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 3-76; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 2-224. - Filing of reports of fees, etc., paid to city treasurer/collector by boards, officers, etc. 
    All boards, officers and departments receiving fees, costs, charges, commissions or other moneys allowed by law for and in behalf of the city shall, upon paying the same to the city treasurer/collector, file with the city auditor an itemized statement of the sources from which such fees or moneys were received, together with the amount thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 3-77; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 2-225. - Countersigning bonds, notes and certificates of indebtedness; record to be kept. 
    The city auditor shall countersign all bonds, notes and certificates of indebtedness issued by the city treasurer/collector, as authorized by the city manager and city council. 
(Code 1994, § 3-78) 
Sec. 2-226. - Custodian of bonds, contracts and agreements. 
    The bonds of the city treasurer/collector, city clerk, assistant city clerk and other administrative officials and subordinate employees and all contracts or agreements to which the city may be a party shall be in the custody of the city auditor, unless otherwise specifically provided for by the Charter, general or special laws, the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code) or this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 3-79) 
Sec. 2-227. - Annual report. 
    The city auditor shall prepare an annual report which complies with the requirements of the uniform municipal accounting system, as prescribed by the director of the bureau of accounts, and shall provide a copy of this report to the city manager and the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 3-80) 
Secs. 2-228-2-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY TREASURER/COLLECTOR AND TREASURY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Treasurer, M.G.L. c. 41, § 35 et seq. 

Sec. 2-248. - Record of receipts and disbursements to be kept. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall cause an accurate and true account to be kept of all receipts and disbursements on behalf of the city, and such records shall conform as far as practicable with the accounts of the city auditor. 
(Code 1994, § 3-100) 
Sec. 2-249. - Payments to be made only upon warrants issued by city auditor, approved by the city manager. 
    Except as provided in section 2-253, no payments shall be made by the city treasurer/collector except upon a warrant issued by the city auditor, approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-250. - Books, papers, vouchers and documents to be kept in safe or vault. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall cause all books, papers, vouchers and documents under such officer's care, together with all money not deposited in banks, and belonging to the city, when not in use, to be kept in a proper safe or vault. 
(Code 1994, § 3-102) 
Sec. 2-251. - Payments to employees or officials based on departmental payrolls. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall make payment, based on departmental payrolls and warrants issued by the city auditor and approved by the city manager and the city auditor, to each employee or official, or authorized agent or attorney, or assignee, and shall take therefor the receipt of no person other than such employee or official, authorized agent or attorney or assignee. 
(Code 1994, § 3-103) 
Sec. 2-252. - Payments to be made only on orders of the city manager and countersigned and approved by city auditor. 
    The city treasurer/collector may only make payment of accounts, bills, payrolls and veterans' benefits aid rolls and claims of any nature included, except as provided in section 2-253, on orders in prescribed form approved by the city manager and countersigned and approved by the city auditor. 
(Code 1994, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-253. - Payments which may be made without warrant issued by the city auditor and approved by the city manager. 
    The city treasurer/collector may pay any sum of money due on the principal or interest of any bond, note or certificate of indebtedness, or state or county taxes or assessments, or on any court execution against the city. Any of the aforesaid payments made by the city treasurer/collector without a warrant issued by the city auditor and approved by the city manager shall forthwith be reported to the city manager and the city auditor. 
(Code 1994, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-254. - Statement of receipts and disbursements to be furnished city manager and city council. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall furnish to the city manager and city council a statement of receipts and disbursements for the preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1994, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-255. - Weekly statement to city auditor. 
    The city treasurer/collector shall furnish to the city auditor each week a detailed statement of all cash receipts, including trust and investment funds, during the preceding week. 
(Code 1994, § 3-107) 
Sec. 2-256. - Payroll accounts. 
    All executive, legislative and administrative officers and persons in the service of the city shall be paid from the proper account for the office to which they are elected or appointed, or the department in which they are employed. 
(Code 1994, § 3-108) 
Secs. 2-257-2-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTS 

Sec. 2-276. - Procurement. 
(a)  All procurements of goods and services by the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws, the city Charter, the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code) or this Code. As soon as practicable after final execution of each contract, the chief procurement officer or designee shall distribute one copy of each fully executed contract to the city clerk, to the city auditor, to the issuing department and to the vendor, and shall maintain one copy in the purchasing department. All city procurement contracts shall comply, in every way, with the mandates of M.G.L. c. 30B, unless otherwise provided for in this Code. 
(b)  The chief procurement officer or designee shall have the authority to implement municipal procurement policies and procedures beneficial to the city. In so doing, the chief procurement officer shall have the authority to set monetary purchasing limits, not less restrictive than the provisions of M.G.L. c. 30B, for the purposes of: 
(1)  The solicitation of written or oral price quotations pursuant to M.G.L. c. 30B; 
(2)  The purchase of goods or service through the exercise of sound business practices pursuant to M.G.L. c. 30B, § 4(c); 
(3)  The threshold for purchases requiring advertised, sealed bids or proposals pursuant to M.G.L. c. 30B, §§ 5, 6; 
(4)  Sole source procurements pursuant to M.G.L. c. 30B, § 7; and 
(5)  Any other reasons covered under the ambit of the Uniform Procurement Act, M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(Code 1994, § 3-50; Ord. of 4-23-2001) 
Sec. 2-277. - Contracts. 
    All contracts shall be in writing and authorized by the signature of the head of the department, or a majority of the commission or board, and shall not be binding upon the city until the same is signed and executed by the city manager; and after being authorized, signed and executed, such contract shall not be altered in any particular, except as required and allowed by M.G.L. c. 30B, and not unless the city manager shall assent thereto, by endorsement of the contract. All contracts shall be deposited with the city auditor within one week from the date of the execution thereof, and shall not be removed therefrom before the completion of such contract and final settlement of all claims and accounts in connection therewith. 
(Code 1994, § 3-51; Ord. of 4-23-2001) 
Sec. 2-278. - Required sureties. 
    When the chief procurement officer or designee requires a surety for the fulfillment of a contract, such surety shall be in the form of a bond or certified check satisfactory to the chief procurement officer. 
(Code 1994, § 3-52) 
Sec. 2-279. - Award to lowest bidders. 
    Except as provided by law, all contracts made under the provisions of this article shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Code 1994, § 3-53) 
Sec. 2-280. - Erection of buildings. 
    No contract for the erection, construction or alteration of a building shall be awarded until the plans and specifications for the same have been filed with and approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1994, § 3-54) 
Sec. 2-281. - Public construction projects. 
    No public construction contract shall be awarded until the plans and specifications have been filed with and approved by the city engineer or the individual performing similar functions and duties. 
(Code 1994, § 3-55) 
Sec. 2-282. - Inspection of contract work. 
    Whenever in the opinion of the city manager the interests of the city require it, the city manager may appoint a clerk of the works to supervise the work to be done under any contract made and entered into on behalf of the city under this article. The city manager shall file the order making such appointment in the office of the city clerk, and in the order making such appointment shall fix the salary of the inspector so appointed. Such appointment shall not be subject to confirmation or rejection by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 3-56; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 2-283. - Filing with city auditor. 
    All accepted bids, contracts and proposals, or certified copies thereof, shall be filed with the city auditor by the board, commission, officer or department head accepting or making the same. 
(Code 1994, § 3-57) 
Sec. 2-284. - Residents employment and contractors responsible work. 
(a)  General intent, definitions and purpose. 
(1)  Short title. This section may be cited as the "Chelsea Residents Employment and Contractors Responsible Work Ordinance." 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chelsea resident means any person for whom the principal place of residence is within the city. 
    Public construction project means a municipal public building project, constructed pursuant to M.G.L. c. 149, § 44A(2), where the total cost of the project exceeds $100,000.00. 
(3)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to ensure that city residents, qualified by craft, are part of and benefit from improvements in the city, and further to establish guidelines that ensure responsible management and work on all such public improvements within the city. 
(4)  Legislative findings. 
a.  The city council hereby finds that the city expends substantial municipal funds for public construction projects on an annual basis. 
b.  The council finds that a large portion of said funds are derived from taxes paid by city residents, yet often times qualified residents do not directly benefit from the work opportunities available as a result of these large public construction projects. 
c.  As a result of such expenditures, it is in the public interest, health, welfare and safety to ensure that projects which are funded with city funds and where the amount of the contract is more than $100,000.00 shall: 
1.  Provide employment opportunities for Chelsea residents; and 
2.  Provide that employees: 
(i)  Be paid at the lawfully required wage rates; 
(ii)  Be trained in a bona fide apprenticeship training program; 
(iii)  Have hospitalization and medical coverage; and 
(iv)  Be classified according to the law. 
d.  Further, in light of the economic loss to the city when bidders and subcontractors who perform work on public construction projects are not from the area of the city and/or do not hire workers from the city area, it is in the public interest to establish goals for the hiring of Chelsea residents on public construction projects, and it is found that these provisions will serve the public interest, health, welfare and safety as described in subsection (a)(4)c of this section. 
e.  Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to make certain that each municipal project constructed with municipal funds, as defined herein, includes employment opportunities for Chelsea residents through compliance with this section and strict guidelines to ensure responsible management and work on all municipal projects in the city. 
(b)  Contractors qualifications and sanctions. 
(1)  Requirement. All bidders and all subcontractors for public construction projects, as defined in subsection (a)(2) of this section, subject to M.G.L. c. 149, § 44A(2) and estimated to cost in excess of $100,000.00, shall, as a precondition for bidding, comply with the following obligations: 
a.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must comply with the obligations established under M.G.L. c. 149 to pay the appropriate lawful prevailing wage rates to their employees; 
b.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain or participate in a bona fide apprentice training program as defined by M.G.L. c. 23, §§ 11H and 11I for each apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in their work force that is approved by the division of apprentice training of the department of labor and industries and must abide by their apprentice to journeyman ratio for each trade prescribed therein in the performance of the contract; 
c.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must furnish at their expense hospitalization and medical benefits for all their employees employed on the project and/or coverage at least comparable in value to the hospitalization and medical benefits provided by health and welfare plans in the applicable craft recognized by M.G.L. c. 149, § 26 in establishing minimum wage rates; 
d.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain appropriate industrial accident insurance coverage for all the employees employed on the project in accordance with M.G.L. c. 152; 
e.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must properly classify employees as employees rather than independent contractors and treat them accordingly for the purpose of workers compensation, insurance coverage, unemployment taxes, social security taxes and income tax withholding. (See M.G.L. c. 149, § 148B on employee classification.) 
(2)  Rejection for noncompliance. A bid submitted by any general bidder or by any subcontractor under the general bidder that does not comply with any of the foregoing conditions for bidding shall be rejected, and no subcontract work outside the scope of M.G.L. c. 149, § 44F shall be awarded to a subcontractor that does not comply with the foregoing conditions. 
(3)  Weekly certification. All bidders and subcontractors under the bidder who are awarded or otherwise obtain contracts on projects subject to M.G.L. c. 149, § 44A(2) shall comply with the obligations set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section for the entire duration of their work on the project, and an officer of each such bidder or subcontractor under the bidder shall certify under oath and in writing on a weekly basis that they are in compliance with such obligations. Such certificate shall constitute a condition precedent to any payment obligation of the city. 
(4)  Sanctions. 
a.  Any bidder or subcontractor under the bidder who fails to comply with any one of the obligations set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section for any period of time shall be at the sole discretion of the city, subject to one or more of the following sanctions: 
1.  Cessation of work on the project until compliance is obtained; 
2.  Withholding of payment due under any contract or subcontract until compliance is obtained; 
3.  Permanent removal from any further work on the project; 
4.  Liquidated damages payable to the city in the amount of five percent of the dollar value of the contract. 
b.  In addition to the sanctions outlined in subsection (b)(4)a of this section, a general bidder or contractor shall be equally liable for the violations of its subcontractors, with the exception of violations arising from work performed pursuant to subcontract that are subject to M.G.L. c. 149, § 44F. Any contractor or subcontractor who had been determined to have violated any of the obligations set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be barred from performing any work on any future projects for six months for a first violation for three years for a second violation, and permanently for a third violation. 
(5)  Severability. If any provisions of this section, or application of such provision to any persons or circumstances, shall be enjoined or held to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this section, or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances, other than that which is enjoined or held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(6)  Procurement officer to enforce. The procurement officer shall be the enforcement and compliance officer for these provisions. All notices, records, and/or other written verification of compliance shall be directed to the city's procurement officer. 
(c)  Chelsea resident job goals. 
(1)  All bidders and subcontractors subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall make a good faith effort on a craft-by-craft basis to provide at all times at least 35 percent of the total employee worker hours in each trade, at every tier, to be performed by bona fide residents of the city. For the purposes of this subsection, work performed by apprenticeship and on-the-job training shall be included. 
(2)  Contractors shall submit to the city's procurement officer workforce charts listing each of its workers and those of its subcontractors of all tiers, by name, residence, craft, job category and hours worked. Submission of said workforce charts shall constitute condition precedent to any payment obligation of the city. 
(3)  Any person who provides false information regarding the person's residential address, or in the case of a contractor or bidder who knowingly provides false information regarding the address of any employee, shall be subject to a fine of $300.00 for each violation. 
(4)  The city's procurement officer shall establish criteria and procedures for compliance herewith, and shall report a compliance report to the city council annually. 
(5)  Where the provision of any federal or state statute or regulation provides that no procedure or requirement shall be imposed which will operate to discriminate against the employment of labor from any other state, possession or territory of the United States, the terms of this section shall not apply. 
(6)  If any provision of this section, or application of such provision to any persons or circumstances, shall be enjoined or held to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this section, or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances, other than that which is enjoined or held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to projects funded with noncity public dollars. The provisions of this section shall not apply to municipally funded public construction projects for which the low general bid was less than $100,000.00, nor shall it apply to work performed pursuant to subcontracts that are subject to M.G.L. c. 149, § 44F and were bid for less than $100,000.00, nor shall it apply to any rebids for construction projects for which the city receives fewer than three contract bidders in the original bid. 
(Code 1994, § 4-16; Ord. of 6-16-2003, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 2-284A. - Wage theft. 
(a)  The following section shall be incorporated into the City of Chelsea's Standard Contract General Conditions Form as of July 1, 2016 and apply to every new contract and every renewal term of a contract entered into after that date: 
The Contractor certifies that neither it nor any of its subcontractors have been subject to a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages within three years prior to the date of the contract; or certifies that it has provided copies of any and all of the above to the city prior to the date of the contract and any required wage bond or insurance; and certifies that while the contract is in effect, it will report any instance of the above to the city within five days of the contractor's receipt. 
(b)  The following provisions shall be included in any request for proposals, invitation for bids or request for qualifications issued by the city on or after July 1, 2016; 
(1)  Prospective vendors must provide the following certifications or disclosures in writing to the purchasing agent with their bids or proposals. Failure to provide the following shall result in rejection of the bid or proposal; 
(2)  Prospective vendors must certify that neither they nor any of their subcontractors have been subject to a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages within three years prior to the date vendors submit their bids or proposals; or 
(3)  Prospective vendors must disclose any such criminal or civil judgments, administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment and include copy(ies) with their bids or proposals. 
(4)  Prospective vendors are notified that they must report any such criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages while any of their bids or proposals to the purchasing agent official is pending and, if awarded a contract, during the term of the resulting contract, within five days of vendor's receipt. 
(5)  Prospective vendors that are subject to a state or federal debarment for violation of the above laws, either voluntarily or involuntarily, or that have been prohibited from contracting with the Commonwealth or any of its agencies or subdivisions will be deemed not responsible and their bids or proposals shall be rejected. Such vendors shall be deemed not responsible for the entire term of debarment or other stated time period. During the term of a contract, upon a finding or order of such debarment or prohibition, the city may terminate the contract. 
(6)  Vendor(s) awarded a contract that have disclosed a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages within three years prior to the date they submit their bids or proposals, or vendor(s) awarded a Contract that receive a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, order or final administrative determination resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages during the term of the contract and that are not otherwise prohibited from public contracting may be required by the city to obtain a wage bond or other form of suitable insurance in an amount equal to the aggregate of one year's gross wages for all employees, based on an average of its total labor costs for the past two years. Such bond must be maintained for the terms or extensions of any contract, and proof of such bond must be provided upon request by the city. 
(7)  Vendor(s) awarded a contract that have disclosed a federal or state criminal or civil judgment administrative citation, final administrative determination, order or debarment resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages within three years prior to the date they submit their bids or proposals and through the contract term shall furnish their monthly certified payrolls to the purchasing agent for all employees working on such contract. 
(Ord. of 4-25-2016 , § 1) 
Sec. 2-284B. - The living wage ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that when taxpayer-funded benefits are extended by the city to private businesses, they are used in a way that benefits the interests of the city as a whole by creating jobs that keep workers and their families out of poverty. This section therefore requires the city, its contractors and subcontractors to pay their employees a wage that will enable a full-time worker to support a family at a level that meets basic needs and avoids economic hardship. 
(b)  General definitions. As used in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    City means the City of Chelsea, its departments, offices, agencies, subdivisions, or officials thereof. 
    City administrator means the city manager, or the person designated by the city manager, who shall be responsible for the overall implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
    City contract means any agreement between the city and any other person to provide services to the city or its residents. City contract includes any grant, including but not limited to community development block grant (CDBG) funds, awarded to a person in order for it to provide specific services to the city or its residents. City contract does not include agreements primarily for the purchase or lease of goods or property for the city; nor agreements for the provision of professional services such as legal services, banking services, architectural services or computer services. 
    Contractor means any person that has entered into a city contract. 
    Covered employee means any individual fitting the definitions set forth in subsection (e). The only individuals who otherwise meet the standard of "covered employee" who are automatically exempted from the living wage are individuals in a youth or senior program, those working part-time at the Chelsea Public Library or those in a child care or summer food program for the Chelsea School Department. See definitions under subsection (h) below. 
    Covered employer means any entity fitting the definitions set forth in subsection (d). 
    Designee means a city department or agency or other party designated by the city administrator to assist with the implementation, monitoring and enforcement of this chapter. 
    Employee means any person who performs work on a full-time, part-time, temporary or seasonal basis, including employees, temporary workers, contracted workers, contingent workers and persons made available to work through services of a temporary services, staffing or employment agency or similar entity. 
    Living wage means a wage equal to the levels established in subsection (f). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, sole proprietorship, association, joint adventure, estate, trust and any other entity, group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Subcontract means any contractual relationship under which a person assists a contractor in performing a city contract, or accepts or transfers any right or responsibility set forth in a city contract. 
    Subcontractor means any person that has entered into a subcontract. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  This chapter shall apply to any for-profit contractor that employs or contracts with five or more individuals firmwide; or a nonprofit contractor that employs or contracts with ten or more individuals firmwide. 
(2)  This chapter shall apply to any city contract initially awarded after the effective date of this chapter. 
(d)  Covered employer. 
(1)  The city is a "covered employer" in all of its operations and activities. 
(2)  A contractor is a "covered employer" if it enters into one or more city contracts where the annual value of payments under all such city contracts is (or is projected to be) more than $25,000.00. A contractor is a covered employer from the beginning of the term of the city contract that caused the combined annual value of payments to exceed $25,000.00 and continues until the termination of all city contracts. 
(3)  A subcontractor is a "covered employer" beginning on the later of the following dates: (1) the beginning of the term of the subcontract; or (2) the date on which the subcontractor's associated contractor becomes a covered employer. A subcontractor ceases to be a covered employer on the earlier of the following dates: (1) the termination of the subcontract; or (2) the date on which the subcontractor's associated contractor ceases to be a covered employer. 
(e)  Covered employee. 
(1)  Employees of the city are covered employees for all hours they work for the city. 
(2)  Employees of covered employers are covered employees for all hours they perform work relating to a city contract. 
(3)  The only individuals who otherwise meet the standard of "covered employee" who are automatically exempted from the living wage are individuals in a youth or senior program, those working part-time at the Chelsea Public Library or those in a child care or summer food program for the Chelsea School Department. See definitions under subsection (h) below. 
(f)  Living wage required. 
(1)  Every covered employer must pay covered employees no less than a living wage for all hours worked as a covered employee. The living wage shall be $12.30 per hour upon implementation of this chapter. Each year thereafter, starting January 1, 2018, the amount of the living wage shall be upwardly adjusted to the higher of these three calculations: the increase, if any, for the period of the preceding November over the level as of November of the immediately preceding year in the "Consumer Price Index-All Urban Consumers" or its successor index as published by the U.S. Department of Labor or its successor agency; or the minimum wage required for a person working 2,000 hours annually to earn enough to at least match the poverty level for a family of four as determined annually by the U.S. Dept. of Health & Human Services; or 110 percent of the state minimum wage. 
(2)  Beginning in 2018 and each year thereafter, the city shall publish a bulletin on or about February 1 announcing the adjusted living wage which shall take effect immediately upon publication. This bulletin shall be distributed to all city agencies and covered employers upon publication. Covered employers shall provide written notification of the rate adjustment to their covered employees, and to their affected contractors and subcontractors. In the event that the city fails to publish the adjusted living wage, it shall remain the obligation of each covered employer to calculate and begin paying the adjusted living wage effective no later than February 1. 
(g)  Retaliation prohibited. No covered employer shall discharge or take other adverse action against any person in retaliation for asserting any claim or right under this chapter, for assisting any other person in doing so or for informing any person about their rights. 
(h)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, the following exemptions shall apply: 
(1)  The following will be granted an automatic exemption from the requirements of this chapter: 
a.  Any city, state or federally funded program which employs youth, as defined by city, state or federal guidelines, or as part of a school to work program or in other seasonal or related part-time program, including: 
1.  A bona fide training program, 
2.  An after school or summer or youth employment program, or 
3.  A bona fide work-study program, internship, fellowship, or other similar program, including the ROCA program; 
b.  Any city, state or federally funded senior program which employs individuals 60 years of age or older in a community service employment program or other subsidized employment or training program; 
c.  The part-time employment program at the Chelsea Public Library which employs part-time individuals for the purpose of supporting the full-time staff and ensuring that there is adequate personnel to meet state-mandated hours of operation. 
d.  The part-time program at the Chelsea Public Schools for child care assistants and for workers in the summer food program. 
(2)  For any city contract, the city council may grant a partial or complete exemption from the requirements of this chapter for: 
a.  A not-for-profit organization providing human services pursuant to city contracts that demonstrates that it cannot reasonably afford to pay the living wage and provide health care to its covered employees based on payment rates under the city contract and other resources available to it; 
b.  A specific exception where the city manager represents that payment of the living wage by a covered employer will (a) substantially curtail the services provided by the covered employer, (b) have an adverse impact on the city, or (c) is not in the best interests of the city. 
(3)  The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the written terms of a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, provided that this chapter is expressly referenced in the agreement, and that the agreement sets forth in clear and unambiguous terms the desire of all parties to waive some or all of the requirements of this chapter. Unilateral implementation of the terms and conditions of employment by either party to a collective bargaining relationship shall not constitute a waiver of any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  Monitoring of chapter. 
(1)  Every covered employer shall agree to the payment of a living wage as a condition of entering into or renewing a city contract, shall agree to post a notice regarding the applicability of this chapter in every workplace in which covered employees are working and shall agree to provide payroll records or other documentation as deemed necessary within ten business days from the receipt of the city's request. All city contracts covered by this chapter shall provide that a violation of the living wage requirements of this chapter shall be a material breach of the city contract. The city or its designee shall monitor the compliance of each contractor under procedures developed and approved by the city administrator. 
(2)  Each covered employer shall submit to the city information regarding the number of employees and applicable wage rates of its employees covered by this chapter in such manner as requested by the city or its designee. At the request of the city or its designee, any contractor shall provide satisfactory proof of compliance with the living wage provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person may submit a complaint or report of a violation of this chapter to the city. Upon receipt of such a complaint or report, the city or its designee shall investigate to determine if there has been a violation. The investigation shall be resolved within 90 days. 
(j)  Penalties and enforcement. 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 plus all costs of the action. Any court of competent jurisdiction may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce this chapter, including backpay to affected employees and other relief deemed appropriate. 
(2)  Each day upon which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(3)  In addition to enforcement under subsections (j)(1) and (j)(2), the city shall have the right to modify, terminate, and/or seek specific performance of any city contract with a covered employer or to cancel, terminate or suspend the city contract in whole or in part. 
(4)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city or any other person for the correction of violations of this chapter. 
(k)  Private actions for damages or injunctive relief. 
(1)  A covered employee who is denied payment of the applicable living wage in violation of this chapter may bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate injunctive relief or damages or both against the person(s) who acted in violation of this chapter. No employee or person shall bring a civil action alleging a violation of this chapter unless the employee or person has first provided a written allegation of the violation of this chapter to the city and the covered employer no less than 90 days prior to filing said civil action. After at least 90 days have passed after the written allegation has been provided, the employee or person shall be free to proceed with a civil action. Any civil action under this section must be brought within one year of the last date of the violation. The last date of the violation shall be determined by the last paycheck received by the employee or person that did not contain the living wage, or by the last occurrence of retaliation prohibited by subsection (g). 
(2)  As used in subsection, "damages" means restitution of the difference between amounts actually paid and the living wage that should have been paid including interest, an additional equal amount as liquidated damages, and reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
(3)  Private actions and remedies under this section shall be in addition to any actions for violations which the city may take. 
(l)  Other provisions. No covered employer may fund the living wage increase required by this chapter by reducing the compensation, fringe benefits or leave available to any covered employee. 
( Ord. of 6-19-2017(4) ) 
Sec. 2-285. - Disposal of goods less than $5,000.00. 
    In accordance with M.G.L. c. 30B, § 15(f), in instances in which the city determines that it wishes to dispose of goods with an estimated value of less than $5,000.00, the chief procurement officer shall dispose of same in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 3-58; Ord. of 1-27-2003) 
Secs. 2-286-2-303. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-304-2-324. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Historical commission, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8D. 

Sec. 2-325. - Establishment of Chelsea Historical Commission. 
    The Chelsea Historical Commission is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 8D for the preservation, promotion and development of the historical assets of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 8-56; Ord. of 6-8-1998) 
Sec. 2-326. - Members. 
    The Chelsea Historical Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city manager, in accordance with the city Charter, serving for terms of three years. The commission shall comply with and be subject to all rules and regulations of multiple-member bodies, as set forth in the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). 
(Code 1994, § 8-57; Ord. of 6-8-1998) 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-327. - Establishment of the community preservation committee. 
(a)  There is hereby established a community preservation committee ("committee") consisting of nine voting members pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44B. The composition of the committee, the appointment authority and the term of office for the committee members shall be as follows: 
(1)  One member of the planning board as designated by the board for a term of three years; 
(2)  One member of the conservation commission as designated by the commission for a term of three years; 
(3)  One member of the historical commission as designated by the commission for a term of three years; 
(4)  One member of the HHS Recreation and Cultural Affairs Division as designated by the city manager for a term of three years; 
(5)  One member of the Chelsea Housing Authority as designated by the Chelsea Housing Authority for a term of three years; and 
(6)  Four members of the general public not city employees or currently holding elected or appointed positions, for a term of three years, appointed by the city manager. All members appointed by the city manager shall be approved by the city council in same manner as all other appointees to boards and commissions. 
(b)  No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to stagger the terms of the members, the initial appointments of the housing authority member, the planning board member and one member of the general public appointed by the city manager shall be for two years; and the initial appointments of the HHS Recreation and Cultural Affairs Division and two members of the general public appointed by the city manager shall be for one year. 
(c)  Any vacancy on the committee shall be filled by the commission, authority, board or person that designated the member who creates the vacancy by designating another member for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Should any of the commissions, boards, or authorities who have appointment authority under this chapter be no longer in existence for whatever reason, then any other commission, board or authority performing substantially the same duties as those with appointment authority under this chapter shall have the authority to appoint a member of the committee as provided herein. In the event that there is no such commission, board, or authority then the city manager shall have the authority to appoint to the committee a person acting in the capacity of, or performing like duties of the commission, board or authority in question. 
(e)  The committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and may elect such other officers, adopt procedural rules and regulations and establish any subcommittees as it deems appropriate. 
(f)  The committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall approve its actions by a majority vote of the quorum. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 2-328. - Procedure for appointment of public members. 
    For the four members of the general public, there shall be a public announcement of the open positions, with at least a three-week period for submittal of an application to the city manager. The public announcement shall be posted on the city's website and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The four members of the general public should include citizens who have demonstrated interest in open space, recreation, historic preservation and/or affordable housing. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 2-329. - Powers and duties of the community preservation committee. 
(a)  The committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the city regarding community preservation. The committee shall consult with existing municipal boards, including the conservation commission, the historical commission, the planning board, the Chelsea Housing Authority and the HHS Division of Recreation and Cultural Affairs, or persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the city regarding community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The committee may, after proper appropriation, incur expenses as permitted by state law using funds from the community preservation fund to pay such expenses. 
(b)  The committee shall make recommendations to the Chelsea City Council for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; for the acquisition, creation, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of land for recreational use; for the acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; and for rehabilitation or restoration of open space and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section; provided, however, that funds expended pursuant to this chapter shall not be used for maintenance. With respect to community housing, the committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites. With respect to recreational use, the acquisition of artificial turf for athletic fields shall be prohibited. 
(c)  The committee may include in its recommendations to the Chelsea City Council a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in the community preservation fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community preservation. 
(d)  The committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. Recommendations to the Chelsea City Council shall include their anticipated costs. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 2-330. - Action by the city council. 
    The city council shall consider recommendations of the committee similar to appropriation requests from the city manager, and city council action on such recommendations shall be governed by the same rules in the city Charter applicable to appropriation requests. 
( Ord. of 12-19-2016(1) ) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, M.G.L. c. 140, § 136A et seq.; disposition of old and infirm animals, M.G.L. c. 133; lost goods and stray beasts, M.G.L. c. 134; dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 136A et seq.; cruelty to animals, M.G.L. c. 272, § 77 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means any person appointed by the city manager as the animal control officer under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 151 and 151A, and to carry out the provisions of this chapter. In the absence or vacancy in the office or unavailability of the control officer, the city's inspector of animals or deputy shall perform the duties of the animal control officer. 
    Animal control ordinances means this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city manager for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog determined to be a nuisance by the chief of police, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
    Guard dog means a dog which meets the provisions of M.G.L. c. 129, § 39B. 
    Humane officer means any person designated by the humane society as a law enforcement officer and who qualifies to perform such duties under state law. 
    Humane society means any organization for the prevention of cruelty to animals incorporated under state law. 
    Owner means any person, having reached the age of majority, owning, keeping or harboring dogs. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means: 
(1)  Any dog which, according to the records of any appropriate public official, including, but not limited to, the animal control officer or any police officer, has: 
a.  Inflicted serious injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
b.  Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; 
(2)  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting or any dog trained for dogfighting; 
(3)  Any dog not owned by a government or law enforcement unit used primarily to guard public or private property; 
(4)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person on the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; 
(5)  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(6)  Any dog which, on three separate occasions within a 12-month period, has been observed being unrestrained or uncontrolled off its owner's premises by the animal control officer or other police officer, or has been impounded by the animal control officer for being unrestrained or uncontrolled off its owner's premises. 
All dangerous dogs as defined by this chapter shall be presumed to be a nuisance and a danger to the public safety for the purposes of M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
    Restraint means a dog that is on the premises of its owner or, if outside the premises of the owner, is accompanied by a person who has the dog under control by holding it firmly on a leash. 
    Serious injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or lacerations requiring multiple sutures. 
    Veterinary hospital means an establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the boarding of animals or the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
(Code 1994, § 8-11; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of all individuals who reside or frequent the city. It is further the purpose of this chapter to prevent the needless health hazards caused by animals, and by animal feces upon public and private properties. 
(Code 1994, § 8-10) 
Sec. 4-3. - Seizure. 
    The animal control officer shall have full authority to seize any animal pursuant to this chapter or who is otherwise a clear and imminent threat to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(Code 1994, § 8-10; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-4. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall allow any domestic fowl, swine, goat, sheep, ox, cow, horse or other grazing animal owned by such person, or in such person's charge or control, to go at large or to graze in or upon: 
(1)  Any public ways, or private ways open to the public; or 
(2)  Any of the parks, commons, public grounds or lands of the city, whether supervised or not. 
(b)  No person shall allow any dog owned by such person, or in such person's charge or control, to: 
(1)  Swim in a pond or pool in any of the parks or public grounds of the city; or 
(2)  Trample upon or injure any flower bed, flower, shrub or other property of the city, in any of such parks or public grounds. 
(Code 1994, § 8-12) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit grazing in streets, M.G.L. c. 85, § 10; strays generally, M.G.L. c. 134. 
Sec. 4-5. - Nuisances. 
    No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such person's animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking people or other domestic animals, trespassing upon school grounds, or trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage property shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1994, § 8-13) 
State Law reference- Barking dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
Sec. 4-6. - Animals suspected of being rabid. 
    No police officer or other person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any animal suspected of being rabid, except after the animal has been placed in quarantine and the diagnosis of rabies made by a licensed veterinarian. If a veterinarian diagnoses rabies in an animal in quarantine, then the animal shall be humanely killed and the head of such animal sent to a laboratory for pathological examination and confirmation of diagnosis. 
(Code 1994, § 8-14) 
Sec. 4-7. - Using animals as prizes. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Give away any live vertebrate animal as: 
a.  A prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition; 
b.  An inducement to enter a place of amusement; or 
(2)  Offer such vertebrate animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 1994, § 8-150) 
State Law reference- Giving away live animals, M.G.L. c. 272, § 80F. 
Sec. 4-8. - Animal waste. 
(a)  The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any fecal matter deposited by the owner's animal on the owner's property, public walks, recreation areas or private property. 
(b)  The owner or person who possesses or controls the animal when appearing with the animal on any public walk, street, recreation area or private property shall possess the means of removal of any fecal matter left by such animal. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the means of removal shall include any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such fecal matter. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such fecal matter to a place suitable and regularly and specifically reserved for disposal of human fecal matter, specifically reserved for the disposal of dog fecal matter or otherwise designated as appropriate by the director of public health. 
(Code 1994, § 8-16; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-9. - Keeping of exotic animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, member of the feline species other than a domestic cat (Felis domesticus), member of the canine species other than domestic dog (Canis familiaris) or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals without the permission of the board of health. Such permission shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. 
(Code 1994, § 8-10; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
State Law reference- Possession of certain wild animals, M.G.L. c. 131, § 5. 
Sec. 4-10. - Pigeons and wild birds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pigeon means any bird belonging to the family Columbidae. 
    Public property means any property owned and controlled by the city, including streets, parks and sidewalks. 
    Wild bird means: 
(1)  Starling, also known as a Sturnus vulgaris; 
(2)  English sparrow, also know as a Passer domesticus; or 
(3)  Seagull, also known as the genus Larus. 
(b)  Scope/purpose. It is the purpose of this section to: 
(1)  Regulate the keeping, feeding, breading, raising and harboring of pigeons, wild pigeons and wild birds in the city in a way to protect and promote the safety of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Prevent the spread of disease; 
(3)  Prevent the creation of nuisance and prevent damage to private and public property. 
This section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health pursuant to this section shall not be construed to give a person or entity permission to keep pigeons if said harborage is contrary to other federal, state or local laws. 
(c)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity: 
(1)  To transport, sell, own, keep or otherwise posses any live pigeon and/or wild bird within any public property or any area designated as a residential district under chapter 34, zoning. Nothing in this provision prohibits any person or entity from transporting a live pigeon through a residential district, if the live pigeon is caged during transportation and not released in a residential district. 
(2)  To willfully and intentionally feed pigeons and wild birds on any public property or property to which the public has right of access. 
(3)  To willfully and intentionally feed pigeons and wild birds on private property if a nuisance is created or to the extent the public health is threatened. A bird feeder on private property shall be exempted if that bird feeder is not creating a public nuisance. At no time shall a bird feeder feed pigeons or seagulls. 
(4)  Not to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated by the board of health, unless expressly waived by this section. 
(d)  Regulation and control. 
(1)  A person or entity may seek a permit from the city's board of health to keep, breed, raise or harbor pigeons, wild pigeons or wild birds. 
(2)  If a person or entity receives such permit, all such pigeons, wild pigeons and wild birds must be housed or caged in a "pigeon loft" as that term is defined in the rules and regulations of the board of health. 
(3)  The person or entity with a permit to house pigeons or wild birds shall be responsible for the control of such pigeons or wild birds so as not to create a nuisance and for the maintenance of such roosting or harboring areas in a clean and sanitary condition pursuant to the rules and regulations of the board of health. 
(4)  A person or entity that can establish that, for at least two months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, it has been licensed or is a member of a pigeon organization either to raise, breed or harbor pigeons may be exempted from any permit or registration fee created by the board of health. Such persons or entities must, however, register and obtain a permit to feed, raise or harbor pigeons from the board of health. 
(e)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city board of health and inspectional services department. The board of health shall be the issuing authority and coordinator of the permitting process and administration of this section. 
(f)  Revocation and suspension. After notice any permit issued under this section may be revoked or suspended at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the board of health. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person or entity violating any of the provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40 § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or by noncriminal complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 50, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-23-2001, § 8-19) 
State Law reference- Killing or frightening pigeons, M.G.L. c. 266, § 132. 
Secs. 4-11-4-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, 149. c. 140, § 136A et seq. 

Sec. 4-39. - Fines-Generally. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a criminal fine, for offenses within a calendar year, of: 
(1)  $25.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $50.00 for the second offense; 
(3)  $75.00 for the third offense and each subsequent offense; and 
shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 8-36) 
Sec. 4-40. - Same-For dogs biting persons. 
(a)  Any owner of a dog which has bitten a person shall be subject to a criminal fine of: 
(1)  $50.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $75.00 for the second offense; 
(3)  $100.00 for the third and all subsequent offenses; and 
shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(b)  If any violation be continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 8-37) 
State Law reference- Report of dog bites, M.G.L. c. 112, § 12Z. 
Sec. 4-41. - Issuance of tickets. 
    The animal control officer and police officers of the city are empowered to issue tickets for violations of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 8-34) 
Sec. 4-42. - Compliance no defense. 
    Compliance with the requirements of this article shall not be a defense to an order of disposal of a dog pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
(Code 1994, § 8-396; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-43. - Impoundment-Seizure and quarantine. 
(a)  Any dog may be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer if the owner, keeper or possessor has not complied with the requirements of this article. Such animal shall be kept by the animal control officer, pending a hearing before the chief of police or designee, and such further disposition or relief as the chief may order. 
(b)  Potentially dangerous dogs shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer and a hearing pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, § 157 shall be scheduled in due course. 
(c)  Any dog which bites a person shall be quarantined for ten days if so ordered by the inspector of animals. During quarantine, the dog shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal. At the discretion of the inspector of animals, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. If the inspector of animals requires other confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the quarantine period to an animal shelter or shall, at such owner's expense, place it in a veterinary hospital. 
(d)  The animal control officer shall file a verified report of any dog having attacked or bitten any person with the city clerk for filing and such dog shall not be reregistered in the city unless the owner is in full compliance with this article. 
(e)  Unrestrained dogs, females in heat, dogs found to be disturbing the peace, or dogs having bitten or injured any domestic animal may all be taken by police or the animal control officer and impounded in an animal shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. Such impounding facility shall be available for inspection at specified periods of time by persons seeking lost dogs which may have been impounded. 
(1)  If by an identification tag or by other means the owner can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner of the impoundment of the animal. 
(2)  Impounded dogs shall be kept for ten days, unless reclaimed by their owners. Dogs not claimed by their owners within ten days, or placed in suitable new homes, may be humanely euthanized by the animal control officer or by an agency delegated by such officer to exercise that authority. 
(Code 1994, § 8-29; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
State Law reference- Impoundment of certain dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 151A. 
Sec. 4-44. - Same-Release. 
    An impounded dog shall be released to its owner or keeper upon payment of the impounding facility's fees and on the following additional conditions, as the animal control officer deems each or any applicable: 
(1)  Upon the obtaining or display of a valid, unexpired license and evidence of a current antirabies vaccination as required by law. 
(2)  Upon the agreement of the owner or keeper to undertake such restrictions or the control of the animal, as the dog officer shall require for the health and safety of the dog and the public. 
(3)  In addition to the impounding facility's fees, pay or reimburse the city for all costs, expenses or charged incurred under this article and agree to indemnify and hold it harmless for all damage done by or to said dog. 
(Code 1994, § 8-32) 
Sec. 4-45. - Sale or disposition of dogs held by city for purpose of experimentation or vivisection prohibited. 
    All dogs kept in restraint by the animal control officer in the city dog pound shall not be sold or given away for the purpose of experimentation or vivisection. 
(Code 1994, § 8-33) 
Sec. 4-46. - Hindering enforcement. 
    Any animal control officer shall have police power in the enforcement of this article. No person shall interfere with or hinder, molest or abuse any animal control officer in the exercise of such powers. 
(Code 1994, § 8-38) 
Sec. 4-47. - Identification tag required. 
(a)  Every owner issued a license in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, § 137 for a dog owned or kept within the city will also receive an identification tag from the city clerk's office. 
(b)  The identification tag shall be a durable tag stamped with an identifying number and of a particular color to signify the specific year of issuance. Tags will be so designed that they may conveniently be fastened to the dog's collar or harness. Dogs must wear identification tags at all times. 
(c)  The city clerk shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers and shall make this record available to the public. 
(d)  Any dog unrestrained and without an identification tag shall be apprehended by the animal control officer, and shall not be released until properly licensed. If not properly licensed at the expiration of ten days of confinement, such dog shall be disposed of as set forth in this article. 
(e)  This license shall not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog within the city for less than 60 days. 
(f)  No person may use any license for any dog other than for the dog for which it was issued. No person shall keep or control more than three dogs on a single premises. 
(g)  The city shall automatically place under review all licenses, upon application for renewal, issued to animal owners against whom three or more violations of this article have been assessed in a 12-month period. 
(h)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any such license that the city, designated agents or the inspector of animals appointed under M.G.L. c. 29, §§ 15 and 16, be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any time, and, if permission for such inspections are refused, the agent shall seek a search warrant to enter and inspect the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 8-25; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-48. - Owner's duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog, or anyone having any dog in possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damages which might result from their dog's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. 
(b)  In the event that the owner or keeper of any dog is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog, or anyone having any dog in possession or custody, to ensure that the dog is kept under restraint and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian, and that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanly enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition, preventing the animal from gaining access to the exterior of such premises or from reaching persons or animals from within such premises, and such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; 
(2)  It is securely and humanly restrained by chain, cable and trolley, or other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape. For the safety of the animal, no such chain may be less than eight feet in length; accordingly, if such premises are not of sufficient area to maintain the animals as aforesaid, then such premises may not be used for such purpose; or 
(3)  It is on a leash, not longer than five feet, strong enough to restrain and control the movements of said dog and under the control of a responsible and competent person. 
(Code 1994, § 8-26; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
Sec. 4-49. - Curbing of dogs. 
(a)  Any dog which scratches, digs, urinates or defecates upon any lawn, tree, shrub, plant, building, sidewalk or any other public or private property, other than the property of the owner or person in charge or control of such dog, is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  No person being the owner in charge or control of any dog shall allow or permit such animal to commit a nuisance on any school grounds, city park or other public property, or upon any private property other than that of the owner or person in charge or control of such dog, without the permission of the owner of such property. 
(c)  Where the owner or person in charge or control of such dog immediately removes all feces deposited by such dog and disposes of such in a sanitary manner, such nuisance shall be considered abated. 
(Code 1994, § 8-27) 
Sec. 4-50. - Female dogs in heat. 
(a)  Every dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such dog cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(b)  If the animal control officer determines that a dog in heat, even when properly confined, is attracting other dogs to the area, which causes a disturbance or damage to neighboring property or public areas, the dog may be impounded for the duration, in accordance with section 4-52, and shall be released to the owner or keeper upon compliance with the provisions of section 4-44. 
(Code 1994, § 8-29) 
Sec. 4-51. - Dangerous dogs regulation. 
(a)  There shall be a total ban of dangerous dogs anywhere within the city, excepting a dangerous dog kept in accordance and pursuant to an order of the chief of police. 
(b)  The owner of any dangerous dog, if said animal is found on property not owned or controlled by its owner, or is not restrained in a secure area pursuant to this article, shall be guilty of an offense and said animal shall be forever banned from within the limits of the city. 
(c)  Subsequent to a hearing by the chief of police, carried out in conformance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, § 157, the chief may order such animal disposed of or forever banned from with the limits of the city, or may order the dog restrained in accordance with section 4-52. 
(d)  As part of any order of the chief of police issued pursuant to such a hearing, the chief of police shall also be authorized to order the following administrative sanctions and remedies: 
(1)  Obedience training for the dog in question; 
(2)  Reduction of the number of animals kept any one location; 
(3)  Any other measure or sanction designed to eliminate a violation, prevent future violations, or protect the health and safety of the public. 
(e)  Any person having knowledge which the person believes constitutes probable cause to believe that another is harboring, keeping or maintaining a dangerous or vicious dog which is not registered with and licensed by the city in accordance with this article, shall file with the animal control officer or the police department a sworn affidavit setting forth the basis on which they believe the animal to be a dangerous dog, the name and address of the owner of the dog, and a description of the dog. The animal control officer or the police department shall, upon receipt of such an affidavit, inquire of the city clerk if the dog is currently registered as a dangerous dog pursuant to this article. If the dog is not registered, the city clerk shall notify the police department of this fact and the police department shall notice the owner and shall include the requirement that the owner shall bring the potentially dangerous dog to the veterinarian stated in the aforementioned notice for inspection to determine whether this dog is a "dangerous dog" by the definition as set forth in section 4-1. 
(Code 1994, § 8-30; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
State Law reference- Vicious dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
Sec. 4-52. - Restraint of dangerous dogs. 
    The chief of police, pursuant to a hearing, may determine any dog to be a nuisance and may make such order concerning the restraint or disposal of such dog as may be deemed necessary. Any restraint order issued by the chief shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person shall allow or suffer any dog to be anywhere except within or upon the principal and usual residential premises of the person to whom such animal is registered, as required by law. 
(2)  While on the premises of the person to whom such dog is registered, as required by law, be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen or structure must have a minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(3)  The person to whom such dog is registered as required by law shall display a sign on the person's premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or way. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous dog. 
(4)  Such a dangerous dog may be beyond such premises for the purposes of transport of the animal for medical or veterinary care. In such instance, the animal must be securely muzzled and restrained by a leash or chain not exceeding five feet in length; at all such times appropriate care, precaution and security must be maintained to preclude and prevent the animal from gaining access to the exterior of any transport utilized or from reaching persons or animal from within such transport. 
(5)  Such animal may be beyond such premises for the purpose of transport of the animal permanently out of the limits of the city. In such instance, the procedure for such animal provided in subsection (4) of this section shall be employed. 
(Code 1994, § 8-31; Ord. of 9-30-1996) 
State Law reference- Vicious dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 157. 
Sec. 4-53. - On school premises. 
    The owner or anyone having any dog in possession or the custody of any dog shall not allow such dog to be upon any school grounds between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any day that such schools are in session. 
(Code 1994, § 8-35; Ord. of 9-30-1996; Ord. of 9-8-1997) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Regulation of vacant and foreclosing properties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Foreclosing means the process by which a property placed for a real estate loan is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults. 
    Initiation of the foreclosure process means the taking of any of the following actions: 
(1)  Taking possession of a residential property pursuant to M.G.L. c. 244, § 1; 
(2)  Delivering the mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose to the borrower pursuant to M.G.L. c. 244, § 17B; or 
(3)  Commencing a foreclosure action on a property in either land court or county superior court. 
    Local means within 60 miles from the distance of the property in question, unless waived by the city's building inspector. 
    Mortgagee means the creditor, including, but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant or employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. 
    Owner means every person, entity, service company, trustee, property manager or real estate broker who alone or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park; 
(2)  Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity including, but not limited to, agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; 
(3)  Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; 
(4)  Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control of any such property; 
(5)  Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium. Each such person is bound to comply with the provisions of these minimum standards as if such person were the owner. However, this section shall not apply to a condominium association created pursuant to M.G.L. c. 138A to the extent that such association forecloses on or initiates the foreclosure process for unpaid assessments due or owing to the association. The term "owner" also means every person who operates a roominghouse; or 
(6)  Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgage backed securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure process. 
    Property means any real, residential property, or portion thereof, located in the city, including buildings or structures situated on the property. 
    Residential property means any property that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living purposes. 
    Vacant means any property not currently legally occupied and not properly maintained or secured. 
(b)  Findings. The city council finds and determines there is a nationwide epidemic of foreclosures due to recent events in the housing market and that the situation has created a threat to the public welfare and safety of private property owners as well as the community at large. The properties are often abandoned as the foreclosure process begins and retaken by financial institutions with little to no connection with the municipality in which they own the property. Homes are often left unoccupied for a significant period of time which may lead to a host of public health and safety issues, as well as having the effect of lowering neighboring property values. Further, many vacant properties sit in direct violation of multiple aspects of state and local building and sanitary codes. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reduce the harmful effect that vacant, abandoned, unsafe and foreclosing properties have on surrounding neighborhoods and the city's inhabitants by: 
(1)  Requiring all residential property owners, including lenders, trustees and service companies, to properly maintain vacant and/or foreclosing properties; 
(2)  Regulating the maintenance of vacant and/or foreclosing, residential properties to prevent blighted and unsecured residences. 
Further, this section will provide additional enforcement tools to the city in an effort to enhance the health, safety and welfare of the community at large. 
(d)  Registration of vacant and/or foreclosing residential properties and the duty to provide written notice. 
(1)  All owners must register vacant and/or foreclosing properties with the commissioner of inspectional services department on the appropriate form provided by that office. 
(2)  All registrations must state the owner's or agent's name, phone number and mailing address located within the state as required by M.G.L. c. 59, § 57D, c. 156D, § 5.02 and 950 CMR 113.20. The mailing address may not be a post office box. 
(3)  This registration must also certify that the property was inspected and identify whether the property is vacant at the time of filing. 
(4)  If the property is vacant, the owner and/or registrant must designate and retain a local individual or local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. This designation must state the individual or company's name, phone number, and local mailing address. The mailing address may not be a post office box. Should the owner and/or registrant choose another local individual or local property management company to be responsible for the security and maintenance of the property, the owner and/or registrant must notify the city in accordance with the requirements of this subsection and subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section, within seven days of the designation. 
(5)  If the property is in the process of foreclosure, then the registration must be received within seven days of the initiation of the foreclosure process as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(6)  If the city determines that the property is vacant and that the foreclosure proceedings have not been initiated, the registration must be received within 14 days of the city's first citation for improper maintenance. 
(7)  In the event there is a change in ownership while the residential property remains vacant and/or in the process of foreclosure, the new owner shall register with the city in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) within seven days of transfer of ownership. 
(e)  Administrative fee. 
(1)  All property registrations are valid for one calendar year. An annual registration fee of $100.00 must accompany the registration form. 
(2)  Subsequent annual registrations and fees are due within 30 days of expiration of the previous registration and must certify whether the foreclosing and/or foreclosed property remains vacant or not. 
(3)  Once the property is no longer vacant or sold, the owner must provide proof of sale or written notice and proof of occupancy to the commissioner of the inspectional services department. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Properties subject to this section must be maintained in accordance with the relevant sanitary codes, building codes, and city regulations concerning external and/or visible maintenance. The owner, local individual, or local property management company must inspect and maintain the property on a bimonthly basis for the duration of the vacancy. 
(2)  The property must contain a posting with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local individual or property management company responsible for the maintenance. This sign must be posted on the front of the property so that it is clearly visible from the street. 
(g)  Inspections. The inspectional services department shall have the authority and the duty to inspect properties subject to this section for compliance with this section. The commissioner of the inspectional services department has enforcement authority pursuant to, inter alia, M.G.L. c. 143, § 3, the state building code and the administrative code of the city (see in appendix A to this Code). 
(h)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  In accordance with section 1-8, general schedule of noncriminal fines, failure to register with the commissioner is punishable by a fine of: 
a.  $50.00 for a first offense; 
b.  $150.00 for a second offense; and 
c.  $300.00 for a third offense. 
(2)  Failure to properly identify the name of the local individual or local property management company is punishable by the fee schedule set forth in section 1-8. 
(3)  Failure to maintain the property is punishable by the fee schedule set forth in section 1-8. All moneys collected pursuant to this section shall be directed to a revolving account for the personnel costs incurred and board-up fee for vacant properties due to the city's enforcement of this section. 
(4)  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by the schedule of fines set forth in section 1-8, for each day that elapses after property is determined to be vacant and/or notice of foreclosure is advertised in the local newspaper. 
(Ord. of 11-24-2008, § 2-24) 
Sec. 6-2. - Certificates of habitability. 
    The purpose of this section is to ensure that all rental units within the city are fit for human habitation and meet the requirements of Chapter II of the Massachusetts Sanitary Code. All rental properties will be required to obtain a certificate of habitability at least every five years and every time a new tenant occupies a rental unit. The objective of this section is to implement a transparent and consistent rental inspection program that maximizes city resources to protect tenants and landlords. The city is not inspecting units pursuant to this section that are occupied by the property owner. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Days. Consecutive calendar days. 
(2)  Owner. An owner shall be defined as a for-profit, not-for-profit, individual or corporation; an agent of a for-profit, not-for-profit, individual or corporation; a mortgagee in possession or any person having legal title, legal charge of or authority, over a private dwelling, tenement, lodging house/rooming house or other residential rental property dedicated to residential use. 
(3)  Certificate of habitability. An inspection conducted to ensure that rented dwelling units are fit for human habitation and comply with the requirements set forth in the state sanitary code, 105 CMR 410. To secure a certificate of habitability, a rental unit must possess separate sleeping, sanitation, and living area. 
(4)  Enforcement. This section will be enforced by the inspectional services department (ISD) as directed by the director of ISD and the board of health. 
(5)  Dwelling. Every building used or intended to be used for human habitation and all other structures located within the same lot line whose existence causes or is likely to effect noncompliance with the provisions of the state sanitary code, 105 CMR 410.00. 
(6)  Dwelling unit. A room or rooms within a dwelling used or intended for use by one family or household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Dwelling unit shall also mean a condominium unit. 
(7)  Rental unit. A non-owner occupied room or group of related rooms within a dwelling used or intended for use by one family or household for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating in exchange for a fee or money. A rental unit shall also mean a non-owner occupied condominium unit or unit that is owned by a trust or LLC. Dwelling units that have current lodging house licenses/rooming house licenses issued by the licensing board for the city shall not be considered as rental units for the purposes of this section, and will continue to be annually licensed and inspected pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 22 and 25. 
(8)  Locking device. A device operated by a key, combination, padlock, keycard or any other device used on a door for holding, closing or securing. 
(b)  Inspections for a certificate of habitability. All property owners shall be responsible for the following inspections: 
(1)  New occupant/tenant inspection for a certificate of habitability. Whenever a rental unit, other than a hotel, motel or lodging house/rooming house licensed pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 22-31, is vacated by the occupants thereof or when an area in an existing building is converted to a condominium it must be inspected by ISD, as meeting the standards set forth in the state sanitary code, 105 CMR 410.00 et seq., as amended, otherwise known as a certificate of habitability, prior to being re-occupied by a new occupant. Once a rental unit receives a certificate of habitability through this process, the owner will not be required to obtain a new certificate of habitability until the lesser of five years from the date of issuance or when there is a change in tenancy. 
(2)  Five-year inspection for a certificate of habitability. Every five years each rental unit, other than units exempt pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, will be inspected to ensure it meets the requirements of the state sanitary code and the ordinances of the city. This is required even if there has been no change in tenancy during this five-year period. 
(3)  Director of ISD may cause unit to be inspected. The director of ISD may cause the unit to be inspected pursuant to the terms herein and in the manner provided for in the state sanitary code. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything in subsections (1) and (2) above, and regardless of the date of any previous certificates of habitability, whenever a property owner has been required by ISD to remove a dwelling unit or space within a dwelling unit deemed illegal, the owner shall be required to obtain a new certificate of habitability inspection for all dwelling units in that same building within one year of the date that ISD issues a building permit confirming removal of the illegal dwelling unit or illegal space. 
(c)  Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of habitability may be issued, for no longer than 30 days, if in the judgment of the director of ISD or designee, the owner is entitled to a reasonable period of time to make necessary repairs and if the health and safety of the occupants is not thereby endangered. 
(d)  Posting of owner information. An owner or the condominium trust association of a rental unit shall post and maintain or cause to be posted and maintained on such dwelling, adjacent to the mailboxes for such dwelling, or elsewhere in the interior of such dwelling, in a location visible to the residents, a notice constructed of durable material, not less than 20 square inches in size, bearing his/her name, address, and telephone number. If the owner is a realty trust or partnership, the name, address, and telephone number of the managing trustee or partner shall be posted. If the owner is a corporation, the name, address, and telephone number of the president of the corporation shall be posted. Where the owner employs a manager or agent, such manager or agent's name, address, and telephone number shall also be included in the notice. Post Office (P.O.) box does not satisfy the address requirement of this section. The phone number on the notice has to be current and accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(e)  Exemption. A dwelling unit that is occupied by its owner is exempt from obtaining a certificate of habitability. If a dwelling unit is owned by a trust or LLC then it shall be inspected. 
(f)  Pertinent safety aspects of certificate of habitability inspections. During certificate of habitability inspections, ISD staff will be evaluating to ensure that each rental unit is safe and habitable for all occupants, and that the number of occupants complies with the minimum square footage calculation set forth in subsection (f)(2)i. below. ISD will also inspect to ensure units are not being used as illegal rooming houses. ISD will determine the unit's compliance with state sanitary code, city ordinances and rules and regulations. ISD will require the following: 
(1)  No locking devices on bedroom doors, however bedroom doors are permitted to be equipped with a privacy lockset doorknob provided such device is operable from the inside of the bedroom without use of a key or tool; and 
(2)  Each rental unit must meet the minimum square footage requirement in the state sanitary code. Rental units shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant and at least 100 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant. 
i.  Minimum square footage calculation: The above calculation will include kitchens, living rooms, bedrooms, and dining rooms. All bathrooms, laundry rooms/spaces, foyers, communicating corridors, closets and storage space shall be excluded from the calculation of total floor space. 
(g)  Charges for inspections. All inspections performed under this section shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of the state sanitary code and recorded on a form approved by ISD. ISD shall charge an inspection fee of $50.00 per unit. This inspection fee shall cover the cost of up to two inspections of the unit to achieve compliance. If additional inspections are required for the unit to achieve compliance, ISD shall charge an additional fee of $50.00 per inspection for the third and any subsequent inspections of the same unit and common areas. All fees are subjected to a scheduled issued and amended time to time by the city manager. 
(h)  Owner responsible for notice to occupants and access to units. 
(1)  The owner is responsible for providing reasonable advanced notice of the scheduled inspection to the occupants of the unit. 
(2)  The owner or his/her representative may be present at and throughout the time of inspection. The tenant or his/her representative may also be present. 
(3)  The owner or his/her representative is responsible for making sure the inspector has access to all interior and exterior spaces of the building, including the basement, the common areas and any outside space. 
(4)  Within reason, the owner or his/her representative is responsible for ensuring that the inspector can view all rooms, all walls, all secondary means of egress, and all other aspects of the rental unit that are pertinent to health and safety. 
(5)  If an owner is denied access by the occupant for purposes of conducting an inspection, the owner of said unit shall notify ISD of such denial no less than 72 hours prior to their inspection appointment and provide proof that they gave adequate notice to the tenant. The owner is required to reschedule the appointment and take any and all steps necessary to obtain access to the all units in the dwelling. 
(6)  If the inspector cannot gain access to a unit or any parts of a unit on the day of the inspection, the owner forfeits the fee and must re-schedule the inspection, paying a new $50.00 fee. If this occurs a second time, the owner will be deemed to be noncompliant and will be fined per day pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code until the unit is inspected and a certificate of habitability is obtained. 
(7)  Results of the inspection will be provided in writing to the owner and shall be provided to the tenant upon request. 
(i)  Penalties. 
(1)  Failure to comply with any provisions of this section will result in the property owner being liable for a fine as provided in section 1-8(b). Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Failure to comply with any order issued pursuant to 105 CMR 410.830 of the state sanitary code will result in the owner being liable for a fine as provided in section 1-8(b) of this Code. Each day's failure to comply with an order issued by ISD shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  The provisions of this section may also be enforced according to M.G.L. c. 40U as accepted by the city, also known as the "Green Ticket" law. 
(4)  If the director of ISD or designee deems the conditions in the unit to endanger or impair the health and safety of the occupants in accordance with 105 CMR 410.750 of Chapter II of the state sanitary code, it is the owner's responsibility to take whatever measures are necessary to bring units into compliance, including but not limited to relocating existing tenants. If this does not occur immediately, the city will use whatever means necessary to ensure the owner complies, including but not limited to deeming the property unfit for human habitation in accordance with the provisions of 105 CMR 410.831, criminal and court actions. All expenditures the city must incur to ensure this compliance will be considered the responsibility of the owner and the city will take whatever means necessary to collect these funds. 
(j)  Creation of a public record. Any and all notices, statements, inspection forms, applications including supporting documentation, and any other documents concerning an inspection pursuant to this section, shall be a matter of public record. 
(k)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or his designee the director of ISD may promulgate written rules and regulations necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 4-13; Ord. of 6-8-1998; Ord. of 3-24-2014 ; Ord. of 3-13-2017(1) ) 
Sec. 6-3. - Single-room occupancy buildings and roominghouse inspections. 
    All single-room occupancy (SRO) buildings, roominghouses, dwelling units and areas within SRO buildings and roominghouses, and/or any other residential premises issued a license by the licensing commission pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 22-31, shall be annually inspected for compliance with building, sanitary, fire and local codes by the department of municipal inspections. Such inspections shall take place annually prior to the issuance of requisite licenses by the city licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 4-15; Ord. of 4-9-2001) 
Sec. 6-4. - Condominium and cooperative conversion. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Condominium means the land or the lessee's interest in any lease of such land which is submitted to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 183A, the buildings, all other improvements and structures thereon, and all easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, which have been submitted to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 183A. 
    Condominium unit means a unit in housing condominium as that term is defined in M.G.L. c. 183A. 
    Convert or conversion means the initial offer, in any manner, for the sale and transfer of title to any residential unit as one or more condominium units pursuant to an individual unit deed or, in the case of a cooperative, an individual proprietary lease. 
    Cooperative unit means a unit in a housing cooperative as set forth in M.G.L. c. 157B. 
    Owner means a person who holds title in any manner to a building or housing accommodation, including without limitation a corporation, partnership or trust, and any employee, agent, servant or other representative of such owner. 
    Unit or residential unit means the room or group of rooms within a building which is used or intended for use as a residence by one household. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that measures are taken by property owners to notify the city of the conversion of residential rental units to condominium or cooperative units and to comply with state requirements when they do so. This notification and permitting process is to alleviate the disruption in providing city services, to aid in the determination of the appropriate assessments of properties within the city, and to ensure that condominium and cooperative owners comply with state mandated protections for tenants. 
(c)  Notice of intended conversion to condominium or cooperative. 
(1)  Any person who (i) holds title to a multiple-unit rental property within the city, (ii) who intends to take title to a multiple-unit rental property within the city and convert said multiple-unit rental property to condominiums or a cooperative, as herein defined, or (iii) any person who intends to establish a condominium or cooperative within the city shall be required to send written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the following city departments to be received by said city departments at least 90 days prior to the filing of a master deed with the county registry of deeds: 
a.  Office of the city clerk; 
b.  Office of the city tax collector; 
c.  Office of the city assessor; 
d.  Department of public works; 
e.  Inspectional services department; 
f.  Department of planning and development. 
(2)  This notice shall include the following information: 
a.  The property address as listed at the county registry of deeds prior to the proposed conversion; 
b.  The street address assigned by the department of public works prior to the proposed conversion as to the final number of separate condominium units which shall result; 
c.  The final number of units proposed post conversion and proposed square unit of each unit; 
d.  Name and contact information for the condominium association, if already established. 
(3)  Any person required to send notice under subsection (d)(1) of this section is required to supplement said notice, if any of the information contained in the original notice becomes inaccurate prior to the recording of any master deed or unit deed. 
(d)  Notice of intended consolidation/cancellation of condominium or cooperative. 
(1)  Any person who (i) holds title to condominium or cooperative property within the city or (ii) who intends to take title to a condominium or cooperative property within the city and convert said condominiums or cooperative from that form of ownership interest to some other form of ownership interest, including but not limited to commonly owned multiple-unit rental property, shall be required to send written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the following city departments, to be received by said city departments at least 30 days prior to the filing of documentation with the county registry of deeds, cancelling or converting the form of ownership interest in the real property from condominium or cooperative to such other form of ownership: 
a.  Office of the city clerk; 
b.  Office of the city tax collector; 
c.  Office of the city assessor; 
d.  Department of public works; 
e.  Inspectional services department; 
f.  Department of planning and development. 
(2)  This notice shall include the following information: 
a.  The property addresses as listed at the county registry of deeds prior to the proposed conversion; 
b.  The street addresses assigned by the department of public works, including unit numbers prior to the proposed cancellation/consolidation; 
c.  The final number of separately owned units proposed post-cancellation/consolidation and square footage of each unit; 
d.  Title references at the county registry of deeds for all properties affected by the cancellation/consolidation. 
e.  Name and contact information for the condominium association and its successor in interest. 
(3)  Any person required to send notice under subsection (e)(1) of this section is required to supplement said notice, if any of the information contained in the original notice becomes inaccurate prior to the recording of any documentation with the county registry of deeds. 
(e)  Conversion permit. 
(1)  Any person who (i) holds title to a multiple-unit rental property within the city, (ii) who intends to take title to a multiple-unit rental property within the city and convert said multiple-unit rental property to condominiums or a cooperative, as herein defined, or (iii) any person who intends to establish a condominium or cooperative within the city shall apply to the director of inspectional services for a conversion permit. 
(2)  The application required by subsection (f)(1) shall contain an affidavit from the person proposing to establish a condominium or cooperative swearing on pains and penalties of perjury that they have complied with the provisions of this section and with the provisions of Section 4 of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983. Specifically the affidavit will aver that the owner: 
a.  Has given each tenant notice of the owner's intent to file a master deed at the registry of deeds or articles of incorporation with the secretary of the commonwealth; 
b.  Has given each tenant notice that the tenant will have a period of time stated in the notice from the date of receipt of the notice before the tenant will be required to vacate the housing accommodation; 
c.  Has given each tenant notice that the tenant will have a period of time stated in the notice to purchase the unit occupied by the tenant on terms or conditions which are at least as favorable as those which the owner extends to the public for 90 days following the expiration of the tenant's right to purchase; 
d.  Has given each tenant notice that the owner will pay relocation expenses to the extent required by Section 4 of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983 to any tenant choosing not to purchase their unit, except that the relocation expenses shall not exceed $750.00 per tenant, or $1,000.00 if the tenant is elderly, handicapped, or low or moderate income; 
e.  And has given each tenant notice that the owner will assist any elderly, handicapped, or low or moderate income tenant to find comparable rental housing within Chelsea. 
(3)  The owner will attach the required notices, including contact information for the tenants, to the affidavit. The period of notice required above shall be no less than the expiration of any written agreement between the owner and the tenant governing the tenant's occupancy of the housing accommodation or one year whichever is greater; except that for any tenant who is elderly, handicapped or of low or moderate income, the period of notice shall be no less than the greater of the period of a such agreement or two years. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, in no situation shall the period of notice exceed two years, regardless of relocation efforts, unless expressly set forth in a written agreement between the tenant and owner. Rent increases are restricted during the notice period to the percentage increase in the consumer price index (CPI) or ten percent, whichever is less. 
a.  A landlord must provide elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income tenants with reasonable assistance in locating accessible and comparable apartments with preference in the City of Chelsea. 
(4)  The above responsibilities and notices are intended to be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983. To the extent they might differ, the notices required by Chapter 527 will satisfy the requirements of this section, except as set forth in subsection (e)(3) above. 
(5)  The application shall include a plan of the proposed common areas and a parking plan. 
(6)  For any building or structure with ten or fewer units which is subject to this section, the applicant shall be required to install for each unit a separate water meter to measure water usage within the individual condominium unit. 
(7)  The fee for such conversion permit shall be established from time to time by the Chelsea City Council. 
(f)  Inspections. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of any conversion permit, the inspectional services department shall make an inspection of the units to determine if they are in compliance with all applicable provisions of the state sanitary code, applicable regulations of the board of health, the state building code, the fire safety code, the City of Chelsea Zoning Ordinances and the rules and regulations of all other regulatory agencies of the City of Chelsea. 
(2)  For any building or structure with less than ten units, the department of public works shall make an inspection to confirm that each unit has a separate water meter. 
(g)  The director of inspectional services shall issue a conversion permit only after confirming that: 
(1)  City departments have been properly notified of the conversion; 
(2)  Each unit complies with all sanitary code, fire safety code, building code, the City of Chelsea Zoning Ordinance and other regulatory requirements and has a valid occupancy permit for each unit; 
(3)  For buildings with ten or less units, each unit has a separate water meter; and 
(4)  The owner has complied with the notice and other requirements of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983. 
(h)  Violations; penalties. 
(1)  Fines/penalties . Any present or former owner of property within the city who by the terms of this section was required to comply with the provisions of this section and who fails to do so in a timely fashion shall be fined $500.00 for each converted unit. 
(2)  Violations. Each notice required under the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate notice. The failure to send any one of the required notices shall constitute a separate violation of this section and is subject to a separate fine or penalty. Further, any notice required to be filed pursuant to the terms of this section which does not contain any of the content required as described in subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be deemed not to have been sent. Each such failure to send required notice shall constitute a separate violation. 
(i)  Enforcement . Any violation contained herein shall be deemed a criminal offense pursuant to criminal enforcement; or the city, at its sole discretion, may elect to pursue any violation of this section, non-criminally, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8, as amended, in which instance civil tickets will be issued to the violators in accordance with the terms of this section. All fines and penalties issued pursuant to this section shall be listed on the certificate of municipal liens and shall not be removed unless and until such fines or penalties have been paid in full. 
(j)  Noncriminal disposition; designated enforcement officers. 
(1)  If the city elects to pursue this matter pursuant to section 1-8, civil tickets will be issued to the violators by the following designated enforcement officers: 
a.  Director of public works or designee; and, 
c.  Director of inspectional services or designee. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, the city may deem that the failure of any notice to any required recipient by any person required to provide such notice shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to a separate fine. 
(k)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all multiple-unit property, whether commercial or residential in nature, except for owner-occupied two- and three-family homes, provided that the owner occupant has occupied such building for more than two years. The city does not intend to regulate the form of ownership of these properties, but intends to ensure that the city has adequate notice of any newly created condominium units or cooperatives or newly cancelled or consolidated units to ensure the efficient and accurate information is available upon request, including but not limited to the accuracy of any final water and sewer bills, the accuracy of information provided on certificates of municipal liens, and to ensure compliance with state protections for tenants. 
(l)  Severability. The provisions of this ordinance or section shall be severable and if any section, part, or portion hereof shall be held invalid for any reason by any court, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any remaining section, part or portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-21-2007, § 3-130; Ord. of 12-18-2017 ) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Dec. 18, 2017 , changed the title of § 6-4 from "Condominium conversion" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Condominiums, M.G.L. c. 183. 
Secs. 6-5-6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND RELATED CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, M.G.L. c. 143, § 3 et seq.; local regulation of plumbing, M.G.L. c. 142, § 11. 

Sec. 6-25. - Copies of codes. 
    Copies of the codes adopted by this article shall be available for inspection at the department of municipal inspections. Copies shall also be made available for purchase at the city's purchase price, plus 2.5 percent. Such additional charge shall be for the city's administrative costs relative to such sales. 
Sec. 6-26. - Terms in adopted code. 
    The following terms used in the codes adopted by this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section: 
    Building, plumbing or electrical officials means the authorized inspectors of the city. 
    Municipality means the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-7) 
Sec. 6-27. - State building code incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The Stretch Energy Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any amendments or modifications, is adopted by the city and herein incorporated by reference in this section. This Stretch Energy Code shall be in effect as of July 1, 2017. Any violation of such Stretch Energy Code shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in sections 1-8. The building inspector shall enforce the Stretch Energy Code. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with any order of the building inspector shall be subject to a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-3; Ord. of 10-3-2016(1) ) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
Sec. 6-28. - State plumbing code incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The state plumbing code, set forth at 248 CMR 2.00 et seq., including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing public health, safety, and welfare as they are affected by all construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of plumbing; and in general, to secure safety to life and property, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The state plumbing code is hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the state plumbing code or any order of the plumbing inspector shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-11) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
Sec. 6-29. - State fuel gas code incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The state fuel gas code, set forth at 248 CMR 3.00 et seq. through 8.00, including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing public health, safety and welfare, as they are affected by all construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of gas fittings; and in general, to secure safety to life and property, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The state fuel gas code is hereby adopted and incorporated, as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the state fuel gas code or any order of the plumbing inspector shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-12) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
Sec. 6-30. - Referrals to fire department. 
    No permit for the installation of sprinkler or other fire extinguishing equipment shall be granted without the written approval of the chief of the fire department or designee. 
(Code 1994, § 4-6) 
Sec. 6-31. - Building permit fee schedule. 
(a)  The fees for all building permits shall be set by the director of municipal inspections, subject to the approval of the city manager, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the director of municipal inspections. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city and section 118 of the state building code, no permit shall be issued until the required fee has been paid to the department of municipal inspections or other authorized city agency in accordance with the building permit fee schedules. 
(c)  At the director's sole discretion, the director of municipal inspections may require that cost computations verified by a registered architect or registered professional engineer (or other person satisfactory to the building inspector) be submitted to substantiate disputed estimates. 
(d)  Permits issued under this article are valid for a period of six months only from the date of issuance. If work is not in progress at the expiration date, permits will be voided. A new application and fee will be required. The building inspector must be notified by the permittee upon completion of all work. 
(Code 1994, § 4-9) 
Sec. 6-32. - Enclosures for private swimming pools. 
    Every private swimming pool shall be fenced or surrounded by a wall as required by 780 CMR 120.M105 and 105 CMR 435.03. All gates or doors through fence or wall shall be in compliance with such rules and shall be kept locked as required by such rules. 
(Code 1994, § 4-10) 
Sec. 6-33. - Demolition of buildings seventy-five years or older. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The ordinance codified in this section is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings within the city which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the city; to encourage owners of preferably-preserved significant buildings to seek out persons who might be willing to purchase and to preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings, rather than demolish them; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare, to preserve the resources of the city and to make the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. To achieve these purposes, the Chelsea Historical Commission is empowered to advise the building commissioner with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition, and the issuance of demolition permits for significant buildings is regulated as provided in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Application means an application for a permit for the demolition of a building, which application contains the information referred to in this section. 
    Building means any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property. 
    Business day means a day which is not a legal municipal holiday, Saturday or Sunday. 
    Commission means the Chelsea Historical Commission. 
    Commission staff means the staffer of the commission, the person performing the functions of such director in the event there is no person regularly providing staff services for the commission to whom the commission has delegated authority to act as commission staff under this section. 
    Demolition means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a building or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same. 
    Director of ISD means the director of the department of inspectional services, ISD, or otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits. 
    Historic district means the Bellingham Square District, Chelsea Square Historic District, and Downtown Residential Districts as stated by the Massachusetts Historic Commission State Register of Historic Places 2015 and the National Register of Historic Places, or which is the subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register or any other historic district that may from time to time have been established by ordinance. 
    Initial determination means any determination contemplated in subsection (c)(3) of this chapter made by the commission or the commission staff. 
    Permit means a permit issued by the director of ISD for demolition of a building pursuant to an application therefor. 
    Preferably preserved significant building means any significant building which the commission determines, as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this chapter, that it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demolished. 
    Significant building means any building within the city which is in whole or in part 75 years or more old and: 
(1)  Which is within any historic district; or 
(2)  Which is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the Massachusetts Historic Commission State Register of Historic Places 2017, the National Register of Historic Places, or which is the subject of a pending application for listing on the state or National Register; or 
(3)  Which is or has been designated by the commission to be a significant building after a finding by the commission that a building either: 
a.  Is importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the city or the commonwealth, or 
b.  Is historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of building construction or association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings. 
(c)  Procedures for demolition. 
(1)  No permit for the demolition of a building which is in whole or in part 75 years or more old shall be issued other than in conformity with the provisions of this section, as well as in conformity with the provisions of other laws and ordinances applicable to the demolition of buildings and the issuance of permits therefor generally. An application for demolition of a building over 75 years in age shall be made only by the person, partnership, corporation or realty trust which is the owner thereof at the time of such application. 
(2)  The director of ISD shall cause a copy of each application for a demolition permit to be forwarded to (or shall satisfy himself that a duplicate of such application has been submitted to) the commission for determination by the commission whether the building which is the subject of such application is a preferably preserved significant building. 
(3)  If the commission staff shall make an initial determination that the building which is the subject of the application is or may be a significant building, the members of the commission and the director of ISD shall be so advised, and no demolition permit or building permit for new construction or alterations as defined in M.G.L. c. 40C, § 6 shall at that time be issued pending review of the initial determination by the commission pursuant to subsection (c)(4). If the director of ISD shall not receive advice of any such initial determination within ten business days of the date that a copy of the application is submitted to the commission staff, then, subject to subsection (g), the director of ISD may grant the permit applied for unless prior to such grant he is advised that such an initial determination has been made. 
(4)  If the commission staff shall have made an initial determination that a building which is the subject of the application is or may be a significant building, the commission shall review the application and such determination at a public hearing of the commission for which the commission shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city notice that such application will be considered. Such notice, which shall specify the address of the subject building, shall be published in an issue of such newspaper distributed in the week preceding the week in which such meeting is held, or in an earlier week. If the commission determines, after a public hearing that the demolition of the subject building would result in the demolition of a significant building whose loss would be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the city, such building shall be considered a preferably preserved significant building. The commission may delegate to the commission staff authority to determine without any hearing that a building is not a preferably preserved significant building and to so advise the director of ISD. Upon determination by the commission or by the commission staff that a building is not a preferably preserved significant building or upon failure by the commission to make any determination within 45 days of the date that a copy of the application was submitted to the commission,the director of ISD may, subject to subsection (g), grant the permit applied for. 
(5)  Upon a determination by the commission that any building which is the subject of an application is a preferably preserved significant building, it shall so advise the person who submitted the application and of ISD, and no demolition permit or building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises shall be issued until six months after the date of such determination by the commission except as may be provided for in subsection (c)(9). Notwithstanding the preceding sentence,the director of ISD may issue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved significant building at any time after receipt of written advice from the commission to the effect either: 
a.  That the commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group willing to purchase the preferably preserved significant building would be willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore such building, or 
b.  That the commission is satisfied that for at least six months since the owner first sought the advice of the commission or the commission staff in locating a person or group that might be willing to purchase such building and to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the same, the owner of the preferably preserved significant building has made continuing, bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful efforts to locate such a purchaser. 
(6)  No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved significant building under subsection (c)(4) of this section shall be granted until all proceedings relating to amendments of the zoning ordinance of the city have been completed, if such proceedings have been initiated prior to the expiration of any period of delay of demolition resulting from such determination, and if such amendments affect the site of the building whose demolition has been thereby delayed. 
(7)  No permit for erection of a new structure on the site of an existing building over 75 years old may be issued prior to issuance of a permit for demolition of such existing building. 
(8)  No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved significant building under subsection (c)(4) shall be granted until plans for use or development of the site after demolition have been filed with the building department and found to comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a building permit, or if for a parking lot, a certificate of occupancy, for that site. All approvals necessary for the issuance of such a building permit or certificate of occupancy including without limitation any necessary zoning variances or special permits, must be granted and all appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit under this section. 
(9)  During the six-month delay of demolition, no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a preferably preserved significant building shall be granted until reviewed by the commission as though the property were designated as a landmark. Until the expiration of the six-month delay period, the commission shall review all construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of the structures on the premises of a preferably preserved significant building. 
(d)  Application-Publication of notice. 
(1)  Application contents. Every application for a demolition permit for a building shall contain the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, address and interest in the property; 
b.  The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's; 
c.  The address or location of the building to be demolished; 
d.  A brief description of the type of building and the condition requiring issuance of the permit; and 
e.  A brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction or replacement of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(2)  Notice. In addition to the publication provided for in subsection (c)(4), notice of any hearing or determination provided for in this section shall in any event be given by the commission to the applicant for the demolition permit, and shall also be given to such other persons and in such manner as the commission may determine. The applicant must post the public hearing notice on the building. 
(e)  Emergency demolition. 
(1)  In the event that the inspection services department or department of public works is convened to consider the condition of a building over 75 years old, the chair and staff of the Chelsea Historical Commission shall be notified to accompany the board during its inspection. The director of inspectional services shall pursue all reasonable courses of action to prevent emergency demolition of such a building which the executive director makes an initial determination is or may be a significant building, including but not limited to requiring the owner to secure it against further danger to the public. 
(2)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any feature which the director of inspectional services shall certify is required for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(f)  Enforcement and remedies. 
(1)  Enforcement. The commission and/or the director of ISD are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, as they may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this section or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. 
(2)  Building permit to be withheld. No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon which a building 75 years or more old has been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a demolition permit granted after compliance with the provisions of this section for a period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition. As used in this section "premises" refers to the parcel of land upon which the demolished building was located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control. 
(3)  Securing of building required. Upon a determination by the commission that a building is a preferably preserved significant building, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the building in compliance with the regulations of the building department. Should the owner fail so to secure the building, the loss of such building through fire or other cause shall be considered voluntary demolition for the purposes of subsection (f)(2). 
(g)  Conflicts with Historic Districts Act. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of the Historic Districts Act, M.G.L. c. 40C, with respect to requirements as to notice, hearing and issuance by the commission of a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship prior to demolition of any building in an historic district; provided, however, that any temporary building erected or maintained in an historic district pursuant to a certificate issued by the commission may be demolished in a manner not inconsistent with the terms of such certificate. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(3) ) 
Secs. 6-34-6-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State electrical code, M.G.L. c. 143, § 3L. 

Sec. 6-50. - State electrical code incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The State Electrical Code, set forth at 527 CMR 12.00 et seq., including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing public health, safety and welfare, as they are affected by wire and electrical installation, repair and maintenance; and in general, to secure safety to life and property, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The State Electrical Code is hereby adopted and incorporated, as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this code or any order of the electrical inspector shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8, by a fine not to exceed $300.00. Each days failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-50) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
Sec. 6-51. - Permit-Required; permission to cover. 
(a)  All persons doing electrical work in the city shall obtain a permit from the electrical inspector within five days of commencing any work. 
(b)  No person shall cover any wires designed to carry current for light, heat or power without permission from the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector. 
(Code 1994, § 4-53) 
Sec. 6-52. - Same-Fees. 
(a)  The fees for all permits shall be set by the director of municipal inspections, subject approval of the city manager all in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerks' office by the director of municipal inspections. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(b)  The fee shall be paid for a continuous permit issued to licensed representatives or licensed maintenance personnel in industrial and commercial enterprises, such permit to cover ordinary maintenance, experimental setups or relocation of minor devices and equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 4-54) 
Sec. 6-53. - Same-Expiration; new application; notification. 
    Permits issued under this article are valid for a period of six months only from date of issuance. If work is not in progress at expiration date, permits will be voided. A new application and fee will be required. The electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector must be notified by the permittee upon completion of all work. In the case of new homes, notification must be given when fixtures and devices are installed. 
(Code 1994, § 4-55) 
Sec. 6-54. - Concealment of wiring restricted. 
    No wire designed to carry current for light, heat or power which is to be concealed shall be installed until all heating pipes, gas pipes, plumbing or other piping has been installed. 
(Code 1994, § 4-58) 
Sec. 6-55. - Electricians. 
    No electrical permit shall be issued to any person who does not hold a license issued pursuant to M.G.L. c. 141 authorizing such person to do the class of work authorized by the electrical permit. 
(Code 1994, §§ 4-56, 4-57) 
Secs. 6-56-6-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fire prevention generally, M.G.L. c. 148; fire departments in cities, M.G.L. c. 48. 

Sec. 6-84. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Capacity means a maximum combined total of all flammable products or their byproducts licensed by the licensing commission on a person's property. 
    Carrier means a person engaged in the business of transporting LEG by LEG trailer or other vehicle; if the trailer or vehicle is leased, the lessee is the carrier. 
    FDD means the fees for permits issued by the fire department, on file in the city clerk's office. 
    Fees means the fees as established by ordinance in the city. 
    Gallon means the U.S. standard gallon. 
    Hot work means and includes any open-flame, electrical equipment which may cause sparks, including welding, cutting or other spark-producing operation. 
    LEG means liquefied energy gases. 
    LEG trailer means a tank trailer designed for the bulk transport of LEG. 
    Master boxes means a combination boxes that can be manually operated (publicly accessible) and automatically activated by the auxiliary alarm system (auxiliary box). The master box is typically located outside on a pole or building. 
    Place of assembly means and includes any church or place of worship, school, nursing home, assisted living facility, business and/or other structure which is required to have a sprinkler system pursuant to M.G.L. c. 148 and 148A. 
(Code 1994, § 7-35; Ord. of 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 6-85. - Permit fee schedule. 
    The schedule of permit fees for permits issued by the fire department is not printed herein but a schedule of such fees is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 7-57) 
Sec. 6-86. - Fire prevention details; private use of city equipment. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall require such means of fire prevention and/or fire protection as, in the chief's judgment, is necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, including fire details which may consist of permanent members of the fire department. Such details shall be approved by the chief of the fire department and shall include any fire watch or other detail required by state law or the chief of the fire department affecting fire prevention, fire protection or a detail left at the scene of a fire to prevent rekindle and to protect human life or public or private property, and as may be required by the chief of the fire department, ordinance or state law. 
(b)  The personnel assigned, and the number thereof, shall be determined by the chief of the fire department. Members so assigned by the chief of the fire department shall be under such instructions as the chief of the fire department, city ordinance or state law may require. 
(c)  When members of the fire department are so assigned by the chief of the fire department, they shall be considered to be on official duty under the direct supervision of and responsible to the chief of the fire department. 
(d)  Equipment owned or maintained by the fire department shall only be used with the approval of the head of the fire department, and a reasonable fee shall be charged for the use of such equipment. 
(e)  All persons who desire or are required by the chief of the fire department, by a city ordinance or by state law, to employ the services of any equipment and/or members of the fire department shall do so through the chief of the fire department, under such terms and conditions as the chief may prescribe. 
(f)  The costs of such fire department personnel so assigned shall be the sole responsibility of the owner, occupant, contractor or person so required to have such detail and/or equipment. Under no conditions shall the city be responsible for any part of such financial transaction. 
(g)  Any person aggrieved by any rule, order or decision of the chief of the fire department so made under this provision may file an appeal in writing within ten days of the date of such act, rule, order or decision to the state fire marshal in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 148, § 31. 
(Code 1994, § 7-55) 
Sec. 6-87. - Board of fire prevention regulations incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The regulations of the state board of fire prevention set forth at 527 CMR, including subsequent modifications, amendments or deletions, is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing public health, safety, welfare, and to secure safety to life and property, a copy of which regulations shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. Such regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated, as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the state board of fire prevention regulations, this article or an order of the chief of the fire department or the fire prevention officer shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8 by a fine which in no instance shall exceed $300.00. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 7-36) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 6-88. - Compliance with orders at a fire. 
(a)  All persons not members of the fire department are hereby required to obey the order and directions of the officer in command at any fire, and to render their services if so ordered by such officer. 
(b)  No person not a member of the fire department shall enter within the lines formed at a fire except by permission of the officer in command. 
(Code 1994, § 7-37) 
Sec. 6-89. - Interfering with, refusal to obey orders of, etc., fire department. 
    No person shall neglect or refuse to remove any combustible material when ordered to do so by the chief of the fire department, or obstruct any officer or member of the fire department in the discharge of duties, or willfully interfere with any pump or other apparatus used by the members of the fire department in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1994, § 7-40) 
State Law reference- Interference with fire fighting operations, M.G.L. c. 268, § 32A. 
Sec. 6-90. - Right of entry of employees into buildings and premises. 
    To the extent allowed by law, any person having any duty to perform under the provisions of this article, in the performance of official duty, may enter any building or premises in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 7-42) 
State Law reference- Fire prevention inspections, M.G.L. c. 148, § 4. 
Sec. 6-91. - Applications for storage of flammable products. 
    All applications for the storage, keeping, manufacture or sale of hydrocarbons, flammable, flammable fuels, shall contain comply with 527 CMR 1.03(2). 
(Code 1994, § 7-43) 
Sec. 6-92. - Permits for rockets, missiles, similar projectiles. 
    The construction, use, discharge, firing, launching or exploding of rockets, missiles and similar projectiles and devices within the city is hereby prohibited, unless a written permit therefor has been obtained from the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to impose reasonable requirements and limitations in the interest of public safety and welfare upon the issuance of and privileges granted by such permits, including: 
(1)  Minimum age; 
(2)  Experience and education of the permittees; 
(3)  Adult supervision; and 
(4)  Limitations on the place and time of use. 
(Code 1994, § 7-45) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, M.G.L. c. 148, § 39 et seq. 
Sec. 6-93. - Transportation of liquefied energy gases. 
(a)  Restricted stopping places. Unless the liquefied energy gas (LEG) trailer is disabled, a carrier or a driver may stop, park and stand an LEG trailer within the city only to: 
(1)  Load or unload that LEG trailer; 
(2)  Comply with the orders of the fire chief or designee; 
(3)  Comply with the orders of a police officer; 
(4)  Comply with an official traffic control device. 
(b)  Disabled LEG carriers. Any disabled carrier in the city shall post a sign in front and at the rear of said carrier indicating that a LEG carrier is disabled. 
(c)  Penalty. A carrier or a driver who violates this section is subject to all fines allowed under the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 7-46) 
Sec. 6-94. - Regulation of vehicle cargo. 
(a)  Liquefied propane gas (LPG). No vehicle with a load limit in excess of 5,000 gallons of LPG shall be allowed in the city, other than on streets listed in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Liquefied natural gas (LNG). No vehicle transporting in excess of 100 gallons of LNG shall be allowed in the city, other than on streets listed in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The chief of police or designee shall enforce this section and shall have the authority during any emergency, including but not limited to street repair, traffic congestion, or weather conditions, to temporarily permit the use of streets other than those listed in the city clerk's office. 
(2)  The chief of police shall report in writing to the city manager and the traffic and parking commission within seven days of any temporary permits granted. 
(3)  During any emergency in which the cargo of a vehicle is, in the judgment of the operator, placed in jeopardy, then the operator of the vehicle may travel on streets not authorized for use. 
(4)  The operator of any vehicle using unauthorized streets, for any reason, shall report to the police department and to the terminal to or from which they were traveling, as soon as possible. 
(d)  Declaration. The chief of the fire department shall notify in writing, to the city manager, the licensing commission, and the city council that a new cargo is classified into the category of LEG, and the city council shall act to determine if an amendment will be added to this section. 
(e)  Notification. 
(1)  The office of the city clerk shall, to the degree possible, supply a copy of this section to all persons that are involved in the transportation of cargos covered by the provisions of this section. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of any person conducting an operation in the city for the loading or unloading of cargos covered by this section, to provide to its own or other LEG carriers that load or unload at its facilities with a copy of this section, and also post a copy of this section in a conspicuous place where operators of LEG carriers will take notice. 
(Code 1994, § 7-47) 
Sec. 6-95. - Bonfires. 
    No person shall make a bonfire or any other fire in a public way or in close proximity to any building, except in accordance with a permit from the chief of the fire department as required by 527 CMR 10.22. 
(Code 1994, § 7-48) 
Sec. 6-96. - Sprinkler systems required in certain buildings. 
    Sprinkler systems, wet standpipe systems and indicator panels shall be installed in buildings in accordance with M.G.L. c. 148, §§ 26-27. 
(Code 1994, § 7-49) 
Sec. 6-97. - Public buildings water sprinkler system. 
    Any construction of public buildings or additions thereto shall include a water sprinkler alarm system, subject to approval of the fire department in accordance with M.G.L. c. 148, §§ 26-27. 
Sec. 6-98. - Automatic fire warning and smoke detector systems. 
(a)  Automatic fire warning and smoke detector systems shall be installed in buildings in accordance with M.G.L. c. 143 §§ 26-27. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Whoever is aggrieved by the chief of the fire department's interpretation, order, requirement, direction or failure to act under the provisions of this section may, within 45 days after the service of notice thereof, appeal from such interpretation, order, requirement, direction, or failure to act, to the state board of appeals as provided in the state building code. 
(Code 1994, § 7-51) 
Sec. 6-99. - Fire detail required during demolition work. 
    Where any contractor is doing demolition work in the city, and where said work is taking place within 30 feet of a dwelling unit or other building that is occupied, and where the safety, health and welfare of the general public is concerned, said contractor shall produce at such contractor's expense sufficient fire details furnished by the fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 7-52) 
Sec. 6-100. - Storage of flammable products fee schedule. 
(a)  The schedule of licensing fees for the storage of flammable products by persons is not printed herein but a schedule of such fees is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  In the case of a new flammable product or byproduct not yet discovered or developed that could take any shape or form, the storage fee charge shall be determined by the licensing commission upon a recommendation by the fire chief, and shall be based upon classification by the state board of fire prevention regulations, according to 527 CMR and comparable established fee schedules. 
(Code 1994, § 7-53) 
Sec. 6-101. - Hot work at marine terminals. 
(a)  Any work or repairs involving so-called "hot work" is prohibited aboard any vessel, ship or barge while located at any marine terminal in the city. 
(b)  Any work or repairs involving hot work on docks, storage tanks, pipes or other equipment whatever, located in or within the property line of a marine terminal or yard area, including a pipeline for petroleum products extended from a petroleum terminal or which extends into the city, shall be prohibited unless a permit has been obtained from the chief of the fire department under such terms and conditions as the chief may require for the prevention of fire or for fire protection, and also as required by state law. 
(c)  Any company operating a marine terminal or yard within the city shall inform all bidders for such work that a permit is required and that such work will require a fire watch in accordance with the requirements of the city fire department. Such permits shall be taken out in the name of the contractor, unless such work is being done by employees of the terminal or yard, in which case it will be taken out in the name of the marine terminal company. 
(d)  All hot work shall stop when, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or the chief's authorized representative, it is not safe due to any spill of product or vapors due to transfer of product from a ship or vessel or barge or at a loading rack which may be dangerous due to weather and/or wind conditions. Hot work must only be conducted under safe conditions with all necessary safety preparations, if the plant is to continue operations. 
(e)  No smoking regulations for marine terminals and yards shall be established and regulated by the city fire prevention bureau and/or state law. 
(f)  Violation of this section may result in the revocation of such terminal or storage license by the chief of the fire department, or stopping of terminal or yard operations by the chief of the fire department. 
(g)  A copy of this section shall be posted in the office of every terminal manager and maintenance manager or engineer responsible for or employing such hot work. 
(Code 1994, § 7-54; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 6-102. - Tar heating permits required. 
    A permit in writing shall be required from the chief of the fire department under such terms and conditions as the chief may prescribe in writing, except as permitted in M.G.L. c. 148, § 24 or except where not required by the state fire prevention regulations, set forth at 527 CMR, for all portable tar-heating equipment to be used in the city for each location before the commencement of such tar-heating work. 
(Code 1994, § 7-56) 
Sec. 6-103. - Smoke detection system false alarms. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department or the chief's authorized designee is authorized to charge a reasonable fee, in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F, which shall be assessed to owners of property and/or persons in possession of property equipped with electronic or battery-operated signal systems which detect smoke or fire who cause or allow such systems to broadcast false alarms due to negligence or failure to properly maintain such equipment. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the chief of the fire department. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(b)  Where an alarm system includes an annunciator and a full-service panel, whether or not connected to the municipal telegraphic system, the chief of the fire department may require the posting of a paid fire watch for as long as the chief shall deem necessary, or until the alarm system has been repaired and tested satisfactorily. 
(Code 1994, § 7-58) 
Sec. 6-104. - Safe key installation required. 
(a)  Any building, other than a residential building of less than six units, shall be covered by this provision. 
(b)  If access to or within a structure or an area is obstructed or unduly difficult because it is secured, and where the chief of the fire department determines that immediate access is necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes or to investigate a signal from a fire and/or smoke detection system, manual or automatic fire alarm system, sprinkler or other fire protection system, the chief of the fire department shall require a keybox to be installed. The type of keybox and location of said keybox shall be approved by the chief. The chief may require more than one keybox if conditions in the chief's judgment are necessary. 
(c)  The building owner shall be required to store all the keys necessary to comply with the provisions of this section and as required by the chief. If a lock is changed, the fire department shall be notified immediately and the new keys placed in the keybox. 
(d)  Any building owner violating this section or after receiving due notice by the chief of the fire department shall be subject to a penalty set forth in section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 7-59) 
Sec. 6-105. - Fire protection equipment and fire alarms on private property. 
(a)  The fire chief shall make such rules, regulations, restrictions or requirements as to the installation, control, maintenance, or supervision of fire protection or alarm systems on private property, in accordance with all relevant state statutes, codes and regulations. Said protection is intended to include, but not be restricted to, hydrants, both ordinary and reverse type, water mains, post indicator valves, check valves, shutoff valves, water tanks, cisterns, fire pumps, sprinkler systems, standpipes, water supply, water flow, alarm systems, or other device and equipment intended for the prevention of explosion or fire on any property, premises, building or structure, where such protection is required or installed. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department shall require such protection on private property to be maintained in good working condition, available for the proper operation and use in case of any danger of fire or explosion, in accordance with all relevant state statutes, codes and regulations. The owner, occupant, lessee or such person who has control or supervision of said property shall have a contract with a person or company authorized and licensed to install, maintain and test such protection. A test of such protection shall be made annually and results of said tests and maintenance furnished to the chief of the fire department or representative, who shall determine that such protection and stated equipment, in addition to water supply and water flow, is adequate to provide an alarm and to provide sufficient water supply and flow for the anticipated fire danger to ensure protection of occupants, property, and the fire department. The fire chief, fire prevention bureau or other representative authorized by the fire chief shall make such other requirements or recommendations as they may deem necessary to ensure proper operation and use by the fire department. Nothing stated herein shall empower the fire chief or designee with greater authority than is permissible via state statutes, codes or regulations. Violation of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both. 
(c)  All places of assembly are required by the fire chief to install, upgrade and maintain master boxes that are connected to the city's E911 system pursuant to the rules and regulations of the city fire department and the state law. 
(d)  All master boxes shall be installed, tested and disconnected only with a permit issued by the city fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 7-60; Ord. of 2-11-2002; Ord. of 2-22-2010) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 8-19. - Termination of article. 
    This article shall remain in force during the effective period of chapter 639, Acts of 1950 and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or substitution thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 7-106) 
Sec. 8-20. - Department of civil defense. 
    There shall be a department of civil defense and emergency management (hereinafter called the "department"). It shall be the function of the department to have charge of civil defense and emergency preparedness as defined in section 1, chapter 639, Acts of 1950, and to perform civil defense and emergency management functions as authorized or directed by said chapter or by any and all executive orders or general regulations promulgated thereunder, and to exercise any authority delegated to it by the governor under said chapter 639. 
(Code 1994, § 7-100) 
Sec. 8-21. - Intergovernmental assistance. 
    In the event of a request therefor from the mayor or city manager of such city or selectmen of such town, the chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, is authorized to send to the aid of any other city or town, in the event of disaster, such equipment and personnel of the police department as in the judgment of the chief of police shall be advisable for the suppression of riot or other form of violence in such other city or town. 
(Code 1994, § 7-101) 
Sec. 8-22. - Acceptance of gifts, grants, loans, etc. 
    In accordance with the authority referred to in section 15, chapter 639, of Acts of 1950, the city may accept gifts, grants or loans of services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds for the purposes of civil defense, and emergency management from the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or from any person. The acceptance of such gifts, grants or loans shall be subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency or person making such offer. Acceptance of such gifts, grants or loans on behalf of the city shall be made through the city council, subject to the approval of the city manager. The department shall keep appropriate records of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans. 
(Code 1994, § 7-102; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 8-23. - Implementation of orders, regulations and directives. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of executive orders or of general regulations by the governor, or upon a directive by the governor to the city manager or other officer or employee of the city to carry out the provisions of any such executive order, regulation or directive, the department, subject to the approval of the city manager, is hereby authorized and directed to take all necessary steps to carry out such executive order, regulation or directive in spite of any city ordinance or procedure which may, in whole or in part, conflict with such executive order, regulation or directive. 
(b)  In the event of a declaration of disaster, as defined in section 1 of chapter 639, Acts of 1950, the director of the department, or other individual exercising the powers and duties of such position, is authorized to exercise all the powers set forth in Acts of 1950, chapter 639, pertaining to the performance of public work, making of contracts, incurring obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of equipment and purchasing of supplies. All such action, taken in time of disaster, shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 7-103) 
Sec. 8-24. - Filing of orders, regulations. 
    Upon the receipt of any executive order, general regulation or directive from the governor, under the powers conferred upon the governor by Acts of 1950, chapter 639, the department or other officer or employee of the city receiving such order, regulation or directive shall cause copies thereof with all due diligence to be filed with the city clerk, the city manager, the city auditor, the city solicitor, the director of civil defense and the department affected thereby. 
(Code 1994, § 7-104) 
Sec. 8-25. - Utilization of services of other governmental bodies. 
    In carrying out the purposes of civil defense and emergency management, the city shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the departments, officers and agents of the state and of the political subdivisions of the state to the maximum extent practicable, and all officers, departments, agents and employees of the city shall, to the fullest extent practicable, cooperate and extend their services to the state and other civil defense or emergency preparedness organizations of the state, upon request, to the end that, so far as municipal action by the city is concerned, the spirit and purposes of Acts 1950, chapter 639, shall be carried out to the fullest extent. 
(Code 1994, § 7-105) 
Secs. 8-26-8-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SECURITY ALARMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- False alarms, M.G.L. c. 268, § 32. 

Sec. 8-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices or a single device, such as a solid state unit, which plugs directly into a 110 volt AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention, and to which police are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user or user means any person on whose premises a security alarm system is maintained within the city, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary systems. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are central station personnel and persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
    Automatic dialing device refers to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Central station means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise circuits or where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals. 
    Communications console means the instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible signals, indicates activation of an alarm system at a particular location, or which indicates line trouble. 
    Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the police department communication center. 
    False alarm. 
(1)  The term "false alarm" means: 
a.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of an alarm system or of the user's employees or agents. 
b.  Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the police department requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the police department, when in fact there has been no unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion into a premises and no attempted robbery or burglary at a premises. 
(2)  The term "false alarm" does not mean activations of alarm systems caused by power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar conditions. 
    Interconnect means to connect an alarm system to a voice grade telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
    Public nuisance means anything which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of a considerable number of persons or of any community or neighborhood. 
(Code 1994, § 7-70) 
Sec. 8-55. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this article punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1-8: 
(1)  Failure to obey an order of the police chief to discontinue use of an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of appeal; 
(2)  Failure to disconnect an automatic dialing device from any telephone numbers at the police department within six months after January 1, 1994; 
(3)  Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any telephone numbers, other than those authorized, at the police department after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(4)  Failure to pay two or more consecutive fines assessed under this chapter within 60 days from the date of assessment; 
(5)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Each day during which such violations continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 7-79) 
Sec. 8-56. - Exclusion from article. 
    Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises and all residential houses are specifically excluded from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 7-71) 
Sec. 8-57. - Administrative rules. 
    The police chief may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 7-72) 
Sec. 8-58. - Automatic dialing devices-Interconnection to police department. 
    Automatic dialing devices may be interconnected only to such telephone numbers at the police department as are specifically designated to receive such calls by the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 7-73) 
Sec. 8-59. - Same-Intermediary services. 
    Any person using an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to: 
(1)  A central station; 
(2)  An answering service; or 
(3)  Any privately owned or privately operated facility or terminal. 
(Code 1994, § 7-74) 
Sec. 8-60. - Direct connections to police department. 
(a)  Alarm systems may be connected to the communications console in the police department. 
(b)  In accordance with the normal bidding practices in effect in the city, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to request bids from alarm companies in order to furnish, at no cost to the city, a communications console and the necessary telephone lines which are compatible to the receipt of alarm signals from alarm systems whose lines are connected to the police department. Each of the bids shall set forth the annual fee each alarm user will be required to pay the alarm company for services rendered with respect to the communications console. Such services shall be set forth in the form of a written contract between the alarm company and each alarm user. The provisions of this subsection relate solely to the aforementioned communications console, connections to said console by alarm users, and fees and charges related to the installation and maintenance of the console. Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company for the sale, installation, maintenance and/or servicing of the alarm system to be installed on the user's premises. 
(c)  The alarm user, or the alarm business contracting for servicing the alarm user's alarm system, shall be responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line between the alarm user's premises and the alarm-receiving equipment at the police department and for furnishing the appropriate interface equipment used to operate the communications console. 
(d)  The provisions of section 8-63 concerning false alarms shall apply to all alarm users or persons having direct connect systems, except city, county and state agencies and religious organizations. 
(Code 1994, § 7-75) 
Sec. 8-61. - Control and curtailment of signals emitted by alarm systems. 
(a)  Every alarm user shall submit to the police chief the names and telephone numbers of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. 
(b)  All alarm systems directly connected to the police station may be equipped with a test device which will give a ten-second or longer delay prior to alarm system activation in order to warn the alarm user of an open alarm circuit. 
(c)  All alarm systems installed after January 1, 1994, which use an audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a device that will shut off such horn or bell within 20 minutes after activation of the alarm system. 
(d)  Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than 30 minutes which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by the user under subsection (a) of this section, and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a community, a neighborhood or a considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the police chief shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or members of the alarm user's family, or those persons designated by the alarm user under subsection (a) of this section in an effort to abate the nuisance. The police chief shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint was made. 
(1)  In the event that the police chief is unable to contact the alarm user, members of the alarm user's family or those persons designated by the alarm user under subsection (a) of this section, or if such persons cannot or will not curtail the audible signal being emitted by the alarm system, and if the police chief is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, the chief may direct a police officer or a firefighter or a qualified alarm technician to enter upon the property outside the home or building in which the alarm system is located and take any reasonable action necessary to abate the nuisance. If entry upon property outside the home or building in which the alarm system is located is made in accordance with this clause, the person so entering upon such property shall: 
a.  Not conduct, engage in or undertake any search, seizure, inspection or investigation while the person is upon the property; 
b.  Not cause any unnecessary damage to the alarm system or to any part of the home or building; and 
c.  Leave the property immediately after the audible signal has ceased. 
After an entry upon property has been made in accordance with this section, the police chief shall have the property secured, if necessary. 
(2)  Within ten days after abatement of a nuisance in accordance with this section, the alarm user may request a hearing before the chief of police and may present evidence showing that: 
a.  The signal emitted by the user's alarm system was not a public nuisance at the time of the abatement; 
b.  Unnecessary damage was caused to the user's property in the course of the abatement; 
c.  The costs of the abatement should not be assessed to the user; or 
d.  The requirements of this clause were not fulfilled. 
(3)  Not less than 20 days after abatement of this public nuisance, the reasonable costs and expenses of abating a nuisance in accordance with this section may be assessed to the alarm user as a municipal charge, such assessment not to exceed $100.00. 
(Code 1994, § 7-76) 
Sec. 8-62. - Testing of equipment. 
    No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the police department shall be worked on, tested or demonstrated without obtaining permission from the police chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to the police department. An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm. 
(Code 1994, § 7-77) 
Sec. 8-63. - False alarms. 
(a)  When emergency messages are received by the police department that evidence false alarms, the police chief shall take such action as may be appropriate under subsections (b) through (e) of this section, and, when so required by the terms of such subsections, order that use of an alarm system be discontinued. 
(b)  After the police department has recorded three separate false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system, the police chief shall notify the alarm user, in person, by telephone or by mail, of such fact and require the user to submit, within 15 days after receipt of such notice, a report describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. If the user, on the basis of absence from the city, or on any other reasonable basis, requests an extension of time for filing the report, the police chief may extend the 15-day period for a reasonable period. If the user fails to submit such a report within 15 days or within any such extended period, the police chief shall order that use of the alarm system be discontinued. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 30 days from the date of receipt of the police chief's order. 
(c)  If the police chief determines that a report submitted in accordance with subsection (b) of this section is unsatisfactory, or that the alarm user has failed to show by the report that that such alarm user has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the police chief shall order that use of the alarm system be discontinued. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 30 days from the date of receipt of the police chief's order. 
(d)  If the police department records five false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system, the police chief shall order that the user of the alarm system discontinue use of the alarm system. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 30 days from the date of receipt of the police chief's order. Such discontinuance shall continue until the police chief has received a certified notice that the alarm system has been reviewed and/or repaired and is in perfect working order by a business or person knowledgeable in the field of alarm systems. 
(e)  Any user of an alarm system which transmits false alarms shall be assessed a fine in accordance with section 1-8 for each false alarm in excess of three occurring within the calendar year. All fines assessed hereunder shall be paid to the city treasurer/collector for deposit in the general fund. Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two consecutive fines assessed hereunder within 60 days of assessment, the police chief shall order that the user discontinue use of the alarm system. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 30 days from the date of receipt of the police chief's order. 
(Code 1994, § 7-78; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Chapter 10 - HEALTH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public health, M.G.L. c. 114 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Sanitary code adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The state sanitary code, set forth at 105 CMR 410.00 et seq., including subsequent modifications, amendments or deletions, is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing minimum standards of fitness for human habitation, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The state sanitary code is hereby adopted and incorporated, as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the state sanitary code shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-4) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D. 
Sec. 10-2. - Sanitation standards for food establishments adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The state minimum sanitation standard for food establishments, set forth at 105 CMR 590.00 et seq., including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions, is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of governing sanitation in food establishments, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. The minimum standards are hereby adopted and incorporated, as if fully set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the state minimum sanitation standard for food establishments be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 4-5) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D. 
Sec. 10-3. - Copies of codes. 
    Copies of the code adopted by this chapter shall be available for inspection at the department of municipal inspections. Copies shall also be made available for purchase at the city's purchase price, plus 2.5 percent. Such additional charge shall be for the city's administrative costs relative to such sales. 
(Code 1994, § 4-8) 
Sec. 10-4. - Prohibition on plastic bags. 
(a)  Purpose. The reduction in the use of disposable plastic shopping bags by retail establishments in the City of Chelsea is a public purpose that protects the marine environment, advances solid waste reduction, reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and protects waterways. This section seeks to reduce the number of plastic bags that are being used, discarded and littered, and to promote the use of reusable checkout bags and recyclable paper bags by retail establishments located in Chelsea. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    City means the City of Chelsea and its legal limits and all rights of access and easements in and licenses to use land areas outside of its legal limits as to which it has the right or obligation to maintain. 
    Checkout bag means a carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale. Checkout Bags shall not include: 
(1)  Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed by a consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale or check-out area of a retail establishment; or 
(2)  Laundry or dry-cleaner bags; or 
(3)  Newspaper bags; or 
(4)  Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish, whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture. 
    Compostable plastic bag means a plastic bag that 
(1)  Conforms to the current ASTM D6400; 
(2)  Is certified and labeled as meeting the ASTM D6400 standard specification by a recognized verification entity; and 
(3)  Must be capable of undergoing biological decomposition in a compost site such that the material breaks down into carbon dioxide, water, inorganic compounds and biomass at a rate consistent with known compostable materials. 
    Recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that is 
(1)  One hundred percent recyclable including the handles; 
(2)  Contains at least 40 percent post-consumer recycled paper content; and 
(3)  Displays the words "recyclable" and "made from 40 percent post-consumer recycled content" (or other applicable amount) in a visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
    Retail establishment means any person, corporation, partnership, business venture, or vendor that sell or provide merchandise, goods or materials directly to a customer, whether for or not for profit, including but not limited to restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and household goods stores; however the term "retail establishment" does not include bazaars or festivals operated by nonprofit organizations or religious institutions. 
    Reusable bag means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other durable material, or durable plastic that is at least 3.0 mils in thickness. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  If any retail establishment provides a checkout bag to customers, the bag shall comply with the requirements of being a compostable plastic bag, recyclable paper bag or a reusable bag. 
(2)  A store that sells any type of acceptable checkout bag as described in subsection (c)(1) above must provide a receipt to the customer at the time of sale which separately identifies the "checkout bag charge". 
(d)  Penalties; warnings; and enforcement. 
(1)  Penalties. Each violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. Each use of a bag that violates this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Warnings. The first offense by a retail establishment shall result in a warning only. Following such warning, the retail establishment shall have 14 days to correct the violations. No fine shall issue prior to 14 days after the initial warning. 
(3)  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the inspectional services department or the health and human services director. 
(e)  Exemption. 
(1)  The city may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for a period of one year upon a finding by the director of municipal inspections or the health and human services director that the requirements of this section would cause undue hardship to a retail establishment. An "undue hardship" shall be found only in: 
a.  Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment such that there are no reasonable alternatives to bags that are not compostable plastic bags, recyclable paper bags or reusable bags; or 
b.  Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment such that compliance with the requirements of this section would deprive a person of a legally protected right; or 
c.  Circumstances where a retail establishment requires additional time in order to draw down an existing inventory of single-use plastic check out bags. Any retail establishment receiving an exemption under this subsection shall file with the city monthly reports on inventory reduction and remaining stocks. 
(2)  Any retail establishment shall apply for an exemption to the city using forms provided by the inspectional services department and shall allow the city access to all information supporting its application. 
(3)  The city may approve the exemption request, in whole or in part, with or without conditions. 
(4)  The city may establish a fee for exemption requests. 
( Ord. of 12-17-2018 ) 
Chapter 12 - HUMAN RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Unlawful discrimination, M.G.L. c. 151B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions as set out in M.G.L. c. 151B, § 1 are hereby incorporated by reference, with the exception of the following terms: 
    Disability. 
(1)  The term "disability" means and includes: 
a.  Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of the individual; 
b.  Having a record of such an impairment; or 
c.  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
(2)  The term "disability" does not include the current, illegal use of a controlled substance as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, § 1. 
    Household means and includes two or more persons: 
(1)  Related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants; or 
(2)  Living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage. 
    Unlawful discrimination practice means and includes discrimination against any person as to employment, housing, education, public accommodations, public services or other opportunities, because of race, color, religious creed, national origin, sex, age, disability, veteran status, ancestry, sexual orientation or public benefit status. 
(Code 1994, § 8-51) 
Sec. 12-2. - Public policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to protect the constitutional, civil, and human rights of all people within the city, to promote understanding among individuals and groups in the city through improving the quality of discourse and eliminating unlawful discrimination, and to see that each person regardless of race, color, religious creed, national origin, sex, age, disability, veteran status, ancestry, sexual orientation or public benefit status shall have equal opportunity in or access to employment, housing, education and public accommodation, and equal access to and benefit from public services. 
(b)  It is a violation of this Code to commit an unlawful discrimination practice. 
(Code 1994, § 8-50) 
Secs. 12-3-12-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 12-23. - Establishment of a human rights commission. 
(a)  There shall be in the city a human rights commission known as the Chelsea Human Rights Commission, hereinafter referred to as the commission. 
(b)  All personnel necessary to staff the department shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1994, § 8-52) 
Sec. 12-24. - Powers. 
    The function of the human rights commission shall be to implement the policies of this article by the exercise of the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To initiate hearings or other activities designed to educate and inform the city and the residents thereof about the effects of prejudice, intolerance and bigotry, including, but not limited to, analyzing the problems of discrimination in the city, issuing publications and results of research and making recommendations to the city manager and the city council as, in its judgment, will promote good will and minimize or eliminate prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination; 
(2)  To initiate investigations into the existence of unlawful discrimination in the city which may deny or tend to deny equal access to or opportunity in housing, employment, education, and public accommodations, services and facilities to a person or group because of their race, color, religious creed, national origin, sex, age, disability, veteran status, ancestry, sexual orientation or public benefits status, provided that cases alleging discrimination on the part of the city, its officers or employees will be transferred within seven days to the state commission against discrimination, and notice of such transmittal shall be given to the complainant within a similar time; 
(3)  To issue, on its own behalf, a complaint, upon reasonable belief that a person has engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice; 
(4)  To conduct hearings, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, including but not limited to filing enforcement and contempt proceedings with the superior court, administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and in connection therewith to require the procurement of any documents, books, papers or evidence relating to any matter in question or under investigation by the commission; 
(5)  To attempt by mediation to resolve any matter over which it has jurisdiction, and after investigation of any matter not resolved by mediation to make written report of its findings and recommendations to the city manager on any matter within the manager's jurisdiction for the manager's review and for the implementation by the manager of such of the recommendations of the commission as the city manager deems justified; or, similarly, to the school committee on any matter within its jurisdiction, or the state commission against discrimination (MCAD) on any matter within its jurisdiction over the matter in question, and in all cases, urging, and using its best efforts bring about, compliance with its recommendations, provided that complainants shall be informed that any mediation services provided by the commission will not legally toll any applicable statute of limitations for a claim of discrimination or violation of civil rights; 
(6)  The city, acting through the commission, reserves the right to charge the parties, as the commission sees fit, reasonable fees for the purposes of mediation, and all related activities; 
(7)  To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations to carry out the policies and provisions of this article, and the policies and practice of the commission in connection therewith; 
(8)  To obtain upon request and utilize the services of all municipal departments and agencies, unless prohibited by law, in order to effectuate the policy of this article; 
(9)  To work with the municipal government agencies to increase compliance with local, state and federal laws and to raise the level of awareness and sensitivity to human and civil rights through workforce-wide required training programs; 
(10)  To expend, with the approval of the city manager, such funds as are appropriated for the aforementioned purposes. The commission shall annually prepare an operating budget in a timely manner; 
(11)  To enter into such agreements with the MCAD which shall be constant with the purposes of this article, with the approval of the city manager; 
(12)  To render to the city manager and city council a full written report of its activities and of its recommendations at least once a year. 
(Code 1994, § 8-53) 
Sec. 12-25. - Limitation of commission jurisdiction. 
    The human rights commission, being itself an established agency of the city, shall not exert, nor attempt to exert, jurisdiction over allegations of discrimination made against the city, its officers or employees. 
(Code 1994, § 8-54) 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Nudity or related conduct prohibited in certain establishments. 
(a)  In accordance with M.G.L. c. 140, § 181 or 183A, the following prohibits acts that are deemed contrary to the public need and to the common good: 
(1)  It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire as to expose to view any portion of the areola of the female breast or any portion of the pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks or genitals. 
(2)  It is forbidden to employ or permit any hostess or other person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  It is forbidden to encourage or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks or genitals of any other person. 
(4)  It is forbidden to employ or permit any person to wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulate the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair or genitals, or any portions thereof. 
(5)  It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to perform any act or to simulate the acts of: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, flagellation or any sexual acts prohibited by law; or 
b.  Touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or genitals of another. 
(6)  It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to show motion picture films, videocassettes, still pictures, or other photographic reproductions depicting any of the acts, or any simulation of any of the acts, prohibited in this subsection (a). 
(b)  No license shall be held for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises where such acts or conduct in violation of the provisions in subsection (a) of this section are permitted. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, no person duly licensed by the licensing board for the city under M.G.L. c. 140, § 181; c. 183A; or c. 138, § 1, 12 or 23 shall employ, use the services of, or permit upon this licensed premises any employee, entertainer or other person who by attire or conduct violates any General Laws, special act or ordinance of the city. 
(d)  No original license shall be granted unless the petitioner has conformed to the rules and regulations of the licensing commission pertaining to the granting of such license. 
(Code 1994, § 9-4) 
Sec. 14-2. - Food dispensing at gasoline stations restricted. 
    In order to protect the health and safety of the residents of the city, no retail food establishment or premises within the city shall be used for the combined purposes of dispensing at retail, food for human consumption and the selling of gasoline or other inflammable products, unless the products are at a minimum of 100 feet apart. The distances shall be computed from the location point of storage tanks or fuel pumps, whichever is closer, to the front door of where the food for retail purposes is stored for sale purposes. This section does not apply to coin vending machines for dispensing of prepackaged and prepared food and drink products. 
(Code 1994, § 2-4) 
Sec. 14-3. - Delivery of milk and bread. 
    The delivery of milk and bread to stores is allowable between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. Permission for such delivery between such hours shall be granted by the chief of police upon request of the business establishment. The chief of police shall not grant this permission of delivery if, in the chief's judgment, a nuisance shall be created, and the chief of police shall withdraw such permission if in the chief's judgment a nuisance is created by such delivery or if requested to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 9-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Time restriction upon delivering or removing merchandise. 
    Except in those areas of the city zoned waterfront or industrial, no person shall deliver to or remove merchandise from any business establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in emergencies. 
(Code 1994, § 2-6) 
Sec. 14-5. - Oil terminals. 
    All oil terminals within the boundaries of the City of Chelsea shall have two trained employees on duty at all times. 
(1)  At least one such trained employee shall be a marine terminal operator who has knowledge and training in the following areas: 
a.  Storage tank type, location and operation of all valves including pressure relief devices, operations of all piping and valves and emergency venting operations; 
b.  Operations of the loading rack(s), including emergency procedures; 
c.  Offloading operations at the dock, including ship to shore connections and emergency procedures; 
d.  Operations of the fire suppression system(s); 
e.  Spill and product release procedures, including proper notification of the fire department. 
(2)  The second trained employee shall have knowledge and training in the following areas: 
a.  Storage tank type and location and emergency procedures; 
b.  Operations of the loading rack(s), including emergency procedures; 
c.  Operations of the fire suppression system(s); and 
d.  Spill and product release procedures, including proper notification of the fire. 
(3)  Whenever there are offloading operations at the dock, there shall be at least two marine terminal operators on duty. 
(Code 1994, § 2-7; Ord. of 6-19-2017(2) ) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted June 19, 2017(2) , changed the title of § 14-5 from "Oil companies with night dispatcher required to have another employee on duty between certain hours" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 14-6. - Operating hours of retail food establishments. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "food" includes any article or commodity, however stored or packaged, intended for human consumption off the premises. 
(b)  No establishment engaged in the sale of food at retail shall, unless granted permission by the licensing commission, remain open for the transaction of regular business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  The licensing commission may issue a permit for the purpose of allowing an establishment to conduct business at retail between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., if in their opinion the public convenience will be served. 
(d)  A permit may be granted after a public hearing called for that purpose, which has been advertised twice in two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(e)  Any permit granted under the provisions of this section shall contain such terms and conditions as the licensing commission shall specify. 
(f)  Any permit granted under the provisions of this section shall expire annually on May 15, unless sooner revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(g)  No permit shall be modified, suspended or revoked until a public hearing has been held upon the issue. Such hearing shall be called in a like manner to that pertaining to the original issuance of the permit. 
(h)  Every establishment currently engaged in the sale of food at retail shall be considered as having been granted special permission by the licensing commission, as provided by this section, until May 15, 1995, unless the licensing commission determines otherwise. The licensing commission may, however, specify terms and conditions under which such permission shall continue. 
(Code 1994, § 9-8) 
Sec. 14-7. - Sale price of gasoline to be displayed. 
    All retail dealers of motor fuel must display price per gallon of motor fuel sold pursuant to M.G.L. c. 94, § 295C. 
(Code 1994, § 2-5) 
Secs. 14-8-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Establishment of licensing commission; service charges on licenses, permits and commissions. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the city a licensing commission, in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter. Unless otherwise provided by the city Charter, the licensing commission shall act as the licensing authority for the city with all power to grant, suspend or revoke licenses and permits for intoxicating liquors, and all licenses and permits now or hereafter vested by law in the mayors and city councils of cities of the state. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code), the licensing commission, subject to the approval of the city manager, may establish such fees as are deemed necessary and reasonable for all licenses within their jurisdiction and control. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the chairperson of the licensing commission. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(Code 1994, § 9-1; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-32. - Licenses may be revoked at any time. 
(a)  Any license or permit which may be granted under the provisions of the Charter, state law or this Code may be revoked, modified, or annulled at any time by the officer, agency, board or commission authorized to grant such license, or permit; and no license or permit granted under any ordinance, nor any thing done nor right acquired by virtue of the same, shall entitle any person to a continuance of such license, permission, nor thing done nor right acquired. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to be in conflict with state or federal law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-2) 
Sec. 14-32A. - Violations of wage laws by licensees or permittees. 
(a)  Any application to the license commission for any license issued pursuant to M.G.L. c. 138 or M.G.L. c. 140 may be denied if, during the three-year period prior to the date of the application, the applicant has been subject to a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, order or final administrative determination resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages. Each applicant for a license shall certify that he has not been found guilty, liable or responsible, in the past three years, in any judicial or administrative proceeding, for any violation of any of the laws set forth above. 
(b)  Any license or permit issued by the license commission under M.G.L. c. 138 or M.G.L. c. 140 may be modified, suspended or revoked if, during the term of the license or permit, the licensee or permittee has been subject to a federal or state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, order or final administrative determination resulting from a violation of M.G.L. c. 149, M.G.L. c. 151, the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages. 
(Ord. of 4-25-2016 , § 2) 
Sec. 14-33. - Notice of all revocation, modification or suspension hearings. 
    Notice of any hearing for revocation, modification or suspension of a license granted by the licensing commission shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Except as otherwise provided herein or by Massachusetts General Laws, notice thereof shall be given by the licensing commission to the holder of the license in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to the holder's resident address, as set forth in the pertinent application. 
(Code 1994, § 9-1; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Secs. 14-34-14-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L. c. 101, § 13 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawker or peddler means and includes any person who goes from place to place either on foot or on or from any animal or any vehicle carrying, exhibiting or selling any goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1994, § 9-70) 
Sec. 14-56. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a criminal penalty of $200.00 and in all other respects shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Violators of any provision of this article shall be subject to arrest as provided for by M.G.L. c. 101, § 32. 
(Code 1994, § 9-84) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 14-57. - Interpretation of article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license duly issued under state law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-86) 
Sec. 14-58. - Sale of certain goods prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 14-85, hawkers and peddlers are prohibited from selling jewelry, other than costume jewelry valued at not more than $25.00, furs, wines, spirituous liquors, small artificial flowers and miniature flags. 
(Code 1994, § 9-73) 
State Law reference- Sale of certain goods prohibited, M.G.L. c. 101, § 16. 
Sec. 14-59. - Times restricted for street sales. 
(a)  Any person who cries such person's wares or makes any loud or disturbing noise selling or buying goods in any street or public place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall be subject to a criminal fine of not more than $200.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person holding the license to do so who allows more than one person at a time to cry such person's wares shall be subject to a criminal fine of not more than $200.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(c)  No hawker or peddler shall remain more then 20 minutes in one location. All hawkers and peddlers shall move at least 100 feet from the last location of sale. No hawker or peddler shall have exclusive right to any location on the public streets, or streets open to the public, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, including private property, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where the operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of all enforcing agents exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or whether the public is impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Code 1994, § 9-76) 
Sec. 14-60. - Sale of merchandise from vehicles standing in streets prohibited. 
    Any person who stands, parks or places any wagon, cart or other vehicle of whatever description for the purpose of selling goods, wares, or merchandise upon any street or public place shall be subject to a criminal fine of not more than $200.00, and shall in all other respects be treated in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 9-77) 
Sec. 14-61. - Vehicles and receptacles used. 
(a)  Every vehicle or other receptacle used by a licensee under the provisions of this article as a conveyance for articles offered or exposed for sale shall be kept in a neat and clean condition and shall not leak. 
(b)  Every vehicle or other receptacle used by a licensee under the provisions of this article as a conveyance for articles offered or exposed for sale by a licensee shall have plainly painted or attached to each side of such vehicle or other receptacle the licensee's name and number, in letters and figures at least two inches in height. 
(c)  No person hawking, peddling or carrying or exposing articles for sale shall carry or convey such articles in any manner that will tend to injure or disturb the public health or comfort. 
(d)  Persons who are found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be liable for a criminal fine, not to exceed $200.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 9-78) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Secs. 14-62-14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local licenses, M.G.L. c. 101, § 17. 

Sec. 14-81. - Waiver of fees. 
    The licensing commission may waive in whole or part any and all fees required by this article, as it deems necessary. Upon issuance of such a waiver, the licensing commission shall provide the city manager with written reasons for the granting of the waiver. 
(Code 1994, § 9-83) 
Sec. 14-82. - Sale of certain goods require license from state and certificate of registration from the city. 
(a)  Articles, other than those permitted for sale under articles IX and X of this chapter, or permitted without a license as described in section 14-83, or not permitted to be sold at all as described in section 14-58, shall not be sold by hawkers or peddlers unless duly licensed by the state for such purposes or by the licensing commission, as provided by section 14-84. 
(b)  All hawkers and peddlers duly licensed by the state are required to register with and obtain a certificate of such registration from the city clerk prior to conducting business in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-71) 
Sec. 14-83. - No fee required for sale of certain goods. 
    No fee shall be required for a license to sell newspapers, religious publications, flowering plants, wild or uncultivated flowers, fruits, nuts and berries by hawkers and peddlers. Persons licensed for the sale of such goods shall comply in all other respects with this article, and the rules and regulations of the licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 9-72) 
Sec. 14-84. - State or municipal license for sale of certain goods. 
(a)  Before selling any meats, butter, cheese, fish, fresh fruit or vegetables, any hawker or peddler must either be duly licensed by the state or by the licensing commission in accordance with M.G.L. c. 101, § 17. 
(b)  The licensing commission shall have authority to grant a license under this section to any person of good repute, as to morals and integrity, which has shown responsibility and business acumen. 
(c)  Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals issued under the authority of the city. 
(d)  Any hawker or peddler of any meats, butter, cheese, fish, fresh fruit or vegetables who uses, or possesses with intent to use, any false, condemned or unsealed weighing or measuring device shall be subject to a criminal penalty not to exceed $50.00 for each use or possession of a false or condemned measuring device and $25.00 for each use of an unsealed measuring device, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(e)  Every licensed hawker and peddler shall be assigned a license number, a record of which shall be kept by the licensing commission. 
(f)  Any license granted by the licensing commission under this section may be modified, suspended or revoked by the licensing commission for good cause after reasonable notice to the licensee and a hearing upon the grounds for modification, suspension or revocation. The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be sufficient cause for revocation of that license. 
(g)  Unless sooner revoked, and irrespective of any modification or suspension, any license granted by the licensing commission under this section shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1994, § 9-74) 
Sec. 14-85. - Special license relating to sale of articles for charitable purposes. 
    The licensing commission shall, under such conditions as it may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged exclusively in charitable work, or to a part of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military services of the United States in time of war or insurrection, a special license authorizing it, upon a particular day and for a charitable purpose named in such license, to sell, through its accredited agents in the streets and other public places within the city, or in any designated part thereof, flags, badges, medals, buttons, flowers and similar items, provided they are small in size. Under no circumstances shall a person under 16 years of age be accredited as such an agent. Each accredited agent shall wear in plain sight while engaging in selling such articles a badge, provided by such organization and approved by the licensing commission, bearing upon it the name of such organization and the date on which the license is to be exercised, and no such agent shall be authorized to make or attempt to make such sales in front of any private premises against the objection of the owner or occupant thereof. The exercise of the licenses hereby provided for shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1994, § 9-75; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Temporary licenses to sell articles for charitable purposes, M.G.L. c. 101, § 32. 
Sec. 14-86. - Age requirement. 
    No person under the age of 16 years of age shall receive a license or be registered as a hawker or peddler. 
(Code 1994, § 9-81) 
Sec. 14-87. - Bond or insurance required. 
(a)  No hawker or peddler shall sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city unless such hawker or peddler has posted a bond with the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city manager, sufficient to protect the city against any suit, action or proceeding in which the city may be a party as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such transient vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said bond specified in this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall be in a form approved by the city solicitor. 
(b)  A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be substituted for the bond described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 9-85) 
Sec. 14-88. - Subject to further restrictions. 
    The terms of every hawker's and peddler's license and certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restriction and regulations as the licensing commission shall impose. 
(Code 1994, § 9-82) 
Sec. 14-89. - License and/or certificate of registration of hawkers and peddlers to be shown on demand. 
    Every hawker or peddler shall exhibit such person's license and/or certificate of registration when the same is demanded by a member of the licensing commission, an inspector or police officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 101, § 27. 
Sec. 14-90. - Permitting and regulation of mobile food operations. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Administrator shall mean the licensing administrator of the City of Chelsea or his or her designee. 
    Canteen shall mean any mobile food operation that serves food prepared elsewhere from a motorized vehicle or which is towed by a motorized vehicle. 
    Food cart shall mean any mobile food operation that serves food from a non-motorized vehicle. 
    Mobile food operations shall mean any food establishment as defined in 105 CMR 590.002 that is conducted in a mobile or temporary location. 
    Mobile food truck shall mean a mobile food operation that prepares and serves food and beverages (non-alcoholic) from a motorized vehicle or is pulled by a motorized vehicle. 
    Temporary food operation shall mean any food operation that serves food which has been prepared at a central preparation facility from a satellite feeding location. 
    The commission shall mean the licensing commission established at section 6-2 of the Charter of the City of Chelsea. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to mobile food operations engaged in the business of cooking, preparing, and distributing food or beverage with or without charge on or in public, private or restricted spaces. This section shall not apply to ice cream trucks that move from place to place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 30 minutes at a time. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to mobile food operations that receives a temporary permit from the licensing administrator for a one-day event or an event sponsored by the City of Chelsea. 
(c)  Mobile food operation permit required. 
(1)  No person or business entity, including a religious or charitable organization, shall operate a mobile food operation in any public, private or restricted space without a permit issued by the commission. 
(2)  A mobile food operation permit is required for each and every mobile food operation. 
(3)  Each mobile food operation must display its permit on the vehicle, cart, or satellite feeding location while food is being served. 
(d)  Application for a mobile food operation permit. 
(1)  Single application. There shall be made available by the commissioner a single application form to apply for each mobile food operation permit. The application shall provide the following: 
a.  A description of necessary inspections and fees; 
b.  A description of areas of the city where the operation of mobile food operations are limited or prohibited; 
(2)  Submission of materials. Each application shall indicate on its face, in addition to other requirements as may be determined by the commission, that the following materials must be submitted by the applicant: 
a.  The name of the business and its owner or owners and the mailing address of the business, 
b.  A description of the proposed business plan for the mobile food operation, 
c.  A proposed service route and hours of operation with a detailed schedule of times and locations where the mobile food operation will be stationary and serving food, 
d.  A food operation permit shall be issued only for the explicit time period covered by the effective dates of the general liability insurance policy. 
(3)  Approval process. An application must be submitted to the licensing administrator, who shall then forward the application to the inspectional services department, fire department, department of public works and police department for review. The application must receive the approval of each of the departments and the traffic and parking commission, prior to its final approval and the issuance of a permit by the commission. 
a.  The commission may work with the applicant or permit holder to modify a service route at any time (i) before the issue of a permit or (ii) after the issue of a permit, if the grant of a permit or approval of a service route has led to the creation of a nuisance or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, or order or by request of the permit holder. 
b.  In no case shall an initial permit required under this section be granted until after a public hearing is given by the licensing commission to all persons interested therein. Notice shall be provided in the same manner as it is for other public hearings of the licensing commission. The costs of any advertising shall be paid by the applicant at the time of application. These costs are in addition to the filing fee described in section 14-90.8. 
c.  Criteria for issuance of permit. In considering an application for a mobile food operation permit, the licensing commission shall consider the public good and general welfare and convenience to the community, and shall take into account factors such as the sort of operation proposed (including the proposed menu, days and hours of operation, and location), any impact on the community with respect to such matters as noise, traffic, congestion, odors, sanitary and waste disposal facilities, parking, dust and fumes, the impact on the character of the neighborhood and city, and whether any articulable harm would follow from granting the permit. Also the commission shall consider whether a public benefit would flow from the proposed location and use and the competitive or other impact on existing restaurants. 
d.  No permit will be issued by the licensing commission unless and until the vehicle and any of its food handling components have passed inspection by the inspectional services department. 
e.  If the application is denied in whole or in part, the commission shall state the specific reasons for the denial. This decision shall be final. 
(e)  Limitation on the number of permits. The commission may from time to time set a limit on the number of total permits that may be issued or renewed per year; provided, however, that no more than ten percent of total permits or five permits, whichever is lesser, may be issued to a single person or business entity or both. Upon receipt of application, the commissioner or his or her designee shall advise the applicant whether or not the limitation has been met. 
(f)  Permit renewal. 
(1)  Every mobile food operation permit, unless suspended or revoked by the commission for a violation of any provision of this section, any other rule or regulation promulgated for the implementation of this section, or any law of the Commonwealth or the United States shall be renewed annually given that the annual fee is paid within 30 days after its one-year expiration, at which time the permit holder shall forfeit the right to renew and the permit may be made available to another applicant for new permit if the limitation on the number of permits has not been reached. 
(2)  The renewal of a permit does not also guarantee renewal of the previously approved route. The commission reserves the right to add, remove, and reapportion available locations among mobile food truck operations at renewal. 
(g)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  General. The commission is hereby authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations appropriate for the implementation of this section, and, if necessary, work with other agencies and departments of the city and state to establish a streamlined process for the permitting of mobile food operations; provided, however, that such rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the following limitations and restrictions: 
a.  No operator of a mobile food operation shall park, stand, or move a vehicle and conduct business within areas of the city where the permit holder has not been authorized to operate; 
b.  No permit holder shall possess a permit for a mobile food operation that is not in operation for a period of more than 14 days without duly notifying and obtaining approval from the commission. 
c.  The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the exclusive use of the service route, in whole or in part, to the mobile food operation permit holder, other than the time and place as approved for the term of the permit; 
d.  No mobile food operation shall provide or allow any dining area, including but not limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup counters, unless a proposal for such seating arrangements is submitted with the permit application and approved by committee. 
e.  Consumers shall be provided with single service articles, such as plastic forks and paper plates, and a waste container for their disposal. All mobile food operations shall offer a waste container for public use that the operator shall empty and properly dispose of at his own expense. 
f.  No mobile food operation shall make or cause to be made any unreasonable or excessive noise in violation of Chelsea Code of Ordinances section 16-99. 
g.  A mobile food operation may not operate on public property unless the commission and the departments have otherwise granted approval on the permit application for its operation at the particular location during specific times. 
h.  All mobile food trucks must be equipped with a permanently mounted global positioning system (GPS) device that meets rules and regulations established by the commission. 
i.  For mobile food operations on public property, the city reserves the right to temporarily move a mobile food operations to a nearby location if the approved location needs to be used for emergency purposes, snow removal, construction, or other public benefit. 
(2)  Fire department. The Chelsea Fire Department shall promulgate rules and regulations for the inspection of mobile food operations and to ensure compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local fire safety statutes, regulations, ordinances, and codes. 
(h)  Permit fees. 
(1)  Application fee. The application fee for a permit granted by the commission for the operation of a mobile food operation shall be $50.00 for applicants. 
(2)  Annual fee for mobile food trucks. After approval of the application, an annual fee shall be required for each mobile food truck. The annual fee for Chelsea residents (proof of residency is that the mobile food truck is registered as garaged in Chelsea) shall be $500.00 and the annual fee for non-resident applications shall be $1,500.00. 
(3)  Annual fee for canteens. After approval of the application, an annual fee shall be required for each canteen. The annual fee for Chelsea residents (proof of residency is that the canteen is registered as garaged in Chelsea) shall be $300.00 and the annual fee for non-resident applications shall be $900.00. 
(4)  Annual fee for food carts. After approval of the application, an annual fee shall be required for each food cart. The annual fee for Chelsea residents shall be $200.00 and the annual fee for non-resident applications shall be $350.00. 
(i)  Prohibition against the transfer of a permit. 
(1)  Transfers for value prohibited. No person holding a permit for a mobile food operation shall sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer a mobile food operation permit for value. 
(2)  Nonvalue transfers as part of the sale of a business. Notwithstanding subsection 14-90.10(a), a permit holder may transfer a permit as part of the sale of a majority of the stock in a corporation holding such permit, as part of the sale of a majority of the membership interests of a limited liability company holding such permit, or as part of the sale of a business or substantially all of its assets; provided that there shall be no allocated or actual value for the transfer of the permit 
a.  Prior to any such transfer, the transferor shall notify the commission in writing and the transferee shall submit a food truck operation application for approval to the commission pursuant to the process set forth in subsection 14-90.5 and any additional rules and regulations promulgated by the commission. 
b.  Any such transfer shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the original permit. 
(3)  Unauthorized transfer voids permit. Any unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer a permit shall automatically void such permit. Whoever violates this provision, including both the transferor and transferee, shall be subject to a fine of $300.00 dollars, pursuant to section 14-90.12(a). The unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer of each permit shall constitute a separate violation. 
(j)  Operation of mobile food operations. 
(1)  Operation without permit. Any mobile food operation being operated without a valid mobile food operation permit issued by the commission shall be deemed a public safety hazard and may be ticketed and impounded. All mobile food operations should be parked or garaged pursuant to the City of Chelsea's Zoning Ordinances and traffic and parking commission rules. 
(2)  Unattended vehicles prohibited. No mobile food operation shall be parked on the street overnight, or left unattended and unsecured at any time food is kept in the mobile food operation. Any mobile food operation which is found to be unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard and may be ticketed and impounded. 
(3)  A mobile food operation operating outside of an approved route, at an unauthorized location, or beyond the hours for which the operation has been permitted shall be deemed operating without a permit in violation of this section and may be subject to enforcement under section 14-90.11. 
(4)  Areas of operation. No person shall operate a food operation: 
a.  Within 300 feet of a restaurant; 
b.  Within 300 feet of any elementary or secondary school; 
c.  On private property without the written consent of the property owner. 
d.  In a municipal park without the written consent of the director of public works. 
(5)  A mobile food operation may be allowed signage on the cart or vehicle provided that no sign shall project from the cart or vehicle and there shall be no free standing signs adjacent to the cart or vehicle. 
(6)  A mobile food operation shall not emit exterior lighting in a manner so as to shine on adjacent properties or toward any street. 
(7)  Notwithstanding section 14-90.7(a)(4), no seating shall be placed on a public way or on a sidewalk. 
(8)  Mobile food operations shall not park overnight on public property or private lands after operating hours except on land owned, leased or rented by the operator for the storage of the vehicle in compliance with the city's zoning by-law. 
(9)  A mobile food operation shall not operate between 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(10)  Food trucks shall be exempt from hourly parking restrictions on public property provided they are parked in legal parking spaces; actually engaged in the operation of the food truck business, and otherwise in compliance with this section. 
(11)  Mobile food operations shall pull over to the side of the public right-of-way as far as practicable when stopping for the purpose of selling. In no event shall any mobile food operation stop for the purpose of selling if such a stop prevents the passage of other motor vehicles on the public right-of-way. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Fine for violation. Any permit holder operating a mobile food operation or service in violation of any provision of this section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the commission may be subject to a fine of $300.00 per day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D may be used to enforce this section. Any permit holder found in violation of this section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the commission may be issued a ticket for violation and the mobile food vehicle may be impounded. 
(2)  Revocation, suspension, modification. Once a permit has been issued it may be revoked, suspended, modified, or not renewed by the commission for failure to comply with the provisions of this section, any rules and regulations promulgated by the commission, or any laws of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
a.  No permit shall be revoked, suspended, modified, or not renewed without a hearing before the commission, prior to which hearing the commission shall give reasonable notice of the time and place of the hearing and the specific grounds of the proposed action. The decision resulting therefrom shall be final. 
b.  The commissioner or his or her designee may suspend a permit for no more than three days without a notice or hearing, if the commissioner or his or her designee specifically notifies the permit holder in writing that there is a probability of violation of public safety, health or order. In such a case, a hearing shall be held before the commissioner or his or her designee within 48 hours of the suspension in order to determine whether the public safety, health or order concern justified the suspension. 
(3)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the committee may be enforced jointly by the Chelsea Police Department and the Chelsea Inspectional Services Department. 
(l)  Severability. If any provision of this section is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
( Ord. of 4-23-2018 , § 1) 
Secs. 14-91-14-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK DEALERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license junk dealers and to make rules and regulations relative to their business, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 54-56; form, term and revocation of licenses for junk dealers and collectors, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 202, 203 and 205. 

Sec. 14-107. - Copy of article to be printed in license. 
    A copy of this article shall accompany every license granted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-135) 
Sec. 14-108. - License. 
(a)  No person shall purchase, barter, collect or store junk, waste materials, materials discarded by others, old metal, rags or other secondhand articles, for any purpose, without first having received a license to do so from the licensing commission. When acting in their official capacities, city administrative officers, boards and commissions shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any license granted under the provisions of this article may, after notice and hearing, be revoked by the licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 9-125) 
Sec. 14-109. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of any such article: 
(1)  A description of the article purchased; 
(2)  The name, age and residence of the person from whom purchased; and 
(3)  The day and hour when such purchase was made. 
(b)  Such book shall at all times be open to any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-126) 
Sec. 14-110. - Sign to be displayed. 
    Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles shall place in some suitable and conspicuous location on such keeper's shop a sign, having such keeper's name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon, in letters no more than 12 inches in height and no less than six inches in height. 
(Code 1994, § 9-127; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-111. - Examination of shops, articles by city. 
    Every shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles and all articles of merchandise therein may be examined by any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-128) 
Sec. 14-112. - Purchases from minors. 
    No keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any of the articles aforesaid of any minor, knowing or having reason to believe such person to be a minor. 
(Code 1994, § 9-129) 
Sec. 14-113. - Retention period for purchases. 
    No article purchased or received by such keeper shall be sold by such keeper until a period of at least one week from the date of its purchase, or receipt shall have elapsed. 
(Code 1994, § 9-130) 
Sec. 14-114. - Location of shops, stores, etc. 
    No dealer or collector of junk, rags, or secondhand articles shall be allowed to keep, expose, sort or offer for sale any junk in any shop, store or any other building which is located within 500 feet of any school or other public building. 
(Code 1994, § 9-131) 
Sec. 14-115. - Condition of premises; manner of keeping clothing. 
    All dealers and collectors of junk, old metals, rags or secondhand wearing apparel shall be required to keep their premises in a neat and orderly condition. Such clothing shall be kept enclosed in sacks, boxes, barrels or other suitable covered containers. 
(Code 1994, § 9-132) 
Sec. 14-116. - Storage of old rags overnight prohibited. 
    No person to whom has been issued a license for the purpose only of collecting junk, old metals or old rags, or other secondhand articles, except secondhand clothing, shall store any old rags overnight in any building within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, § 9-133) 
Sec. 14-117. - Licensing of vehicles. 
    Every vehicle used in the collection of junk, metals, rags or secondhand articles shall have the owner's name or business upon each side thereof, in plain, legible words and figures of not less than two inches in size. 
(Code 1994, § 9-134) 
Secs. 14-118-14-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-148. - Definitions. 
    Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Branch establishment means any activity requiring licensing under the provisions of this article occurring at a separate address or on a separate parcel of land in city which is owned, controlled or operated by a person who also holds or has applied for a license for an operation on another site under the provisions of this article. 
    Garage means a building, shed or enclosure, or any portion thereof in which more than two motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept for which any charge is made, unless the space is accessory to a dwelling unit and used by a resident thereof, or unless the space is accessory to a business not requiring a license under the provisions of this article, and which is used by the operators and/or employees of said business. 
    Motor vehicle. 
(1)  The term "motor vehicle" means an automobile, truck, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle, designed primarily to transport persons or property over public streets and highways, and includes motorized off-road vehicles. 
(2)  The term "motor vehicle" does not include trailers and/or motorized vehicles not requiring ground support during normal operation. 
    Motor vehicle junk business means any person whose principal business is the buying of secondhand motor vehicles for the purpose of remodeling, taking apart or rebuilding the same, or the buying or selling of parts of secondhand motor vehicles or tires, or the assembling of secondhand motor vehicle parts. 
    Motor vehicle repair shop. 
(1)  The term "motor vehicle repair shop" means any place, indoors or outdoors, where motor vehicles or their motors, engines, bodies, parts and/or equipment and accessories are repaired, installed or maintained (including mechanical washing, buffing and painting) for a charge and includes any place where such work is carried on as an incident to the business of selling new or used motor vehicles, or new or used motor vehicle parts, or as an incident to any other traffic in motor vehicles, motors or engines or their parts or equipment. 
(2)  The term "motor vehicle repair shop" does not include a facility, the primary business of which is selling the fluids necessary for the operation of a motor vehicle, and any repairs and/or adjustments made are of such a trivial nature that the motor vehicles involved are not left on the premises. 
    Parking garage. See Garage. 
    Parking lot means any outdoor space, or uncovered plot, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where more than two motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for which any charge is made, unless the space is accessory to a dwelling unit and used by a resident thereof or unless the space is accessory to a business not requiring licensing under this article and which is used by the operators, employees and/or customers of that business. 
    Repair work on motor vehicles means any work done on the premises of a motor vehicle repair shop which requires direct or indirect physical contact with a motor vehicle or part thereof. 
    Towing operations means the hauling and/or transportation of motor vehicles and shall include any establishment which provides towing services either as a primary use or as an accessory use. 
(Code 1994, § 9-170) 
Sec. 14-149. - Other businesses and activities. 
(a)  No business shall be carried on in conjunction with any license hereunder, unless such business would be permitted under applicable zoning laws, if carried on independently, and is in compliance with all laws applicable thereto. 
(b)  No partially dismantled, inoperable, or wrecked motor vehicle shall be stored or dismantled on the repair shop towing operations or parking premises, except as a direct, immediate and necessary incident to its repair or towing, or unless such storing or dismantling is necessary to some business in which the licensee is lawfully engaged in conjunction with the motor vehicle repair business or towing operations. 
(c)  All motor vehicles being repaired or maintained or awaiting repair or maintenance shall be kept on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1994, § 9-178) 
Sec. 14-150. - Inspection. 
    The licensing commission or its designee shall inspect all businesses licensed under this article at least once a year to determine whether such businesses are being operated in a lawful manner and in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-178.1) 
Secs. 14-151-14-168. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-169. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business as a motor vehicle junk business, a motor vehicle repair shop, a towing operation, a parking lot and/or a parking garage within the city without first having obtained a license from the licensing commission in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A person who operates more than one of these businesses within the city shall possess a separate license for each such location and each operation, including branch establishments. When multiple uses requiring a license in accordance with this article are operated at the same location by the same person, a single application for the multiple uses may be submitted, but a separate license for each such use must be obtained. 
(c)  A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or location were a separate business. 
(Code 1994, § 9-171) 
Sec. 14-170. - Application. 
(a)  An applicant for a license under this article shall file with the licensing commission a written application, upon forms provided by the city clerk, together with all required fees, signed by: 
(1)  The applicant, if an individual; 
(2)  All partners, if a partnership; or 
(3)  The president or chief officer, if a corporation or other organization. 
(b)  The application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and shall contain such information as the licensing commission deems necessary. 
(Code 1994, § 9-172) 
Sec. 14-171. - Approval procedure. 
    Upon receipt of an application as provided for in this division, the licensing commission shall furnish copies of same to all members of the board, the chief of police, the fire chief and the building inspector. 
(1)  The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's business responsibility and any violations related to the type of operations for which the license is required, and provide a written report of said investigation to the licensing commission within 30 days of the filing of the application. 
(2)  The proposed or existing premises and equipment with which the motor vehicle repair shop, towing operation, parking lot or parking garage is being or is to be operated shall be examined by the police chief, fire chief and the building inspector or their duly appointed representatives, who shall file a report with the licensing commission setting forth the results of their examination within 30 days of the filing of the application. 
(3)  The licensing commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the application not less than five days nor more than 30 days following the submission of the application, notice and advertising of said hearing in accord with Massachusetts General Laws. 
(4)  The licensing commission shall approve the application only if it finds: 
a.  The applicant's business responsibility and record are satisfactory and that all agents or officers of applicant, if any, who will take part in the operation of such business are of good character and reputation and are capable of operating the business in a manner consistent with public health, safety and general welfare; and 
b.  The proposed or existing premises and equipment with which the business is being or is to be operated conform to the requirements of the building code, applicable health and fire protection laws, and the provisions of this article, chapter 34, zoning, and other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations. 
(5)  If the findings in subsections (4)a and b of this section are all favorable to the applicant and the licensing commission approves the application, then within 60 days after the filing of the application, the licensing commission shall notify the applicant that a license may be issued subject to the conditions of this article and any further reasonable conditions imposed by the licensing commission. 
(6)  If any of the findings in subsections (4)a and b of this section are unfavorable to the applicant, the licensing commission shall disapprove the application and shall, within 60 days after the filing of the application, notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 9-173) 
Sec. 14-172. - Issuance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued unless the application is approved by the licensing commission. 
(b)  The license as issued shall bear the following language on its face: 
    "IMPORTANT: This license is valid only with respect to the premises and for the use(s) indicated herein and authorizes the licensee to operate in a lawful place and manner only; it is not a substitute for any certificate of occupancy, building permit, or other certificate or permit that might be required by law of the licensee, and it does not relieve the licensee of the responsibility to have all such required permits or certificates at all times and comply with all laws affecting the above-described business." 
(c)  Each license issued hereunder shall be accompanied by a bond, approved as to form by the city solicitor, executed by a company authorized to do such business in the state, in the sum of $50,000.00, conditioned upon the payment of the licensee of any and all final judgments for damages resulting to persons or property, including theft of any motor vehicle or any part or accessory thereof, arising out of the operation or maintenance of the licensed operation. Such bond shall run to the city for the benefit of any person who may receive injuries or suffer property damage or loss by theft resulting from the operation or maintenance of such business and shall be kept in full force and effect for the full period of time for which the license is effective. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be substituted for the bond described in this subsection. 
(d)  The licensing commission shall issue a license if and only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The application has been approved by the licensing commission; 
(2)  The applicant has submitted a bond or liability insurance policy meeting the requirements of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has paid all application fees and other costs prescribed by this article; 
(4)  The applicant has obtained from the building inspector a certificate of occupancy for the premises and uses to be licensed and has filed copies of the certificate of occupancy with the police chief and fire chief; and 
(5)  The applicant submits the license fees prescribed by this article. 
(e)  The licensing commission shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed and all licenses issued in accordance with this article, indexed alphabetically and by location. 
(Code 1994, § 9-174) 
Sec. 14-173. - Expiration date; renewal procedure. 
(a)  All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall expire on April 30 of each year, except as otherwise provided by Massachusetts General Laws. 
(b)  An applicant for a renewal of a license issued in accordance with this article shall, at least 60 days before the expiration date, file with the licensing commission a written application upon forms provided by the licensing commission, signed and sworn to in the same manner required in the case of an original application. The application shall contain such information about the applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of the licensed business during the preceding license period as is reasonably necessary to enable the licensing commission to determine the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license. 
(1)  The licensing commission shall forward copies of said renewal application to the police chief, the director of municipal inspections, and the fire chief, who shall investigate the contents of the application for renewal and submit a report of their findings to the board within 30 days of the submission of the application. 
(2)  No hearing for a license renewal is required; however, the licensing commission may at its discretion hold a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this article should the findings of this subsection be negative or if other information indicates such need. 
(3)  There shall be no fee for an application for renewal of a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article, but should a hearing be required, the applicant shall pay all costs involved in advertising and notice of hearing. 
(c)  Valid licenses issued prior to the passage of this article shall not qualify for renewal under this section. An application for an initial license must be made. 
(d)  The licensing commission shall issue renewal licenses only as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 9-174; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-174. - Fees due and payable upon issuance. 
    The annual fee to be paid for any license or renewal license issued hereunder is due and payable upon issuance of the appropriate license. No license shall be validly issued until all required licensing fees are paid in full. 
(Code 1994, § 9-176) 
Sec. 14-175. - Transferability. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. 
(b)  Any change in the names supplied in the application or in a renewal application during the period of license shall be reported to the licensing commission within 30 days of such change. 
(c)  Any change in the layout of the facility from that submitted in the application or the renewal application shall require a new application. 
(d)  Any violation of this section, including use of spaces not as prescribed in the application, shall be deemed sufficient cause for the immediate revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Code 1994, § 9-177) 
Sec. 14-176. - Revocation and suspension. 
    When the licensing commission determines that the public interest so requires, it shall revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder when it finds, after due investigation, that: 
(1)  The licensee or any agent or officer of the licensee who takes part in the operation of the licensed business: 
a.  Is not of good character or reputation; or 
b.  Has failed to comply with this article or any provision of law applicable to the premises, equipment or operation of the licensed business; 
(2)  The licensee, or any officer, agent or employee of the licensee, in the course of the licensed business, has: 
a.  Mutilated or altered the engine number or serial number of any motor vehicle; 
b.  Made wrongful use of any motor vehicle entrusted to the licensee; 
c.  Victimized, injured, or abused any member of the public in a manner amounting to a crime (other than a minor traffic violation); or 
d.  Endangered the life or safety of any person willfully or through gross negligence; 
(3)  The licensee or any officer, agent or employee of the licensee, in the course of the licensed business, has defrauded or attempted to defraud any person financially concerned with payment for services of the licensee, by means of charging or attempting to charge for any unnecessary or unauthorized repairs intentionally made, by misstating the nature or probable cost of any repair, or by any other means; 
(4)  The licensee has obtained the license through any fraud or misstatement; 
(5)  The licensed business is: 
a.  Being conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; 
b.  A nuisance; 
c.  Being operated in any unlawful manner; or 
d.  No longer being operated; 
(6)  The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances: 
a.  The violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle; or 
b.  The operation of a motor vehicle without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or other person has been convicted of such offense or not; 
(7)  The licensee has made any charge for services other than those set forth in the licensee's application; 
(8)  The licensee fails to keep an attendant on duty during the times specified on the application; 
(9)  The licensee is using spaces, bays or storage areas in any manner other than specified in the license application; or 
(10)  There is any change in a signature of the application for the license. 
(Code 1994, § 9-179) 
Sec. 14-177. - Hearing for aggrieved persons. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the licensing commission granting, denying, renewing or revoking a license for a proposed or existing business or activity subject to the provisions of this article may file a written request for a hearing before the licensing commission within ten days after issuance of such order. The licensing commission shall give notice of a public hearing upon this request to be held in not less than five days after service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing. The licensing commission shall also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question. 
(b)  At such hearing, the licensing commission shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of this article, and shall issue written findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order shall be filed with the city clerk and served by the licensing commission upon all parties appearing or represented at said hearing. 
(c)  All city boards and officers shall furnish such assistance and advice to the licensing commission as the commission shall request. 
(Code 1994, § 9-180) 
Secs. 14-178-14-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 70 et seq., 202; regulation of gold, silver and platinum dealers, M.G.L. c. 266, § 142A. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-208. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 9-156) 
Sec. 14-209. - Records to be kept. 
    Every person licensed under this article shall keep a daily legible list containing an accurate description on forms provided by the police department of all articles purchased during the preceding business day, the respective numbers of such articles, the prices paid therefor, the time of purchase and the name and address of the seller. The list described is this section is to be delivered to the commanding officer of the police station on the first workday of each week before 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1994, § 9-152) 
Sec. 14-210. - Purchases to be held for 30 days. 
    All articles purchased over the counter by precious metals dealers licensed under the provisions of this article shall be held for a period of 30 days in their original state before disposing of same. 
(Code 1994, § 9-153) 
Sec. 14-211. - Scales and weights to be tested and sealed. 
    No license shall be issued unless the licensee's scales and measures, used in the course of business, have been tested and sealed by the appropriate city official. 
(Code 1994, § 9-155) 
Secs. 14-212-14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-231. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall carry on a business of a pawnbroker without a license to do so issued by the licensing commission. 
(b)  No person shall purchase, barter, collect or store precious metals, gold, silver, platinum, etc., for any purpose without a license to do so issued by the licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 9-150) 
Sec. 14-232. - Business to be carried on in place named in license. 
    No person licensed under this article shall carry on the licensed business in any other building or place other than the one identified in the license. 
(Code 1994, § 9-154) 
Sec. 14-233. - Modification, suspension and revocation of license. 
    Any license granted under this article may be revoked following proper notice and a public hearing by the licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 9-151) 
Secs. 14-234-14-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-260. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words as used shall be considered to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto: 
    License means the photo identification card issued to the licensee. 
    Premises means a building or portion of a building used for residential, commercial or governmental purposes, including the real estate upon which any such building is located. 
    Solicit or solicitation includes any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to sell or to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character or description whatever. 
(2)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(3)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable item for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, group or project, except as otherwise excluded by this article or by Massachusetts General Laws. 
    Sponsoring organization includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or joint-stock association, society, organization or league and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof, except as otherwise excluded by this article, which employs, directs or otherwise obtains the services of any person. 
(Code 1994, § 9-100; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-261. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who solicits within the city without a license as described in division 2 of this article shall be subject to a criminal fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $100.00, for each and every day such person solicits without a license, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person who files an application for a license containing false or fraudulent statements shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $200.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the other provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $200.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 9-113; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 30, § 20. 
Sec. 14-262. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to children 14 years old or younger who solicit under the supervision of an adult, who shall be at least 18 years old, or to the Boys Scouts of America, the Girls Scouts of America, the Boys Club, the Girls Club, or similar organization, as determined by the licensing commission. Further, the provisions shall not apply to neighborhood youth or students under the age of 17 years, who solicit for the shoveling of snow or cutting of lawns. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or bakery or other foodstuffs to regular customers on established routes in the city. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to route salesmen or other persons having established customers to whom they make periodic deliveries and who may from time to time call upon prospective customers along their regular service route to solicit an order for future periodic route deliveries. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person who has an established place of business where the goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the buyer has initiated contact with and specifically requested a home visit by said person. 
(e)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(f)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person engaged in the following activities: 
(1)  The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its existing members; 
(2)  The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by a person when such solicitation occurs on premises: 
a.  Owned or controlled by the person soliciting funds; 
b.  With the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises; or 
c.  As otherwise provided by Massachusetts General Laws; 
(3)  The solicitation of support or votes for any political candidate or public issue in any general or special election or for presentation to any legislative or governmental body. 
(Code 1994, § 9-112; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-263. - Posted premises. 
(a)  No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises without a prior invitation from the occupant thereof, or if such premises is posted against such solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend, "no solicitors," or words of similar import. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the premises shall be deemed posted against solicitation if there is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the main door to any residence located thereon, a sign at least three inches by four inches in size which bears the legend described in subsection (a) of this section in letters at least one-third inch in length. 
(Code 1994, § 9-106) 
Sec. 14-264. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this article or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or to create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract attention of the occupant of such residence for solicitation, as herein defined, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day or at any time on a Sunday or national holiday. 
(b)  No person engaged in solicitation shall, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer or donor, fail to identify themselves and the purpose of the solicitation. 
(c)  No person engaged in solicitation shall misrepresent the purpose of solicitation or use any false, deceptive or misleading representation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call. 
(d)  No person engaged in making a solicitation, as defined in section 14-260, shall violate any of the provisions of M.G.L. c. 93A, said chapter being entitled Regulation of Business Practices for Consumers' Protection, the current provisions of which are hereby adopted and by reference made a part hereof. 
(Code 1994, § 9-107; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-265. - Constitution of a nuisance. 
    The practice of any individual or group going in and upon private residences in the city, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of said private residences, for the purposes of soliciting after the owner has requested the individual to depart from the premises, either orally or in writing, is declared to constitute a nuisance under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-108) 
Sec. 14-266. - Bond or insurance required. 
(a)  No door-to-door solicitor shall sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city, unless such door-to-door solicitor has posted a bond with the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city manager, sufficient to protect the city against any suit, action or proceeding in which the city may be a party as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such transient vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said bond specified in this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall be in a form approved by the city solicitor. 
(b)  A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be substituted for the bond described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 9-115) 
Secs. 14-267-14-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-296. - Application. 
(a)  Every person and/or representative of a sponsoring organization who will be soliciting in the city for any purpose, except as otherwise excluded by this division, shall, before commencing business in the city, make written application under oath for a license to the licensing commission. 
(b)  Applicants shall present to the licensing commission for examination a driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be reasonably required. 
(c)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire one year from date of issuance. 
(Code 1994, § 9-101) 
Sec. 14-297. - Photograph required. 
    The applicant shall present the police department of the city with one or more photographs of approved size as the police department shall determine. 
(Code 1994, § 9-102) 
Sec. 14-298. - Issuance of license; fee. 
(a)  No later than 30 days after filing of such application, the licensing commission shall hold a public hearing on the issuance of the applicant's license. Any such license granted shall be in the form of a photo identification card, showing the name and address of the licensee, and authorizing the licensee to solicit for the purposes described in the licensee's application, subject to city ordinances and state laws. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire one year from the date of issue, or on the day of its surrender or revocation, or on the filing of an affidavit of its loss to the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 9-103; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 14-299. - Notification of changes to police. 
    If, while the application is pending or during the term of any license granted thereon, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall notify the licensing commission in writing within 24 hours of such change. 
(Code 1994, § 9-104) 
Sec. 14-300. - Not to constitute endorsement. 
    Said license does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments or officers of the purpose of or the person conducting the solicitation. 
(Code 1994, § 9-105) 
Sec. 14-301. - Denial. 
    No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or of the United States related to any prior solicitation by the applicant within the last five years. 
(Code 1994, § 9-109) 
Sec. 14-302. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the licensing commission after reasonable notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business as solicitor; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  All licenses shall be suspended until the time of hearing as of the date of receipt of notice of the revocation hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 9-110; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Secs. 14-303-14-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXICABS AND LIVERY VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Taxicab regulation, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22. 

Sec. 14-323. - Taxicab stands. 
(a)  The traffic and parking commission shall designate the locations of all taxicab stands in the city, and the number of taxicabs specified for each location. The traffic and parking commission may impose such conditions on the place, time and use of such locations as they deem necessary for public safety and convenience. 
(b)  No person shall use or occupy any portion of a designated taxicab stand without a license granted by the licensing commission in accordance with their rules and regulations. No license shall be granted except upon the prior payment of all appropriate fees. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street in any taxicab stand. 
(d)  No person shall park a taxicab at a designated taxicab stand except in conformance with the provisions of this section. Failure to conform to such conditions shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the taxicab stand license issued by the licensing commission. 
(e)  No person shall park a taxicab upon any street at any place other than the taxicab stands designated for the use of such person's taxicab, except while engaged or while waiting for an opportunity to use a taxicab stand designated for such person's use. 
(f)  The licensing commission may revoke, change or modify any taxicab stand license, after reasonable notice and a public hearing upon the issue. 
(Code 1994, § 9-5) 
Sec. 14-324. - Prohibition of unlicensed operation of taxicabs. 
(a)  No person shall operate a hackney, taxicab or other passenger vehicle for a fee for hire for the purpose of transporting, soliciting or the picking up of passengers unless said person is validly licensed as a taxicab driver, operating a validly licensed taxicab. 
(b)  No person shall own or operate a taxicab business in the city without the proper licenses required by the licensing commission. 
(c)  Any police officer witnessing a violation of this section shall be authorized pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21 to arrest the violator and to seize the evidence of said violation, including but not limited to meters, whether mechanical or electrical, for the computation of fares based upon mileage or predetermined periods of time, and the vehicle used. In the event of such a seizure for evidence by a city police officer incident to such arrest, such evidence shall be inventoried and held by the city police department or its agents, and shall be fully accounted for in any trial or other court proceeding. Upon final disposition, all such property shall be disposed of as the court determines, and may be returned, forfeited, sold or destroyed in the discretion of the court. 
(d)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable for a criminal fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. However, if the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on criminal complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
(Code 1994, § 9-6) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 14-325. - Livery licenses. 
(a)  Definitions. Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Fleet livery license means a livery license to operate 15 or more livery vehicles within the city. 
    Livery driver license means a license to operate a livery vehicle within the city. 
    Livery license means license to operate and maintain a livery business within the city. The primary service of a livery business shall be based on a prearranged demand response. 
    Livery vehicle means any limousine or other vehicle which is designed to carry 15 or fewer passengers, including the driver, and carries passengers for hire, business courtesy, employee shuttle, customer shuttle, Charter or other prearranged transportation, and which vehicle is not required to obtain a taxicab license pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 22 or a taxicab license pursuant to section 14-323 and such vehicle shall have a livery license plate. 
(b)  License required. No person shall operate a livery vehicle for the business of transporting persons for hire in a livery vehicle from one location in the city to another location in the city or from a location in the city to a location outside the city unless said person is validly licensed as a livery driver and/or operating a validly licensed livery vehicle by the licensing commission. No person or entity shall present an application for any license under this section without complying with any and all applicable laws and regulations of the state. 
(c)  Drivers license. No person shall own or operate a livery in the city without the proper livery driver license required by the licensing commission. 
(d)  Compliance with rules of licensing commission. All operators and owners of a valid livery license, fleet livery license or a livery driver license shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the licensing commission. 
(e)  Prearranged transportation required. No licensed livery vehicle may pick up a person in response to a street hail or may stand in a public taxicab stand or in a special taxicab stand authorized for city taxicabs only. Transportation shall be prearranged in accordance with the limo/livery license rules and regulations of the licensing commission. 
(f)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city police department. 
(g)  License revocation and suspension. After a public hearing, any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the licensing commission. 
(h)  Penalties. Any person or entity violating any of the provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on criminal complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006, § 9-9) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Secs. 14-326-14-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSIENT VENDORS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Transient vendors, M.G.L. c. 101. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-354. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article the following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Temporary or transient business. 
(1)  The term "temporary or transient business" means any exhibition and sale of goods, wares or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building or other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least 12 consecutive months. 
(2)  The term "temporary or transient business" does not apply to a business operating under a written agreement with a licensed promoter. 
    Transient vendor means any person who engages in a temporary or transient business selling goods, wares or merchandise, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place. 
(Code 1994, § 9-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 101, § 1. 
Sec. 14-355. - Penalties. 
    Any transient vendor who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-8, or be subject to arrest as provided for in M.G.L. c. 101, § 32. 
(Code 1994, § 9-36) 
Sec. 14-356. - Interpretation of article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license issued under state law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-37) 
Secs. 14-357-14-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-386. - Required; fee. 
(a)  Every transient vendor, before making any sale of goods, wares or merchandise in the city, shall apply to the licensing commission for a license and shall accompany such application with a license fee, which shall apply to all applicants. 
(b)  No license shall be granted under this section until the applicant has complied with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 101, § 3 and has exhibited to the city clerk a license issued by the state director of standards. 
(c)  If, after review of said application, it appears that the applicant is a person of good repute as to morals and integrity and is a person of responsibility and business acumen, the licensing commission may authorize the city clerk to issue a city license to the applicant. Upon order of the licensing commission and proof of payment of all license fees, the city clerk shall issue the city license, endorsed upon the state license "local license fees paid," and shall affix thereto the clerk's official signature and date of such endorsement. 
(Code 1994, § 9-26) 
Sec. 14-387. - Expiration. 
    The city transient vendor license shall remain in force so long as the licensee shall continuously keep and expose for sale such stock of goods, wares and merchandise but not later than January 1 following its date of issue. 
(Code 1994, § 9-27) 
Sec. 14-388. - Special license relating to transient sales for charitable purposes. 
    The licensing commission may, under such conditions as they may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in charitable work, or to a post of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military or naval service of United States in time of war or insurrection, a special license authorizing it, for a particular time period to be stated in such license, and for a charitable purpose stated in such license, to conduct under their control a temporary or transient business; provided that no person under 16 years of age shall be accredited as an agent of the license holder. The exercise of the license hereby provided for shall be subject to, and in conformity with, the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1994, § 9-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 101, § 12A. 
Sec. 14-389. - Licenses to be shown on demand. 
    Every transient vendor shall exhibit such person's state and city licenses when the same are demanded by an inspector of the city or a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-29) 
Sec. 14-390. - Responsibility for obtaining and maintaining all other relevant licenses, permits, seals, etc. 
    Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals issued by a department, board, commission or officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-30) 
Sec. 14-391. - Revocation. 
    Any transient vendor license granted by the licensing commission may be revoked by the licensing commission for cause, after reasonable notice to the licensee and a public hearing upon the grounds for revocation. 
(Code 1994, § 9-31) 
Sec. 14-392. - Bond or insurance required. 
(a)  No transient vendor shall sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city unless such transient vendor has posted a bond with the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city manager, sufficient to protect the city against any suit, action or proceeding in which the city may be a party as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such transient vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said bond specified in this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall be in a form approved by the city solicitor. 
(b)  A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, and substantially conforming to the requirements of this section, may be substituted for the bond described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 9-32) 
Sec. 14-393. - Age requirement. 
    No person under 16 years of age shall be granted, nor shall receive, a license as a transient vendor. 
(Code 1994, § 9-33) 
Sec. 14-394. - Subject to further restrictions. 
    The terms of every transient vendor license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restrictions and regulations as the licensing commission shall impose. 
(Code 1994, § 9-34) 
Sec. 14-395. - Waiver of fees. 
    For charitable organizations only, the licensing commission may waive in whole or in part any and all fees required by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-35) 
Secs. 14-396-14-417. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OPEN AIR VENDING OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-418. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Goods, wares or merchandise shall include, but not be limited to, consumer goods, home furnishings, novelty items, clothing, shoes, sports memorabilia, trees, Christmas trees, wreaths, plants, flowering plants, cut flowers and food of any kind. 
(Code 1994, § 9-50(b)) 
Sec. 14-419. - Penalties. 
    Any open air vendor who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-8 or be subject to arrest as provided for by M.G.L. c. 101, § 32. 
(Code 1994, § 9-60) 
Sec. 14-420. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to license and regulate the open air, temporary sale of goods, wares and merchandise, from one location in the city. Any person duly licensed pursuant to M.G.L. c. 101 or other provisions of this article that is carrying on business in a manner consistent with said license shall not be subject to the licensing requirements of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-50(a)) 
Sec. 14-421. - Interpretation of article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license issued under state law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-63; Ord. of 2-5-1996) 
Sec. 14-422. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to residential yard sales; provided that: 
(1)  Only five such yard sales shall occur per year on a single parcel of land but not for consecutive weeks; 
(2)  It be for the benefit of the tenants, owners or occupants of the parcel; 
(3)  The items set out for sale shall all have been previously owned by the tenants, owners or occupants; 
(4)  The yard sales occur exclusively upon the parcel and not upon any way, street or sidewalk. 
(b)  Persons found to be in violation of this section shall, in addition to any fines levied, be reported to the licensing commission. 
(Code 1994, § 9-61; Ord. of 2-5-1996; Ord. of 6-4-2018(1) ) 
Sec. 14-423. - Bond or insurance required. 
(a)  No city open air vendor shall sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city unless such open air vendor has posted a bond with the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city manager, sufficient to protect the city against any suit, action or proceeding in which the city may be a party, as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such transient vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said bond specified in this subsection shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall be in a form approved by the city solicitor. 
(b)  A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and substantially conforming to the requirements of this section may be substituted for the bond described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 9-56) 
Sec. 14-424. - Sidewalk sales. 
    Any license issued under the provisions of this article to the tenant of a ground floor premises for vending in front of the location where the character of the merchandise being sold under the license is essentially the same as that being sold within the ground floor of those premises shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Transactions. All transactions for the purchase of goods, wares or merchandise shall occur within the confines of the establishment. In no instance shall sales transactions occur on the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(2)  Display. Only those goods, wares or merchandise which may be placed on a table or a rack shall be sold or displayed under the provisions of this license. In no instance shall there be the sale of furniture or major appliances from the sidewalk or streets of the city. 
(3)  Time. Licenses shall be issued for a maximum of two calendar days per week, being Friday and Saturday, or both. 
(4)  Distance. Permitted activities shall not obstruct the public ways. Permitted activity shall occupy no more than 31/2 feet from the face of the building. The licensing commission may impose a stricter restriction if deemed to be in the interests of public safety. 
(5)  Maintenance. Due to street traffic and commercial activity created by the issuance of licenses subject to this section, store owners shall be responsible for maintaining the cleanliness of the sidewalk, curb and gutter immediately in front of the business at all times before, after and during such permitted activity, by sweeping or through such other manner as is deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 9-62; Ord. of 2-5-1996) 
Secs. 14-425-14-446. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-447. - Required; fee. 
(a)  No person, whether principal or agent, shall, on a temporary basis, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell any goods, wares or merchandise in any open area, alley, lot located in the city or adjacent to any street or way of the city unless such person has first obtained a license therefor from the licensing commission. Said license shall be known as a "city open air vending license." 
(b)  In order to receive such a license, the applicant must submit written consent to its issuance on the part of the owners of the premises on which or in front of which the applicant desires to carry on business and of the ground floor of such premises. Said owners or tenants shall not demand or accept consideration for such grant of approval. Evidence of the granting or receipt of such consideration shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. The property owner may obtain legally negotiated rent from a license holder operating on the license holder's premises. When the exercise of the license will occur on or in front of premises owned by the city, the owner's consent herein provided for may be given by the department having charge of the premises. For the purposes of this license, unless otherwise provided for by the city manager, the department of municipal inspections shall be deemed to have charge of municipal sidewalks, and the department of public works shall be deemed to have charge of the public ways. 
(c)  Whenever the license is intended to be exercised on public property, including but not limited to public ways, sidewalks, and parks, the city manager may make and collect an additional charge as rent, unless the licensee is the tenant of the ground floor of the premises in front of which the location for vending has been granted, and the character of the merchandise the licensee is selling under the license is essentially the same as that being sold within the ground floor of those premises. Rental rates shall be determined annually by the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 9-51) 
Sec. 14-448. - Expiration. 
    The city open air vendor license shall remain in force for a specified period of time, indicated on the license, but not later than January 1 following its date. 
(Code 1994, § 9-52) 
Sec. 14-449. - Special license relating to transient sales for charitable purposes. 
    The licensing commission may, under such conditions as they may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in charitable work or to a post of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military or naval service of United States in time of war or insurrection, a special license authorizing it, for a particular time period to be stated in such license, and for a charitable purpose stated in such license, to conduct under their control a temporary or transient business, provided that no person under 16 years of age shall be accredited as an agent of the license holder. The exercise of the license hereby provided for shall be subject to and in conformity with the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1994, § 9-53) 
Sec. 14-450. - Licenses to be shown on demand. 
    Every city open air vendor shall exhibit such vendor's state and city licenses when the same are demanded by an inspector of the city or a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-54) 
Sec. 14-451. - Responsibility for obtaining and maintaining all other relevant licenses, permits, seals, etc. 
    Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals issued by a department, board, commission or officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-54.1) 
Sec. 14-452. - Revocation. 
    Any city open air vendor license granted by the licensing commission may be revoked by the licensing commission for cause after reasonable notice to the licensee and a public hearing upon the grounds for revocation. 
(Code 1994, § 9-55) 
Sec. 14-453. - Age requirement. 
    No person under 16 years of age shall be granted nor receive a license as an open air vendor. 
(Code 1994, § 9-57) 
Sec. 14-454. - Subject to further restrictions. 
    The terms of every open air vendor license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restrictions and regulations as the licensing commission shall impose. 
(Code 1994, § 9-58) 
Sec. 14-455. - Waiver of fees. 
    For charitable purposes, and events organized under the auspices of recognized business associations, the licensing commission may waive in whole or in part any and all fees required by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-59) 
ARTICLE XI. - MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-456. - Definitions. 
    When used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Marijuana establishment shall mean a marijuana establishment licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
    Marijuana retailer shall mean a holder of a holder of a marijuana retailer license from the Cannabis Control Commission of the Commonwealth. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(4) ) 
Sec. 14-457. - Local licensing regulations. 
    The City of Chelsea Licensing Commission is authorized to establish regulations relative to the licensing and operation of marijuana establishments. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(4) ) 
Sec. 14-458. - Local licensure. 
    No person shall operate a marijuana establishment within the City of Chelsea without first obtaining a license to do so from the City of Chelsea Licensing Commission and obtaining a license from the Commonwealth's Cannabis Control Commission. 
    No fewer than half of the licenses issued by the City of Chelsea Licensing Commission under paragraph (a) above shall be granted to applicants certified by the cannabis control commission to be economic empowerment priority applicants. This requirement may be waived by the licensing commission based on clear and convincing evidence that no certified economic empowerment priority applicant is interested in operating a retail marijuana establishment in Chelsea. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(4) ) 
Sec. 14-459. - Limitation on number of marijuana retailers. 
    As authorized by M.G.L. c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), the number of marijuana retailers operating within the boundaries of the City of Chelsea shall be limited to a maximum that is 20 percent, rounded if necessary to the next higher whole number, of the number of licenses issued within the City of Chelsea for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not to be drunk on the premises where sold under M.G.L. c. 138, § 15. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(4) ) 
Chapter 16 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES AND PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General municipal authority to enact ordinances for the public welfare, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Posting bills, etc., on public property prohibited. 
    Unless otherwise allowed by law, no person shall, without the consent of the city manager, post, affix, paint, print or write, or cause to be posted, affixed, painted or written, a notice, advertisement or bill upon a curbstone, sidewalk, tree, lamppost, police or fire alarm box, hydrant or other structure, in or upon any street or public place or upon any fence, building or structure belonging to the city or the state. 
(Code 1994, § 2-10) 
Secs. 16-2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PERSONAL INJURY 

Sec. 16-21. - Harassment. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose, and shall be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress, and must actually cause the victim to suffer substantial emotional distress. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully engage in a course of conduct which seriously alarms, annoys or harasses another person and which serves no legitimate purpose. 
(c)  Constitutionally protected speech is not included within the meaning of the term "course of conduct" for the purposes of this section. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the term "victim" shall not include a police officer acting in such officer's official capacity. 
(e)  For purposes of a second or subsequent offense involving the same victim, a course of conduct need only consist of one act which follows the same continuity of purpose established in the offense which is the basis of the first conviction. 
(f)  Anyone convicted under this section is subject to the maximum fines allowable under section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 2-19) 
Sec. 16-22. - Peeping or spying. 
    No person shall enter upon the premises of another with the intention of spying or peeping upon any person therein; provided, however, that police officers may enter such premises in the performance of their duties. The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 2-20) 
State Law reference- Photographing, videotaping or electronically surveilling partially nude or nude person, M.G.L. c. 272, § 105. 
Secs. 16-23-16-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 16-48. - Destruction of property. 
    Whoever willfully, intentionally and without right, or wantonly, maliciously and without cause, destroys, defaces, mars or injures the walls, or any other part of any building, or an appurtenance of such building, or any monument, tablet, vase, statue or other device erected to mark a public place, to commemorate an historic event, or any equipment, apparatus or fixture located on public property, or any playground apparatus or equipment, located in a public park or playground or upon any fence, post, awning or any private dwelling or other building or any timber, tree, or wood, ferns, flowers, shrubs or produce, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the maximum criminal fine allowed by state law. In addition, the person convicted shall forfeit the cost of repairing, replacing, removing or obliterating such defacement, whichever is deemed appropriate by the chief of police, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 2-2) 
State Law reference- Property damage generally, M.G.L. c. 266, §§ 98, 98A, 104, 114, 126, 126A, 126B, 127. 
Sec. 16-49. - Defacement, injury and detention of library materials. 
    Whoever willfully, intentionally and without right or wantonly and without cause, writes upon, injures, defaces, tears or destroys a book, plate, picture, engraving, map, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or statue which belongs to the city, or other public or incorporated library shall be subject to all fines and penalties allowed by law, and in addition shall forfeit the cost of repairing, replacing, removing or obliterating such defacement, whichever in the city manager's opinion is appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Defacing library property, M.G.L. c. 266, § 99 et seq. 
Sec. 16-50. - Posting handbills without consent. 
(a)  Unless otherwise allowed by law, no person shall affix, paint, print or write, or cause to be posted, affixed, painted, or written, a notice, advertisement, or bill, upon a post, pole, fence, telephone pole, building, structure or other property, including but not limited to ledges and rocks, without: 
(1)  Obtaining the consent of the person, or entity having possession of such post, pole, fence, telephone pole, structure or other property; and 
(2)  In the event that said post, pole, fence, telephone pole, building, or structure, including, but not limited to, ledges or rocks are located on land owned by: 
a.  Another person or entity, including the city, said person must obtain the consent of the person or entity having ownership of such land; 
b.  The city, said person must obtain written approval from the director of public works. 
(b)  The director of public works and other authorized city employees may issue tickets for violations of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-11; Ord. of 9-25-2000) 
Sec. 16-51. - Abandoned shopping carts prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned cart means any cart that has been removed without written permission of the owner or on-duty manager from the premises of the business establishment, regardless of whether it has been left on private or public property. Written permission shall be valid for a period not to exceed 72 hours. This provision shall not apply to carts that are removed for purposes of repair or maintenance. 
    Cart means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device provided by a business establishment for use by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind, including, but not limited to, grocery store shopping carts. 
    Owner means any person or entity that, in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, possesses or makes any cart available to customers or the public. The term "owner" also includes the owner's on-site or designated agent that provides the carts for use by its customers. 
    Premises means the entire area owned and utilized by the business establishment that provides carts for use by customers, including any parking lot of other property provided by the owner for customer parking. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that measures are taken by store owners to prevent the removal of shopping carts from store premises and parking lots, to make the removal of shopping carts a violation of municipal ordinance, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned carts within the city. 
(c)  Required signs on carts. Every cart owned or provided by any business establishment in the city must have a sign permanently affixed to it that contains the following information: 
(1)  Identifies the owner of the cart or the name of the business establishment, or both; 
(2)  Notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the business premises; 
(3)  Notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of parking area of the business establishment is a violation of a municipal ordinance; 
(4)  Lists a telephone number and contact person to report the location of the abandoned cart; 
(5)  Lists an address for returning the cart to the owner or business establishment; 
(6)  Lists an identification number for the cart. 
(d)  Prohibiting removal or possession. It shall be unlawful to either temporarily or permanently remove a cart from the premises or parking area of a business establishment without the express prior written approval of the owner or on-duty manager of the business establishment. Written permission shall be valid for a period not to exceed 72 hours. It shall be unlawful to be in possession of a cart that has been removed from the premises or parking area of a business establishment unless it is in the process of being immediately returned to the owner or business establishment. This section shall not apply to carts that are removed for the purposes of repair or maintenance. 
(e)  Mandatory plan to prevent removal; evaluation report. Every owner shall develop and implement a specific plan to prevent customers from removing carts from the business premises. The plan must include the following elements: 
(1)  Notice to customers. Written notification shall be provided to customers that removal of carts from the premises and parking lots are prohibited and a violation of the municipal ordinance. This notice may be provided in the form of flyers, warnings on shopping bags, or any other form of written notification that will notify customers of the prohibition. 
(2)  Signs. Signs shall be placed in pertinent places near door exits and near parking lot exits that warn customers that cart removal is prohibited and constitutes a violation of a municipal ordinance. 
(3)  Physical measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented to prevent cart removal from the business premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Disabling devices on all carts; 
b.  Posting of a security guard to deter and stop customers who attempt to remove carts from the business premises; 
c.  Bollards and chains around business premises to prevent cart removal; 
d.  Security deposits required for use of carts; or 
e.  The rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for the transport of purchases. 
(4)  Evaluation report. If a prevention plan was in place the previous year, a report shall be submitted to the city evaluating the measures that were used and approved in the prior year. The report shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  The inventory of carts owned, leased or used by the business establishment; and 
b.  The number of carts that had to be replaced due to loss, theft or abandonment. 
(f)  Prevention plan, evaluation report timelines and approval process. The proposed plan for preventing cart removal and the evaluation report shall be submitted for approval to the city within 60 days after adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and by September 1 of each year thereafter. If a new plan is submitted, the proposed measures shall be implemented by no later than 30 days after city approval is given. If the proposed plan is the same as the previous year, the prevention measures shall be continued until and unless the city indicates that a measure needs to be modified. Unless otherwise agreed, any modifications to the plan imposed by the city shall be implemented within 30 days after the city notifies the owner of the needed modifications. 
(g)  Penalties for failing to submit a prevention plan, evaluation report or to implement prevention measures. Any owner that fails to submit a plan, implement the proposed plan measures, or implement any required modifications to the plan by the city within the timeframe specified in this section shall be required to place disabling devices on all carts owned, leased or used by the business to prevent removal of carts from the business premises and parking lots. Any owner that fails to submit an evaluation report as outlined in subsection (f) of this section by September 1 of each year or fails to place a disabling device on all carts, if applicable, shall be subject to a $1,000.00 civil penalty, plus an additional fine of $50.00 for each day of noncompliance. 
(h)  Notification for retrieval. The city shall notify the owner of any abandoned carts owned or used by the business establishment that have been located within the city. The owner shall have two calendar days from the date the notification is given to retrieve the carts from the city. 
(i)  Administrative costs and fines. Any owner that fails to retrieve its abandoned carts within 48 hours after receiving notice by the city shall pay the city's administrative costs for retrieving the carts and providing the notification to the owner. Any owner who fails to retrieve abandoned carts in accordance with this section in excess of three times during a six-month period shall be subject to a $50.00 fine for each occurrence. An occurrence includes all carts owned by the owner that are impounded by the city in a one-day period. 
(j)  Disposition after 30 days. Any cart not reclaimed from the city within 30 days after notification to the owner shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of such disposition. 
(k)  Exemption. Any owner that owns, leases or uses less than a total of 25 shopping carts shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Any owner that has installed disabling devices on all carts owned, leased or used shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-22; Ord. of 11-23-1998) 
State Law reference- Shoplifting, M.G.L. c. 266, § 30A. 
Secs. 16-52-16-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 16-76. - Possession, use and sale of dangerous weapons. 
(a)  No person shall fire or discharge any air rifle, so-called BB gun, firearm or cannon within the city; however, this section shall not apply to the use of such weapons: 
(1)  At any military exercise authorized by the authority of the state or by the city council; 
(2)  At any military review; 
(3)  In the lawful defense of the person, family or property of any person; or 
(4)  By a police officer in the lawful performance of official duty; 
provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to persons engaged in target shooting on a firing range within the building of a gun club licensed to be used for such purpose and who has in immediate possession a permit from the chief of police granting such person the right of such possession. 
(b)  No person, except as provided by law, shall carry, or carry under such person's control in a vehicle: 
(1)  Those weapons and instruments mentioned in M.G.L. c. 269, § 10(b) and M.G.L. c. 269, § 12; 
(2)  Any knife having any type of blade in excess of four inches by one inch tapered to a sharpened tip (except when actually engaged in hunting, fishing or in any employment which requires the use of such a knife or in going to or returning directly from such activities); or 
(3)  Other object or tool so redesigned, fashioned, prepared or treated that the same may be used to inflict serious bodily harm or for other unlawful purposes. 
(c)  Any individual who has violated any provision of this section shall be subject to arrest and a criminal fine of not more than $300.00 for each offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(d)  Upon a conviction of a violation for the possession or use of a dangerous weapon, or a violation of this section, the weapon involved shall, by written authority of the court, be forwarded to the commissioner of public safety, who may dispose of said article in the same manner as prescribed in M.G.L. c. 269, § 12B. 
(e)  No person shall sell an air rifle or air pistol to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1994, § 2-9) 
Sec. 16-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An order of Sept. 14, 2015 , repealed § 16-77 which pertained to sexual offender residency and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 19, 2005, and an ordinance adopted Jan. 25, 2010. 
Sec. 16-78. - Drag racing. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public from the nuisance, crime, accidents and negative health effects created by drag racing within the community. The city council has determined that drag racing constitutes a threat to public safety, is a public nuisance and increases criminal activity. The city council has further found that the cost related to enforcement against the increased criminal activity is burdensome to city resources and creates a negative impact on the community as a whole. 
(b)  Impoundment of motor vehicle. Notwithstanding M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B or any other general or special law to the contrary, the state police and the city police department may impound any motor vehicle used in the city by an owner or operator to accelerate at a high rate of speed in competition with another operator, whether or not there is an agreement to race, whether or not there is increased noise from skidding tires or amplified noise from racing engines, so-called drag racing, until such time as a forfeiture hearing can be heard in the manner set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Forfeiture. 
(1)  The following items shall be subject to forfeiture: 
a.  Any motor vehicle used or intended to be used to violate M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B or used to facilitate a violation of said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B in the city, but no forfeiture under this act shall extinguish a perfected security interest held by a creditor in a motor vehicle at the time of filing of the forfeiture action; and 
b.  Any money, negotiable instrument, securities or other thing of value furnished or intended to be furnished in exchange for violating said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B or for facilitating a violation of said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B in the city. 
(2)  The following exemptions shall apply: 
a.  No motor vehicle used as a common carrier in the transaction of business as a common carrier shall be subject to forfeiture, unless the owner or other person lawfully in charge of such motor vehicle consented to or participated or intended to participate in the violation or facilitation of a violation of M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B: 
b.  No motor vehicle used or intended to be used to violate said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B or to facilitate a violation of said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B shall be subject to forfeiture by reason of any act or omission established by the owner thereof to have been committed or omitted by any person other than such owner while such motor vehicle was unlawfully in the possession of a person other than the owner in violation of the criminal laws of the United States, the commonwealth or any state; and 
c.  No motor vehicle shall be subject to forfeiture unless the owner knew or should have knows that such motor vehicle was used or intended to be used to violate or to facilitate a violation of said M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B. 
(d)  Civil action. The Suffolk County Superior Court shall have jurisdiction under any action brought pursuant to this act. 
    The city may petition the superior court in the name of the city in the nature of a proceeding in rem to order forfeiture of a motor vehicle, money or other things of value subject to forfeiture under subsection (c)(1)a. and b. of this section. Such proceeding shall be deemed a civil suit. Any person claiming a right in the property subject to forfeiture shall have the right to claim a trial by jury, but if such right is not claimed, the right to a trial by jury shall be waived. In all such suits where the property is claimed by any person other than the city, the city shall have the burden or proving the existence of probable cause to institute the action, and any such claimant shall then have the burden or proving that the property is not forfeitable pursuant to subsection (c). The court shall order the city to give notice by certified mail to the owner of the motor vehicle, moneys or other things of value and to other persons who appear to have an interest therein, and the court shall promptly hold a hearing on the petition. Upon motion of the owner of said motor vehicle, moneys or other things of value, the court may continue the hearing on the petition pending the outcome of any criminal trial related to the violation of M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B, and upon a finding of not guilty, the court shall dismiss the forfeiture petition. At such forfeiture hearing the court shall hear evidence and, if no jury has been requested, make findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall thereupon issue a final order, from which the parties shall have such right of appeal as is provided by law. In all such suits where a final order results in a forfeiture, said final order shall provide for disposition of the motor vehicle, moneys or other things of value by the city in any manner not prohibited by law, including official use by an authorized law enforcement or other public agency; or by sale at public auction or by competitive bidding. The proceeds of any such sale shall be used to pay the reasonable expenses of the forfeiture proceedings, seizure, storage, maintenance of custody, advertising and notice, and the balance thereof shall be deposited in the general fund of the city pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44 § 53 and shall be appropriated to the police department. 
(e)  Penalties. Whoever violates M.G.L. c. 90 § 17B in the city shall, in addition to forfeiture of the motor vehicle as set forth in subsection (c), also be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and the registrar shall suspend such operator's license for a period of not less than 60 days. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of not less than $2,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and a suspension of such license for a period of not less than six months. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2011) 
Sec. 16-79. - Operation of motorized skateboards, scooters and other motorized recreational vehicles. 
    A motorized scooter is a gasoline or alcohol-fueled or is electrically powered. The rider typically stands on a platform (or sits on a small seat) mounted over or between the wheels. The rider controls the direction and speed of the scooter by means of a t-bar type control column. 
    No person shall park or place a motorized skateboard, scooter or any other motorized recreational vehicle on sidewalk, in a park or playground or other property owned by the city except vehicles owned or operated on behalf of federal, state or municipal entities or vehicle used by handicapped persons or medical emergency vehicles. 
    No person shall operate a motorized scooter, motorized skateboard, or other motorized vehicle capable of speeds greater than five mph on any public way, sidewalk, playground or other property owned by the city except: 
(1)  Vehicles owned by federal, state or municipal entities; 
(2)  Vehicles used by handicapped persons; 
(3)  Landscaping and snow removal equipment; and 
(4)  Emergency medical vehicles. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of: 
First offense Warning Second offense $100.00 Third offense $200.00  
    All motorized scooters will be confiscated and towed at the cost of the owner. 
    If a minor child, under the age of 161/2 is found to be in violation of this section, his or her parent or guardian will be responsible for payment of the fine imposed. The motorized scooter, skateboard or vehicle driven by a minor child shall be confiscated until an adult reclaims the vehicle and receives a citation. 
( Ord. of 5-10-2004 ; Ord. of 6-19-2017(3) ) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May, 10, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as § 6-153. For purposes of classification, at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16-79. 
Secs. 16-80-16-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 16-98. - Possession, consumption and use of alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol. 
(a)  Purpose and findings. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the general public from the nuisance created by public use, consumption and possession of any alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol as well as to protect the rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community. This section is also recognizing that the state has recently decriminalized the possession of less than an ounce of marihuana/tetrahydrocannabinol and also has authorized municipalities to restrict and prohibit the use and consumption of marihuana within their jurisdictions. The city council has found and determined that public use, consumption and possession of any alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol is obnoxious, constitutes a public nuisance and creates a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. Public use, consumption and possession of said substances are inimical and destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  The following acts are prohibited while in, upon or within the boundary of any street, passageway, sidewalk, footway, bridge, park, playground, recreation area, boat landing, building, cemetery, parking lot, or any public land or building owned or under the control of the city, except land and structures taken pursuant to M.G.L. c. 60, unless otherwise prohibited by all applicable federal, state and local laws, in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier: 
a.  Consumption and use. No person shall consume or use an alcoholic beverage as defined M.G.L. c. 138, § 1, or possess an opened container of such alcohol beverage, or consume marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol as defined by M.G.L. c. 94C, § 1. Smoking is considered consumption of the prohibited substances. 
b.  Possession. No person shall possess an alcoholic beverage, as defined by M.G.L. c. 138, § 1, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol, as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, § 1. 
c.  Distribution. No person shall serve, distribute or consume any alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol on city-owned property or within city-owned buildings, except land and structures taken pursuant to M.G.L. c. 60. No person shall serve or consume any alcoholic beverages at any municipal event or municipal function held on city-owned property or within city-owned buildings 
(2)  All alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol being used in violation of this section may be seized and held until final adjudication of the charge against any such person or persons has been made by the court. The transportation of empty beverage containers to redemption or recycling centers shall not be deemed to be a violation of this section. 
(3)  Distribution. No person shall serve, distribute or consume any alcoholic beverages, marihuana or tetrahydrocannabinol on city-owned property or within city-owned buildings, except land and structures taken pursuant to M.G.L. c. 60. No person shall serve or consume any alcoholic beverages at any municipal event or municipal function held on city-owned property or within city-owned buildings. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Fines. 
a.  Any person violating any of this section shall be liable for a fine not exceeding: 
1.  $100.00 for the first offense; 
2.  $200.00 for the second offense; 
3.  $300.00 for the third and each subsequent offense; and 
4.  Shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
b.  If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or by noncriminal complaint pursuant to of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(2)  Underage offenders. Any person under the age of 18 who has been cited as a civil offender under M.G.L. c. 94C, § 1 shall be required to complete a drug awareness program in accordance with M.G.L. c. 94C, § 32M, comprising a minimum of four hours of classroom instruction or group discussion, ten hours of community service, and upon completion of said program shall file a certificate of completion with the Clerk of the Chelsea District Court located at 120 Broadway Street Chelsea, MA 02150. In accordance with the notice requirements set forth under M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, a second notice shall be mailed or delivered to at least one of the offender's parents having custody of the offender, or, where there is no such person, to that offender's legal guardian at said parent's or legal guardian's last known address. 
(Code 1994, § 2-1; Ord. of 12-6-2010; Ord. of 11-22-2010) 
State Law reference- Possession of one ounce or less of marihuana, M.G.L. c. 94C, §§ 32L-32N; alcoholic liquors, M.G.L. c. 138; possession of alcohol in motor vehicles, M.G.L. c. 90, § 24I. 
Sec. 16-99. - Noise control. 
(a)  Definitions. Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Emergency situation means a situation wherein immediate work is: 
(1)  Necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, natural disaster or snow emergency; or 
(2)  Required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Loud amplification device means a radio, television, phonograph, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player, loud speaker, sound amplifier or similar device which is operated in such a manner that it creates an unreasonable noise. 
    Unreasonable noise means any noise plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet. If such a determination is being made from within residentially zoned district of the city, the term "unreasonable noise" means noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet. 
(b)  Scope. This section shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the limits of the city, including, but not limited to, power lawn mowers, engine-powered equipment, air conditioners, animals, birds, loud amplification devices, firecrackers, firearms, pile drivers, shovels, graters, scrapers, tractors, jackhammers, and other construction equipment. This section is intended to prohibit preventable and unnecessary noise and is not intended, nor shall it be construed, to regulate the usual and customary noise incidental to urban life. In all applications of this section, due consideration shall be given to the character of the zoning, andthe customary and natural noise incident to the operation of businesses or industries permitted by zoning so as not to work an undue hardship upon lawful business and industrial establishments. The provisions of this article shall be in addition to and shall not disturb either the right of the city, if such, or the right of individuals affected by the violation of this article to pursue any other remedy for the abatement of a nuisance or any other remedy which might or could be available under the law. 
(c)  Noises exempt from this section. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to the following: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work or in training exercises related to emergency activities. 
(2)  Any lawful or proper program or activity supervised by appropriate authority in the parks or on the public ways relating to activities authorized by the city. 
(3)  Emergency situations, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(4)  The use of any device whose purpose it is to protect an owner's vehicle from damage and/or theft through the mechanical creation of a noise, provided such device shall deactivate or be deactivated after sounding for 20 minutes. 
(d)  Prohibition against loud amplification devices in motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a loud amplification device, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, in or on a motor vehicle on a public or private way, or in a public place. 
(e)  Prohibition against loud amplification devices in public ways or places. It shall be unlawful for any person in any area of the city to operate a loud amplification device, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, in a public way, in a private way open to public use, or in any other public place. 
(f)  Prohibition against loud amplification devices in or on residential premises. It shall be unlawful for any person in any area of the city to operate a loud amplification device, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, in a dwelling house or on the land or other premises of such dwelling house. 
(g)  Outdoor implements. Any power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, power saw or such other implement designed primarily for outdoor use shall be operated within the city only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and state and federal holidays; however, such equipment may be operated during the hours otherwise prohibited by this section if the noise is not plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet. 
(h)  Regulation of construction hours. No erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building and excavation in regard thereto shall occur, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, and 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Saturdays, or except by permit when, in the opinion of the director of municipal inspections, the interests of public safety or welfare require such work to occur beyond the allowed hours. This permit may be renewed for one or more periods, not exceeding one week each. 
(i)  Creation of noise at night. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any store, garage, filling station, apartment house, theater, restaurant, bar, or other premises where persons gather or enter for purposes of amusement or trade within the city, either by such person's own actions or by permitting or allowing any persons who may resort to the premises, to disturb the neighbors or public peace by loud noises, boisterous songs, operation of musical equipment, machines, instruments or other musical devices, the use of which produces noise plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet, interrupting the peace or quiet of the city after the hours of 10:00 p.m. and before the hour of 8:00 a.m. 
(j)  Disturbing the residential areas. Unless otherwise authorized, it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to cause or allow to be made any unreasonable noise, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(k)  Enforcement. Any person who is aggrieved by an unreasonable noise in violation of this section may complain to the city police department, who shall be authorized to investigate the complaint, and if appropriate enforce this section. Upon investigation, and before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender the reasons for creating the noise. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section, unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred. 
(l)  Penalties. Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to a criminal fine of not less than $100.00 or not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. However, if a violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, the fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on complaint, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. Any person who violates this article shall, for the first offense, be given a written warning. The police officer, having given the warning, shall make a recording of having served the warning such record shall include, if available: 
(1)  The name and address of the person warned; 
(2)  The name and address of the landlord, if applicable; 
(3)  The date and time of the incident; 
(4)  The motor vehicle registration number, if applicable; and 
(5)  The location of where the warning was given. 
If the person warned refuses to give the information noted in this subsection to the police officer, said person shall be assessed the fine listed for a second offense. 
(m)  Arrest and seizure of property. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, when a person is arrested by a police officer under the authority of the Massachusetts General Laws, including without limitation the provisions of M.G.L. c. 272, § 54 for disturbing the peace, under M.G.L. c. 272, § 53, or any other applicable law, and the arresting officer, pursuant to law, seizes any loud amplification device as evidence, then the police officer shall comply with the following procedures in handling said evidence: 
(1)  In the event of such a seizure for evidence by a police officer incident to such arrest, such loud amplification device shall be inventoried and held by the police department or its agents, and shall be returned to its owner, according to the terms of this section, unless a court of competent jurisdiction orders otherwise. 
(2)  If a motor vehicle shall be seized incident to an arrest, such motor vehicle may be returned to its registered owner, if said loud amplification device has been duly removed from the vehicle with the written permission of the registered owner of said motor vehicle. 
(3)  The police department shall have the authority to tow and impound the vehicle of any violator of subsection (c)(4) of this section until any fines which have been levied under this section have been paid. 
(4)  In all situations, the arresting officer, in addition to any other required reports or procedures, shall give the person claiming to be the owner of said loud amplification device a receipt indicating where, when, and for what purpose it is being held. Copies of said receipt shall be filed in the police department and shall be made available to the court. 
(5)  No receipt shall be redeemed and no such device or equipment shall be returned to any person, unless and until all judicial proceedings that may be held regarding the allegations shall have been finally completed. 
(n)  Permits for exemptions. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city manager or designee may grant a permit for any activity otherwise forbidden by the provisions of this section upon a determination by the city manager or designee that compliance in the conduct of such activity would cause undue hardship on the person conducting such activity or on the community, including but not limited to performances, concerts, bands, and other such public entertainment, taking into account the extent of the noise caused by not requiring such compliance. The city manager or designee shall establish appropriate procedures for the processing of requests for such permits, including the holding of a public hearing, if deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 2-16; Ord. of 6-10-1996; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Authority to control and abate noise, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(22); shooting range noise, M.G.L. c. 214, § 7B. 
Secs. 16-100-16-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 16-127. - Engaging in sexual conduct for compensation. 
    Any person who engages, or agrees to engage or offers to engage, in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee or other consideration may be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 2-12) 
State Law reference- Prostitution and related offenses, M.G.L. c. 39, § 4A et seq.; penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 20. 
Sec. 16-128. - Soliciting or securing a prostitute. 
(a)  No person shall, upon any public way, upon any place to which the public has the right of access, or in any establishment licensed by the city under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 138, solicit, secure, offer or with any other person seek to engage in a sexual act for a fee, or solicit a prostitute or solicit, seek, agree to or secure the sexual services of a prostitute, or any person offering or agreeing to a sexual act or sexual service for a fee. 
(b)  In addition to the acts prohibited in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution. 
(c)  In addition to the acts prohibited in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution. 
(d)  In addition to the acts prohibited in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall aid, abet, allow, permit or participate in the commission of any of the acts prohibited in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 or not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(f)  Violation of this section in an establishment licensed pursuant to M.G.L. c. 138 shall be grounds for the immediate suspension of said license. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13) 
State Law reference- Prostitution and related offenses, M.G.L. c. 39, § 4A et seq. 
Sec. 16-129. - Control of material harmful to minors. 
    No person shall violate the provisions of M.G.L. c. 272, § 28. 
Sec. 16-130. - Gambling and gambling devices. 
(a)  No person shall expose or cause to be exposed upon any street, public grounds or establishment, subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 138, any table, machine or other device of any kind by which or upon which any game of hazard or chance can be played. 
(b)  No person shall play any such game at such a table or with such a device in or upon any street, public grounds or establishment subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 138. 
(c)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be criminally fined not less than $200.00 or not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(d)  Violation of this section in an establishment licensed pursuant to M.G.L. c. 138 shall be grounds for the immediate suspension of said license. 
(Code 1994, § 2-14) 
State Law reference- Gaming, M.G.L. c. 137; gambling, M.G.L. c. 271, § 1 et seq. 
Secs. 16-131-16-156. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 16-157. - Interfering with signal boxes, etc. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with any of the signal boxes, wires or other supports of the wires belonging to or in connection with the fire department of the city. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating this section, including the conviction for interfering with a fire alarm box by falsely pulling the alarm therein, shall be fined in accordance with M.G.L. c. 268, § 32. 
(Code 1994, § 7-39) 
Secs. 16-158-16-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 16-183. - Parental/guardian responsibility for minors. 
(a)  Any parent or legal guardian of a minor child under the age of 18 years old who shall, by word or deed or failure to act or by lack of supervision and control over said minor child, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause said minor child to do any of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or shall be liable for a criminal fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00 per offense: 
(1)  Become a delinquent child; 
(2)  Become a habitual truant; 
(3)  Become a runaway; 
(4)  Use or possess a false identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcohol, pursuant to any of the provisions of M.G.L. c. 138; 
(5)  Violate controlled substance statutes, pursuant to any of the provisions of M.G.L. c. 94C; 
(6)  Violate alcohol sale, delivery, furnish or possession statutes, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 138, § 34, 34A, 34C or 34D; 
(7)  Violate the city curfew ordinance set forth in section 16-185; 
(8)  Violate the city possession, use and sale of dangerous weapons ordinance set forth in section 16-76; 
(9)  Violate the city graffiti prevention, prohibition and removal ordinance set forth in section 18-1; 
(10)  Violate the city anti-gang recruitment ordinances set forth in section 16-187 or the provisions of M.G.L. c. 265, § 44, coercion of child under 18 into criminal conspiracy. 
(b)  Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 7-9; Ord. of 6-2-2003) 
Sec. 16-184. - Truancy. 
(a)  Short title. This section may be cited as the "Truancy Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a qualified student; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a qualified student has been placed by a court. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a qualified student; 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a qualified student. 
    Regular school hours means the hours of the full-time school which the minor would attend in the school district in which the minor resides, on any day for which school is in session, or, if such school in the school district of residence is unknown, the term "regular school hours" means the school hours of the city public schools on any day for which school is in session. 
(c)  Intent. The public purpose of this section is to provide for the protection of juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control of and responsibility for their children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities pursuant to the city's power to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. 
(d)  Findings. The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  Problems associated with youth gangs are a major concern facing the city; 
(2)  Studies and experience have found that truancy can serve as a high indicator of gang involvement; 
(3)  The city is confronted by rising juvenile violence and juvenile gang activity; 
(4)  The crimes being committed by juveniles include serious offenses; and 
(5)  Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
(e)  Offenses. A minor who is at least seven years of age and under 18 years of age and who has not completed the 12th grade may not be upon public streets, public places, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place, including a private residence, or other public property, during regular school hours except while attending school as required, unless such minor is: 
(1)  Absent from the school with the school's permission, but not including students who have been suspended, expelled or dropped out; 
(2)  Engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity that requires the minor's presence somewhere other than school during regular school hours which is authorized by the parent, guardian or other person having legal care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  Lawfully emancipated pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws or court order; 
(4)  Exempt from compulsory school attendance pursuant to M.G.L. c. 76, § 1; or 
(5)  The person has graduated from a high school. 
This section shall not apply to qualified students who are in public places in conjunction with a field trip or program conducted by the student's school or who have been excused pursuant to their school's policies or regulations. If a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that a minor is in violation of this section, the officer is authorized to stop and detain the minor and make reasonable inquiry regarding a potential violation of this subsection. 
(f)  Exemptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to home schools established as specified in Massachusetts General Laws. 
(g)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding: 
a.  $50.00 for the first offense; 
b.  $75.00 for the second offense; and 
c.  $100.00 for the third offense and subsequent offenses. 
(2)  The fines for any person who violates any provision of this section within 1,000 feet of a school shall be doubled. 
(3)  Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 7-10; Ord. of 6-2-2003) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c 40, § 22. 
Sec. 16-185. - Curfew for underage persons. 
(a)  Definitions. Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person, who under court order is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a court. 
    Juvenile means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means an individual who is: 
(1)  A biological or natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a juvenile; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a juvenile. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
    Youth protection curfew hours means 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. the following day. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to impact juvenile violence, gang activity, and crime by persons under the age 17 years in the city and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public, particularly minors. It is the further purpose of this section to protect minors from each other and other persons, enhance enforcement of parental control over them and enhance the reduction of juvenile criminal activity. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  A juvenile is prohibited from remaining in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a juvenile is prohibited from knowingly permitting, or by insufficient control allowing, a juvenile to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment is prohibited from knowingly allowing a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  There shall be an exemption to subsection (c) of this section if the juvenile is: 
a.  Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency or exigent circumstance; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor, if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the juvenile's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile, or going to or returning home, without any detour or stop, from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile; 
h.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or has been married or has been emancipated as a minor in accordance with state law. 
(2)  There shall be an exemption to subsection (c)(3) of this section if the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notifies the police department that a juvenile is present on the premises of the establishment during the curfew hours and refuses to leave. 
(e)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (d) of this section is present. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person or entity violating any subsection of this section shall be subject and liable for a noncriminal fine of not less than $50.00 per offense, and in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. A person who violates a provision of this section is responsible for a separate violation for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. This offense shall be deemed a noncriminal disposition. However, if the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on a complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. If a minor is the violator of this section, then the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the payment of all fines. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. 
(Code 1994, § 2-18; Ord. of 9-27-1999) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violation, M.G.L. c. 40, § 20. 
Sec. 16-186. - Serving alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs to minors on private and public property. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any liquor, wine, beer, spirits, cider or other liquid or solid, patented or not, composed of or containing alcohol or spirits, whether or not brewed, fermented or distilled, and capable of being consumed by a person. 
    Drug means any substances: 
(1)  Recognized as drugs in the official United States Pharmacopoeia of the United States, official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them; 
(2)  Intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals; or 
(3)  Other than food, intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man and animals. 
    Illegal drug means any nonprescribed drug or narcotic. 
    Premises means a home, yard, apartment, vacant lot, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. The term "premises" also includes private functions held at public facilities within the city. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect the public interest, welfare, health and safety within the city by prohibiting the services to and consumption of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs by persons under the age of 21 at private premises located within the city. The city council has determined that the serving and consumption of alcohol and illegal narcotic and nonprescribed drugs by persons under the age of 21 has become a nuisance to the Chelsea community because of the increase in noise, traffic, trash and damage to private and public property by intoxicated persons. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It is prohibited to serve a person under the age of 21 an illegal drug or alcohol beverage on private property or public property in the city. 
(2)  It is prohibited to allow or authorize a person under the age of 21 to consume or possess an illegal drug or alcohol beverage on private property or public property in the city. 
(3)  Any person or entity who owns, rents, manages or otherwise controls any premises shall be responsible when a social gathering and/or party, whether planned or unplanned, occurs at said premises where any alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs are being unlawfully possessed, served to or consumed by persons under the age of 21 at these gatherings at said premises. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The possession or consumption of a drug for which the individual has a current, valid prescription or as otherwise permitted by any other applicable law; 
(2)  The use of alcoholic beverages, which occurs exclusively between a person under the age of 21 and such person's parent or legal guardian; and 
(3)  The practice of legally recognized religious observances and a person over the age of 21 is present at the time of consumption and possession. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Fines. Any person or entity violating any of this section shall be subject to and liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on a complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. If a minor is the violator of this section, then the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the payment of all fines. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. 
(2)  Arrest. A police officer may arrest any person for the commission of any offenses prohibited by this section and also prohibited by M.G.L. c. 138, § 34. 
(Code 1994, § 2-24) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcohol to underage persons, M.G.L. c. 138, § 34. 
Sec. 16-187. - Anti-gang recruitment. 
(a)  Short title. This section may be cited as the "Anti-Gang Recruitment Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Criminal street gang means any ongoing organization, association in fact, or group of three or more persons, whether formally or informally organized, or any subgroup or affiliated group thereof, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more criminal acts or illegal acts, which has an identifiable name or identifying sign or symbol, and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
    Pattern of criminal gang activity means the commission, attempt to commit, conspiring to commit or solicitation of two or more predicate gang crimes, provided the criminal acts were committed on separate dates or by two or more persons who are members of, or belong to, the same criminal street gang, within a one-year period. 
(c)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to empower police officers with legal authority to cite persons who are found to be recruiting juveniles to participate in criminal gang activities. 
(d)  Legislative findings. 
(1)  The city council hereby finds and declares that it is the right of every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, age, or disability to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is not the intent of this section to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The city council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process. 
(2)  The city council finds, however, that neighborhoods throughout the city are negatively impacted by street gangs. 
(3)  The council further finds that it is prudent to institute reasonable laws so as to make it a violation of a city ordinance: 
a.  To solicit or recruit a juvenile as a member of a criminal street gang; 
b.  To conspire to solicit or recruit a juvenile as a member of a criminal street gang; or 
c.  To deter a juvenile from leaving a criminal street gang. 
(e)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  A person who solicits, recruits, entices, or intimidates a minor to join a criminal street gang commits a violation of this section. 
(2)  A person who conspires to solicit, recruit, entice or intimidate a minor to join a criminal street gang commits a violation of this section. 
(3)  A person who solicits, recruits, entices or intimidates a minor to join a criminal street gang or conspires to do so repeatedly from the same location commits a violation of this section. 
(4)  A person who expressly or impliedly threatens to do bodily harm to a minor or to that minor's family or use any other criminally unlawful means to deter any person from leaving a criminal street gang commits a violation of this section. 
(f)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable for a criminal fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(2)  If the minor is solicited, recruited, enticed, coerced, threatened or intimidated to join a criminal street gang within 1,000 feet of a school, youth center, playground or park, then the penalties for any person found guilty of violating this provision shall be doubled. 
(3)  Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 7-8; Ord. of 6-2-2002; Ord. of 5-10-2004) 
State Law reference- Coercion of child under 18 into criminal conspiracy, M.G.L. c. 265, § 44. 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Common nuisances, M.G.L. c. 139. 

Sec. 18-1. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and findings. 
(1)  The city council is enacting this section to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property within the city. It is the purpose of this section to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on walls, natural objects and structures. The city council does not intend for this section to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state and federal laws. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this section to provide a procedure for removal of graffiti from public and privately owned property in order to reduce deterioration of neighborhoods within the city. 
(3)  The city council finds and determines that graffiti on public and private walls and buildings is obnoxious and tends to remain on dilapidated buildings unless the city causes it to be removed. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, resulting in entire neighborhoods littered with graffiti and becoming less desirable places in which to be, and reside, all to the detriment of the city. The city council further finds that graffiti is destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Therefore, the city council declares that graffiti is a public nuisance and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City enforcement officer means the any employee or official of the police department, inspectional services department, department of public works or any other employee or official designated by the city manager to enforce this section. 
    Graffiti means the defacing or tagging of public or private property by one or more persons by means of painting, drawing, dye, chalk, ink, writing, etching, carving or any similar method or substance without the written consent of the property owner. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
(c)  Prohibited acts and penalties. 
(1)  Prohibited acts. 
a.  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property. 
b.  Possession of graffiti implements. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations, without the prior written consent of the city public schools. Exceptions apply to students participating in a class or course requiring the use of broad-tipped markers. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, public building or structure owned or operated by the city of without the express written permission of the city manager or designee. 
c.  Sale of graffiti implements. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to sell a graffiti implement, including spray cans, to any person under the age of 18. 
2.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements such as aerosol paint containers, paint sticks or broad-tipped markers shall display and store such items in a manner that they are not accessible to customers without the aid of the merchant or one of their employees. All retail commercial establishments selling graffiti implements must display and post a sign, suitable to the chief of police, informing the general public of the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Penalties. 
a.  Fines. Any person or entity violating any of this section shall be subject to and liable for a fine of not less than $100.00 up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition, and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on a complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. If a minor is the violator of this section, then the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the payment of all fines. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. 
b.  Arrest. A police officer may arrest any person for the commission of any offenses prohibited by this section and also prohibited by Massachusetts General Laws. Upon conviction of defacing public or private property, the city or the police department shall request as a sentence that the violator's driver's license be suspended for one year. If the violator convicted of defacing public or private property is under the age of 16, then the city or police department shall ask that one year be added to the minimum age eligibility for driving. 
c.  Restitution. In addition to the fines or any punishment levied by a court officer or a city enforcement officer, any violator shall be ordered to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the prohibited act in the amount or manner determined by the court or city enforcement officer. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severally liable with the minor to make the restitution. 
d.  Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this subsection (c)(2), a minor or adult may be required to perform community service as ordered by the court or a city enforcement officer, based on the following: 
1.  The minor or adult shall perform at least 30 hours of community service supervised by the city manager or chief of police or their designee and approved by the city manager or the chief of police. 
2.  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
e.  Removal of graffiti. Any person applying graffiti on a public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such notice shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the inspectional services or any additional city department head, as authorized by the city council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this section. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. 
(d)  Removal process. 
(1)  Removal by perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the police, property owner, or city enforcement officer. If the perpetrator is a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly responsible for the removal of the graffiti within 24 hours notice. Any person applying graffiti shall also be responsible for cost of the removal of the graffiti. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this section and be subject to shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. 
(2)  Removal by property owner. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance of property in the city to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator as described in subsection (d)(1) of this section, then it shall be removed by the property owner. 
(3)  Exceptions. Removal requirements shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party can demonstrate that: 
a.  The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti and has applied to have the graffiti removed by the city as outlined in subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
b.  The property owner or responsible party has an active graffiti defacement program, and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. 
The city has a graffiti removal program to help property owners comply with this section. 
(4)  Removal by city. 
a.  Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines, that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable for a public or quasi-public place within the city, the city manager is authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake or provide for the painting or repairing of anymore extensive area than where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager, or designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repaired or repainted in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
b.  Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time specified by this section, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city and consistent with the terms of this section, the city shall commence removing said graffiti and seek reimbursement for the cost to remove the graffiti. 
(Code 1994, § 2-8; Ord. of 11-6-1995; Ord. of 6-2-2003) 
State Law reference- Defacing property generally, M.G.L. c. 266, § 94 et seq.; penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 18-2. - Determination of buildings, structures or vacant land as a nuisance. 
(a)  Findings. The city council finds and determines that vacant, abandoned or neglected properties are obnoxious, tend to create a blighting influence on the surrounding neighborhood, have the effect of reducing property values in their surrounding neighborhood, and constitute a public nuisance. Further, the council finds that vacant, abandoned or neglected properties are inimical and destructive to the rights and values of private property owners, as well as the community at large. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to eliminate vacant, abandoned or unsafe properties and the blighting influence they have on surrounding neighborhoods. Further, this section will provide additional enforcement tools to the city in an effort to enhance the health, safety and welfare of the community at large. 
(c)  Definitions. Without limiting the foregoing definition, the term "buildings," "structures" or "vacant land" shall be considered a nuisance, within the meaning of this section, under the following conditions: 
(1)  Buildings or structures that are abandoned, unused or open to the weather for a period of 90 days or more; 
(2)  Buildings, structures or vacant land overgrown with vegetation which are dangerous to life or limb, especially unsafe in case of fire, or violate the provisions of M.G.L. c. 139. 
(d)  Procedure. Wherever a nuisance is found to exist, a careful survey of the premises shall be made by a board consisting of the building inspector, health agent, city engineer and fire chief or their respective designees. This board, under the direction of the building inspector, shall make a written report of its findings and shall provide written notice to the owners of the property, which notice shall describe the condition which constitutes the nuisance and shall order the owner to abate the same in not less than 48 hours. If the owner of the property fails or neglects to comply with such order or otherwise abate the nuisance, the city may abate the nuisance and the costs, charges and fees incurred thereby shall be paid by the owner within 30 days of the furnishing of an account to such owner. If payment is not made, then the costs for abatement of the nuisance, and all related costs, including the cost of collection, shall constitute a lien on the property under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 139, § 3A. 
(e)  Penalty. Any owner who fails or neglects to comply with the order of the board or otherwise fails or neglects to abate such nuisance shall be liable for a fine as provided in section 1-8(b). Each day of such failure or neglect shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 2-23; Ord. of 10-19-1998) 
Chapter 20 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Parks and playgrounds, M.G.L. c. 45. 

Sec. 20-1. - Use of playgrounds restricted. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to enter a playground without right or remain therein after having been forbidden to do so either directly or by posted notice. 
(b)  A person may enter a playground, and act within a playground, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the recreation department; said playground hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except when other hours have been authorized by the recreation department. 
(c)  Any police officer may make arrests for violation of this section. 
(d)  Any conviction for a violation of this section shall be punishable by a criminal fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 2-15) 
State Law reference- Trespass, M.G.L. c. 266, § 120; penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Littering highways or bodies of water, M.G.L. c. 270, § 16 et seq.; throwing glass in pubic streets, M.G.L. c. 265, § 32; throwing or dropping objects onto public way, M.G.L. c. 265, § 35; recycling programs, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8H; Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, M.G.L. c. 21C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acceptable waste means all solid waste except for prohibited waste and includes: 
(1)  Solid waste. The term "solid waste" means rubbish, garbage, and other discarded materials with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, but excluding solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other water pollutants. 
(2)  Garbage. The term "garbage" means all waste, animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter produced or resulting from the use or storage of food. 
(3)  Rubbish. The term "rubbish" means domestic solid, combustible and incombustible waste other than garbage. 
(4)  Ordinary commercial waste. The term "ordinary commercial waste" means general and usual waste that accumulates on the premises of any grocery, market, store, restaurant or other such small business enterprise operating for profit, and not exceeding five standard size metal barrels or other suitable containers as defined in rules and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(5)  Garden and lawn waste. The term "garden and lawn waste" means and includes grass, leaves, brush, tree trimmings and vine or shrub trimmings not amounting to tree waste. 
    Containers means receptacles approved by the department of public works and used for the disposal and storage of solid waste. 
    Contractor means the person owning or having legal title to a dumpster. 
    Dumpster means any receptacle used for the collection and storage and transportation of rubbish, garbage, offal and other substances and materials, with a lid or covering satisfactory to the enforcing agencies. 
    Dumpster owner means and refers to the persons having title to the land upon which a dumpster is located, the permit holder and the representatives or designees of the permit holder. 
    Litter means any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, glass, plastic or miscellaneous solid waste which may be classified as trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage or junk. 
    Nonacceptable waste. 
(1)  The term "bulk" means any item which, in whole or in part, is a solid mass in which a sphere with a diameter of eight inches could be contained. 
(2)  The term "extraordinary commercial waste" means waste as defined and set forth in subsection (4) of the term "acceptable waste" in excess of five barrels or the equivalent thereof each week. 
(3)  The terms "motor vehicles" and "large machinery" means any abandoned, junked or inoperative motor vehicle, motor vehicle parts or other large machinery. 
(4)  The term "building and construction waste" means discarded materials resulting from or nonusable in the construction, alteration or repair of structures including stones, plaster, brick, excavated earth, concrete, lathing, roofing materials, siding materials, lumber and structural members. 
(5)  The term "animal remains" means the carcass of any dead animal. 
(6)  The term "industrial waste" means wasted materials from factories, processing plants and other manufacturing enterprises. 
(7)  The term "tree waste" means trunks or limbs which exceed six inches in diameter or 48 inches in length and stumps, regardless of size. 
(8)  Pathological wastes and human wastes. 
(9)  Chemical wastes, toxic and volatile chemicals, explosives, hazardous wastes, petroleum products and wastes. 
(10)  Automobile parts, whole or in part, tires and batteries. 
(11)  Any other waste prohibited by municipal, state or federal law or regulation. 
(12)  Any and all solid waste generated by a stand alone commercial establishment. 
(13)  Any and all solid waste generated by any residential building containing more than eight apartment or condominium units, except buildings owned by the city housing authority. 
    Owner, applied to any building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Private property means and includes, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, entranceways, passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and recreational facilities. 
    Public property means and includes, but is not limited to, the following locations: streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catchbasins, sidewalks, strips between streets and sidewalks, lanes, alleys, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, municipal housing project grounds, municipal vacant lots, parks, beaches, playgrounds, other publicly owned recreation facilities and municipal waterways and bodies of water. 
    Solid waste means garbage, swill, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse and other discarded materials, which may be generated from the normal activities of residences, households, municipal buildings, institutions, organizations, schools and commercial enterprises. 
    Tenant/occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Toxic or hazardous materials means and includes all liquid hydrocarbon products, including but not limited to, gasoline, fuel and diesel oil, and also any other toxic, caustic or corrosive chemicals, radioactive materials, or other substances, controlled as being toxic or hazardous by the division of hazardous waste under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 21C and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1994, § 4-100; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 22-2. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each and every day on which a violation exists, except in cases which a given time has been allowed for corrective action to be taken, shall be a separate and distinct offense. If more than one condition of an ordinance is violated, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, §§ 4-101, 4-103) 
Sec. 22-3. - Enforcement authorization. 
    Designated personnel in the following departments or boards are authorized to enforce sections of this chapter as prescribed in this section: 
(1)  Police department. Regular police officers are empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Department of public works. The director of public works is authorized to delegate enforcement authority to such agents as the director deems appropriate. Such authority is applicable to the entire chapter, except where prohibited by police authority. 
(3)  Department of municipal inspections. Inspectors empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Fire department. The fire prevention officer may enforce the following sections: 
a.  Section 22-29, wherever violations of the household solid waste containerization ordinance constitute existing or potential fire hazards. 
b.  Section 22-30, wherever violations of the commercial solid waste containerization ordinance constitute existing or potential fire hazards. 
c.  Section 22-32, wherever violations of the clean property ordinance constitute existing or potential fire hazards. 
d.  Article IV of this chapter, wherever violations of the hazardous waste ordinances constitute existing or potential fire hazards. 
(Code 1994, § 4-102) 
Secs. 22-4-22-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Littering highways or bodies of water, M.G.L. c. 270, § 16 et seq.; throwing glass in public streets, M.G.L. c. 265, § 32; throwing or dropping objects onto public way, M.G.L. c. 265, § 35. 

Sec. 22-24. - Disposal restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any manner or amount on any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, except in containers or areas lawfully provided for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, no person shall deposit or dump, or cause to be deposited or dumped, any litter, except in a place, and during periods of time authorized, and approved by the department of municipal inspections. 
(c)  In the prosecution charging a violation of subsection (a) of this section from a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was the origin of the litter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such violation the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner was the person who committed the violation. 
(d)  Every person distributing handbills, leaflets, flyers or any other advertising and information material shall take all measures necessary to keep such materials from littering public or private property. 
(e)  To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, such publicly patronized or used establishments, as fast food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, parking lots, mobile canteens, schools and any other establishments, as designated by the department of municipal inspections, shall provide, and regularly empty and maintain in good condition adequate containers that meet the standards prescribed by the department of municipal inspections. 
(Code 1994, § 4-115) 
Sec. 22-25. - Disturbing containers. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously tip over and upset any carton, box, barrel or other container placed upon a sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1994, § 4-116) 
Sec. 22-26. - Vehicles transporting loose materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless such cargo is covered and secured in such a manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public or private property. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be applicable alike to the owner of the truck or other vehicle, the operator thereof, and the person from whose residence or establishment the cargo originated. 
(c)  In a prosecution charging a violation of subsection (a) of this section, lack of adequate covering and securing shall in itself constitute proof a violation has been committed. 
(Code 1994, § 4-117) 
State Law reference- Construction and loading of vehicles so as to prevent dropping of load on highway, M.G.L. c. 85, § 36. 
Sec. 22-27. - Loading and unloading operations. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of an establishment or institution at which litter is attendant to the packing and unpacking and loading and unloading of materials at exterior locations shall provide suitable containers there for the disposal and storage of litter and shall make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof. 
(b)  Every owner or occupant shall remove at the end of each working day any litter that has not been containerized at these locations. 
(Code 1994, § 4-118) 
Sec. 22-28. - Construction or demolition projects. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to cause, maintain, permit or allow to be caused, maintained or permitted the accumulation of any litter on the site before, during or after completion of the construction or demolition project. 
(b)  Every owner, agent or contractor shall have on the site adequate containers for the disposal of litter and to make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof or for transport by such person to an authorized facility for final disposition. 
(c)  The owner, agent or contractor may be required at any time to show proof of appropriate collection, or, if transported by such person, of final disposition at an authorized facility. 
(Code 1994, § 4-119) 
Sec. 22-29. - Household solid waste. 
(a)  All residences located in any area in which collection is by the city or approved contractors shall have sufficient container capacity to accommodate their normal volume of solid waste between collections. 
(b)  All loose materials which normally fit into containers but which are excess as a result of special circumstances such as holidays shall be bundled and tied securely to prevent them from blowing or scattering, and shall be placed beside the containers. 
(c)  Containers shall be kept covered at all times. 
(d)  Any container which does not conform to prescribed standards or which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public generally shall be replaced promptly by the owner or user of the container upon receipt of written notice of such defects from the department of public works. Failure to do so within five days of such notification shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(e)  In placing containers for collection and removing them after collection, all residents shall follow the practices prescribed by the department of public works pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any resident to deposit household solid waste in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person not residing within the limits of the city, or a corporation, institution or organization not located within the limits of the city, to place household or commercial solid waste on the streets of the city for removal by the city or its approved contractor. 
(Code 1994, § 4-120) 
Sec. 22-30. - Commercial solid waste. 
(a)  All establishments and institutions which generate solid waste for collection by the city, or approved contractors, shall abide by the waste container requirements prescribed by the department of public works. 
(b)  Containers shall be covered at all times. 
(c)  Any container which does not conform to prescribed standards, or which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting the contents thereof or the public generally, shall be replaced promptly by the owner or user of the container upon receipt of written notice of such defects from the department of public works. Failure to do so within five days of such notification shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a commercial establishment or institution to deposit solid waste from that establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
(e)  No person in control of a place of business abutting on a street shall knowingly suffer any rubbish, litter or other refuse to remain in the open on the property upon which such place of business is located, including the sidewalk immediately adjacent to such business, except in a receptacle which conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 4-121) 
Sec. 22-31. - Provisions for facilities at new buildings. 
    Before building permits shall be issued for construction of commercial buildings and multiple-dwelling units, plans for the adequacy, location and accessibility of solid waste containerization and storage facilities must be approved by the department of public works. 
(Code 1994, § 4-122) 
Sec. 22-32. - Duty to keep property clean. 
(a)  Every owner, agent, occupant or lessee shall keep exterior private property free of litter. This requirement applies not only to the removal of loose litter, but to materials that already are, or become, trapped at such locations as fence and wall bases, grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments and other lodging points. 
(b)  No owner, tenant or occupant of land or a building abutting upon a sidewalk or a strip between a street and a sidewalk within the limits of any public way or private way, open to the public in this city, and no agent of such owner having charge of such land or building, shall place or suffer to remain on such sidewalk any litter, rubbish, refuse, debris, garbage, scrap, byproduct or other waste material. Such litter, rubbish, refuse, debris, garbage, scrap, byproducts or other waste material shall be removed on a daily basis and shall not be allowed to remain after 7:00 p.m., except as otherwise provided by ordinance regulating the collection of solid waste. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks and strips into streets. Sidewalk and strip sweepings must be picked up and put into household or commercial solid waste containers. 
(d)  Every owner of a vacant lot or other vacant property shall appoint an agent who shall have responsibility for keeping that lot or other property free of litter and the growth of excess vegetation which traps litter, encourages dumping or promotes infestation by rodents and other vermin. 
(e)  If, after due warning, citation or summons, an owner, agent, occupant or lessee fails to remove litter or excess vegetation from any vacant lot, the department of municipal inspections is authorized to serve written notice to the owner or the owner's appointed agent that, if the condition is not corrected within 30 days, the owner shall be subject to a criminal fine of $50.00 a day for each day the violation exists. 
(Code 1994, § 4-123) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 22-33. - Abandoned refrigerators, stoves, etc. 
(a)  No person shall leave or deposit on any vacant lot or on any premises outside of a building a refrigerator, stove or other large appliance equipped with a door, unless the door of such appliance has been removed or unless any and all locking mechanisms on such appliance have been removed. 
(b)  No person shall allow to remain on a premises owned or occupied by such person outside of any building an abandoned refrigerator, stove or other large appliance which is equipped with a door, unless the door has been removed or unless any and all locking mechanisms on such appliance have been removed. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, each day during which such refrigerator, stove or other large appliance equipped with a door is allowed to remain in violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 4-124; Ord. of 10-16-1995) 
State Law reference- Abandoned refrigerators, M.G.L. c. 271, § 46. 
Sec. 22-34. - Unregistered and ungaraged motor vehicles on private property. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no occupier or owner of land shall permit any abandoned, unregistered or partly dismantled or motor vehicle, or parts thereof, to be stored, parked or placed on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person unless the same shall be inside a building or within an area operated by a properly licensed motor vehicle storage facility. 
(b)  A property owner may store one unregistered but safely operable motor vehicle on such owner's property. This vehicle shall not be in abandoned, partly dismantled or wrecked condition. 
(c)  Each 24-hour period that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 4-125; Ord. of 10-16-1995) 
Secs. 22-35-22-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-57. - Responsibility of department of public works. 
    The department of public works shall cause acceptable solid waste to be collected and shall provide for the disposal of such waste. 
(Code 1994, § 4-150) 
Sec. 22-58. - Administration. 
(a)  The department of public works may make such rules as are necessary to provide for the efficient and safe administration of solid waste under this chapter. 
(b)  The department of public works or its designee shall periodically inspect all phases of the municipal solid waste management system within and without the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-155) 
Sec. 22-59. - Dumping refuse originating outside of city. 
    Dumping refuse which originates outside of the city in any part is prohibited, unless said dumping is permitted by order of the department of municipal inspections upon a finding that said refuse is in compliance with state law regarding dumping and does not, and will not, constitute a health hazard to the residents of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-151) 
Sec. 22-60. - Duty of occupants, owners. 
    The occupants of every single- or two-family dwelling, the owner or agent of every dwelling housing more than two families, and the owner or operator of any business enterprise shall remove nonacceptable waste at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent a nuisance as may be determined by the department of municipal inspections or its designee. 
(Code 1994, § 4-152) 
Sec. 22-61. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Nonacceptable waste to be collected by private collectors or to be collected and removed by an occupant, owner, owner's agent or operator shall be stored, handled and placed for collection in a manner as to prevent a nuisance, as determined by the department of public works or its designee. Such waste shall not be placed or stored on any public street or way except by permission of the department of public works or its designee under such reasonable terms as the department of municipal inspections shall determine. 
(b)  Private collectors of solid waste may collect acceptable and nonacceptable waste within the city subject to the rules and regulations issued by the department of public works and any applicable provisions of the General Laws. 
(c)  When the director of public works or designee refuses to remove solid waste for just cause, the occupant, owner, owner's agent or operator responsible under the provisions of section 22-32(a) shall remove the same forthwith at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-153) 
State Law reference- Permit for removal and transportation of garbage, etc., M.G.L. c. 111, § 31A. 
Sec. 22-62. - Time, place of collection. 
(a)  Unless otherwise determined through the regulations of the department of municipal inspections, acceptable solid waste shall be placed in suitable containers at the outer edge of the sidewalk appurtenant to the premises of the occupant or owner not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection, and not earlier than 7:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of scheduled collection. Reusable solid waste containers shall be removed from the sidewalk after collection as soon as possible, but in no case later than 12:00 midnight of the day of scheduled collection. 
(b)  Acceptable solid waste shall be collected in accordance with a schedule published by the department of public works. 
(c)  No person shall willfully or maliciously tip over or spill the whole or any part of the contents of any container holding rubbish. 
(Code 1994, § 4-154; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 22-63. - Collection fees for commercial establishments. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 22-64, the collection of wastes from commercial establishments, including nonresidential generators, shall be subject to an annual fee, payable in accordance with a schedule determined by the director of public works as approved by the city manager. 
(b)  All fees to be collected under this section shall be set annually by the director of the department of public works with the approval of the city manager in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). Prior to any alteration in the schedule of fees, the director of public works shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed change. 
(Code 1994, § 4-156; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 22-64. - Establishment of solid waste collection fee for private dwellings, schools, churches and other charitable organizations. 
(a)  A solid waste fee is hereby established for the collection of solid waste from private dwellings, schools, churches and other charitable organizations. This fee shall be collected annually in 12 equal installments. All such fees applicable to residences shall be determined using the residential unit codes for tax assessment with the city. 
(b)  All fees to be collected under this section shall be set annually by the director of the department of public works with the approval of the city manager. Prior to any alteration in the schedule of fees, the director of public works shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed change. 
(c)  Churches, schools, and other nonprofit/charitable organizations shall pay a trash fee equal to one-half of the fee for a commercial business of comparable size. 
(d)  Solid waste fees for private dwellings shall not be collected when the owner or occupant thereof presents a current contract for private rubbish collection. Such contract must be valid for and must remain in force for the entire term of the presently collectible solid waste fee. Such contract must include: 
(1)  A clause requiring the contractor to notify the city in writing upon termination of the contract within five business days; and 
(2)  A clause accepting all duties and liabilities for the nonpayment of the balance of the customer's trash fee. 
(e)  Fees not collected shall be subject to all collection remedies as provided for real estate collection, including interest and demand fees. Any fee not paid 30 days from the date of mailing of each bill may be liened to the property in the following fiscal year's real estate bill. Such liens shall remain valid to the extent allowed by law. 
(f)  Property owners shall be entitled to obtain a waiver of trash fees on a per-month basis for residential dwellings that are vacant for an entire month. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to complete an affidavit as to the vacancy of the unit and submit same to the city department of public works. The city shall not issue a waiver of trash fees for any month that precedes the date the property owner's affidavit is submitted to the department of public works. Individuals who make one or more false representations regarding the vacancy status of a residential dwelling unit shall be fined twice the amount of the single-unit fee for each such false representation. 
(g)  Individuals who qualify for a statutory exemption under M.G.L. c. 59, § 5(17c), (18), (22), (22A)-(22E), (37), (41C), (42) and (43) shall be eligible for a reduced annual fee of $25.00 upon application and approval by the director of the department of public works. The assessors shall determine if a person has qualified for tax exemption and is therefore eligible for trash fee abatement. 
(h)  In order for more than one dwelling unit within a particular residential property to receive a discount or exemption from the solid waste fee based on owner-occupancy status and pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, said property owners shall provide the treasurer/collector with the following: 
(1)  A copy of the recorded deed to the property indicating the name of all property owners residing at the premises; 
(2)  A current, gas, electric, telephone, cable or other utility bill dated for service within 30 days which names each property owner listed on the deed who is requesting a discount or exemption; and 
(3)  An affidavit of occupancy indicating that each unit is owner-occupied. 
No more than one unit per property shall receive a discount or exemption from the solid waste fee based on owner-occupancy until the items stated in this subsection have been submitted to the treasurer/collector. 
(Code 1994, § 4-157; Ord. of 3-10-1997; Ord. of 12-7-1998; Ord. of 3-20-2000) 
Secs. 22-65-22-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, M.G.L. c. 21C. 

Sec. 22-87. - Penalties. 
    Any person who is found guilty of a violation of this article shall be liable for a criminal fine of not more than $300.00, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. Each day during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; if more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 4-179) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 22-88. - General provisions. 
    Every owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment, including permitted home occupations, storing toxic or hazardous materials shall register with the fire department the types of material stored, quantity, location and method of storage. The fire department may require, by written notification, that an inventory of some or all of such materials be maintained on the premises and be reconciled with purchase, use, sales and disposal records on a monthly basis, in order to detect any product loss. Maintenance and reconciliation of inventories shall begin within seven days of receipt of notification from the fire department that inventories are required and shall be forwarded to the fire department as often as required by said department. The fire department may publish lists of specific materials or classes of materials which must be registered and inventoried. 
(Code 1994, § 4-175) 
Sec. 22-89. - Authority to charge for expenses. 
    The fire department may charge for expenses incurred for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 4-176) 
Sec. 22-90. - Discharges prohibited. 
    All discharges of toxic or hazardous materials within the city are prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 4-177) 
Sec. 22-91. - Reports of spills and leaks. 
    All spills, leaks or other loss of toxic or hazardous materials shall be immediately reported to the fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 4-178) 
Secs. 22-92-22-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DUMPSTERS 

Sec. 22-111. - Enforcement, issuance, fees. 
(a)  The department of municipal inspections and the fire department are hereby designated as the enforcing agencies of this article, according to their respective powers and duties. Any temporary permit or annual license required under this article shall be issued by the department of municipal inspections. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code), the director of municipal inspections, subject to the approval of the city manager, may establish such fees as are deemed necessary and reasonable for all dumpster permits. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the director of municipal inspections. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(Code 1994, § 4-185) 
Sec. 22-112. - Location. 
    Each dumpster must be located at a distance from the lot line so as not to interfere with the safety, convenience or health of abutters and residents and the public, and not to damage the physical integrity of the curb and sidewalk. The location of dumpsters shall be subject to approval of the department of municipal inspections and the fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 4-186) 
Sec. 22-113. - Screening. 
    All dumpsters in residential areas shall be covered with a screen. When deemed necessary by an enforcing agency, it shall be required that a dumpster site be enclosed or screened by the dumpster owner or authorized agent. 
(Code 1994, § 4-187) 
Sec. 22-114. - Hours of use; protection when not in use. 
    No dumpster shall be filled between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in or upon residential property. All dumpsters on commercial property shall be filled prior to the close of the working day, but no later than 6:00 p.m., unless special circumstances are shown to the enforcing agencies, who then at their discretion, may grant an extension of time. All dumpsters must be covered and secured at all times, except during the actual filling thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 4-188) 
Sec. 22-115. - Size. 
    Each dumpster shall be of sufficient size and capacity, shall not be filled to overflowing and shall avoid noisome odors. The dumpster owner or the owner's agent utilizing the dumpster service must take appropriate action to immediately cause the dumpster to be emptied of its contents when full. The department of municipal inspections may refuse an annual license or temporary permit if, in its discretion, the size or capacity of the dumpster does not fulfill the requirements of the department. 
(Code 1994, § 4-189) 
Sec. 22-116. - Obstruction of traffic. 
(a)  Each dumpster shall be situated so as not to obstruct the view of flowing traffic. No dumpster shall be placed or parked on a public way. If, in the opinion of the department of municipal inspections, the primary department responsible for issuing permits, and with the concurring approval of the department of public works, the police chief and the fire chief, a condition, constituting an emergency exists requiring the temporary placement of a dumpster on a public way, then a temporary permit may be issued. 
(b)  If a temporary permit is issued for parking a dumpster on a public way, then such dumpster shall be clearly illuminated at night by lights or reflective materials. The police chief or designee may require additional illumination. The police chief or designee is hereby given authority to remove a dumpster from a public way that does not meet the requirements of this article or presents a threat to public safety. The cost of removal and storage of the dumpster shall be paid by the dumpster owner. 
(Code 1994, § 4-190) 
Sec. 22-117. - Maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the dumpster owner to maintain the dumpster area free of odors, scattered debris, overflowing and all other nuisances. If the dumpster owner is notified that the dumpster upon the owner's property is in violation of any of the offenses set forth in this section, the dumpster owner shall within 12 hours of notification, cause the offense to be remedied or shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 4-191) 
Sec. 22-118. - Contractor's registration permit and bond. 
(a)  No contractor shall supply a dumpster service in the city for the purpose of storage, removal or transportation of rubbish, garbage, offal and other materials and substances without first obtaining a registration permit from the department of municipal inspections. All registration permits shall expire at the end of the calendar year they are issued, but may be renewable upon application annually as herein provided. The name and address of the owner and designee shall be kept on file in the department of municipal inspections. 
(b)  No dumpster contractor shall be issued a registration permit without proof of: 
(1)  Liability insurance coverage in the amount of $100,000.00; or 
(2)  A $20,000.00 surety bond; 
approved by the state insurance commissioner. 
(c)  No dumpster contractor shall provide a dumpster, temporary or annual, in the city without notifying the department of municipal inspections prior to its placement. Failure to do so may result in the revocation of all outstanding dumpster permits. 
(Code 1994, § 4-193) 
Sec. 22-119. - Owner's permit. 
    No dumpster owner shall have or maintain a dumpster on public or private property without obtaining the proper permits from the department of municipal inspections and all other necessary city agencies prior to its placement. It is the responsibility of the dumpster owner to ensure that all other licenses and permits required by the city have been obtained. The issuance of a dumpster permit shall under no circumstances be construed as a waiver from any other permit or license required, nor any of the requirements, provisions or regulations thereunder. 
(Code 1994, § 4-194) 
Sec. 22-120. - Owner's temporary permit. 
    Temporary dumpster permits (roll-off or gondola type) will be issued to an individual for a period of time not to exceed 15 days, in connection with construction, demolition, fairs, carnivals or for other similar temporary needs. Such permit may be renewed for an additional 15 days, as the need requires and upon proper application. The individual shall comply with all the provisions of this article which are applicable to the operation of the dumpster. 
(Code 1994, § 4-195) 
Sec. 22-121. - Display of contractor's name. 
    The contractor shall have the contractor's or the contractor's firm's name and business telephone number conspicuously displayed on the dumpster. 
(Code 1994, § 4-196) 
Sec. 22-122. - Hours for emptying. 
    The emptying of the contents of the dumpster or its removal shall not commence before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 4-197; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 22-123. - Deodorization. 
    The contractor shall have the dumpster deodorized when emptied, washed or sanitized, as directed by order of the department of municipal inspections. 
(Code 1994, § 4-198) 
Sec. 22-124. - Modifications, suspension, revocation of permits. 
    Permits may be modified, suspended, revoked or recalled by the director of the department of municipal inspections at the director's discretion for failure of the contractor and or owner to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 4-200) 
Sec. 22-125. - Contractor's list of accounts. 
    All dumpster contractors shall supply the department of municipal inspections a list of all their active accounts in the city, prior to January 1 of each calendar year or upon request of the department of municipal inspections. 
(Code 1994, § 4-201) 
Chapter 24 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Highways, M.G.L. c. 82; sidewalks, M.G.L. c. 85; authority to regulate use of ways for certain purposes, M.G.L. c. 85, § 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Approved means accepted by the director of the department of public works or designee as meeting applicable specifications stated or cited in these rules, regulations and ordinances, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    ASSHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Cold patch means bituminous concrete made with slow-curing asphalt and used primarily as a temporary patching material when hot-mix plants are closed. 
    Compaction means compressing of suitable material and gravel that has been used to backfill an excavation by means of mechanical tamping to within 95 percent of maximum dry density, as determined by the modified Proctor test in accordance with ASSHTO-T180. 
    Control density fill (CDF) or flowable fill means a mixture of Portland cement, fly ash, sand and water, meeting Massachusetts Highway Department specification M4.08 type 2E (flowable excavatable). High air entrained (25 percent plus) may be used instead of fly ash with an adjustment in sand content. CDF must be hand-tool excavatable. 
    Department or DPW means the city's department of public works. 
    Director means the director of public works for the city. 
    Discharge means flow from a canal, conduit, sewer, drain, outfall, pump, stack, tank or treatment process, or any emission, intentional or unintentional including, but not limited to, flow resulting from spilling, leaking, seeping, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, depositing, dumping, releasing, injecting, escaping, leaching or infiltrating, whether direct or indirect. 
    Easement means an interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited use or enjoyment 
    Emergency repair work means street opening work which must be commenced immediately to correct a hazardous condition whose continuation would unreasonably risk injury, loss of life or property damage. 
    Gravel means coarse grained soil ranging from approximately 0.1 inch to 3.0 inches. Gravel has no plasticity characteristics. 
    Infrared process means a recycling procedure whereby an infrared heater plasticizes the surfaces of an asphalt pavement, preparatory to the introduction of additional compatible paving materials uniformly reworked and compacted to achieve a density and profile consistent and thoroughly integrated with the adjacent pavement. 
    Lien means the statutory lien of the city as defined in the M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F. 
    Massachusetts highway standards means the commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, 1998 edition. 
    MHD means the Massachusetts Highway Department. 
    Newly paved road means a road where repaving is less than five years old. 
    Organic soil means soil high in organic content: 
(1)  Which is usually dark brown (brown or black) in color; 
(2)  In which plant remains or a woody structure may be recognized and the soil usually has a distinct odor; and 
(3)  Which may exhibit little or trace plasticity. 
When considerable fibrous material is the principal constituent, it is generally classified as peat. 
    Owner means a person who, alone or jointly or several with others, has the legal title to any premises or has care, charge or control of any premises as agent, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title. 
    Permanent patch means a final repair of a street opening work to be performed in accordance with this chapter and intended to permanently return the opened portion of the roadway to as good a condition as it was prior to the performance of the street opening work. 
    Plasticity means that property of soil which allows it to be deformed or molded without crumbling (e.g., like dough or soft rubber). This property reflects the capacity of soil to absorb moisture. 
    Poorly graded soil means soil that contains a large percentage of its constituent particles within a relatively narrow range; also referred to as un-uniformed soil. 
    Sand means coarse grained soil: 
(1)  In which individual grains can be visually detected; 
(2)  When moist it forms a cast, which will crumble when lightly touched; 
(3)  When dry it will not form a cast and will fall apart when confirming pressure is released; and 
(4)  Exhibiting no plasticity. 
    Silt means a finely textured soil: 
(1)  When moist, it forms a cast, which can be freely handled; 
(2)  When wet, it readily puddles; 
(3)  When dry, it may be cloddy and readily pulverizes into powder with a soft flour-like feel (i.e., low dry strength); and 
(4)  Exhibiting little or no plasticity. 
    Site plan review means minor and major review in accordance with the definitions thereof provided in section 34-241. Drainage site plans for residential structures that have less than four units shall be approved by DPW. 
    Street opening work means any cutting, excavating, compacting, construction, repair or other disturbance in or under a public way, together with restoration of the public way in accordance with these standards, municipal ordinances and any other applicable law following such disturbance. 
    Temporary patch means the application of either cold patch or type 1 bituminous concrete compacted to achieve a density equal to that of the surrounding pavement. 
    Utility means any corporation, city, town or other governmental subdivision, partnership or other organization or any individual engaged within the state in any business which is, or the persons engaged in which are, in any respect made subject to the supervision or regulation by the department of telecommunications and energy. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "utility" also means any person or entity engaged by or on behalf of a utility to perform street opening work. 
    Well-graded soil means soil having its constituent particles within a wide range; also referred to as "nonuniform" soil. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. In accordance with section 1-8, general schedule of noncriminal fines, all violations shall be punishable by: 
(1)  A fine of $50.00 for a first offense; 
(2)  A fine of $150.00 for a second offense; 
(3)  A fine of $300.00 for a third offense; 
(4)  Imprisonment for not more than one year; or 
(5)  Both a fine and imprisonment pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 39G. 
The applicable penalty for each such violation shall be immediately due and payable. Violations which, in the opinion of the director or any other governmental regulatory agency, endanger the health and life safety of any individual or group of individuals shall cease or be corrected immediately and the person or entity responsible for such violation shall be immediately liable to the city for any expense, loss and damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation and shall forfeit to the city three times the amount of the damages. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation and penalties shall be incurred on a daily basis for continuing violations of the provisions of this chapter. A separate penalty will be incurred for each violation when more than one violation occurs. 
(c)  If the city elects to file an enforcement action in a court of competent jurisdiction, the damages then recoverable by the city shall not be limited to amounts recoverable under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-22(a)-(c); Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 24-3. - Exhibition of permit. 
    Every person granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the permit for such occupation at all times, when requested by DPW or any agent thereof, by an inspector of the department of municipal services or by a police officer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-152) 
Sec. 24-4. - Street names; building numbering. 
(a)  The several streets and squares in the city shall retain the names by which they are known, and all streets, ways or squares hereafter to be laid out shall be named by the city council. The city council may change the name of any street, square or way in the city; provided, that before such change, the city council shall appoint a time and place for hearing all persons interested therein, and give notice of such hearing and of its intention to change such name, by publication of the same in at least one newspaper published in the city as provided in M.G.L. c. 41, § 74. It shall cause signposts to be erected designating the names of streets and private ways leading from accepted streets. 
(b)  Every dwelling house and other structure shall have proper street numbers affixed thereto in the manner designated by the director. The owner of any building or part of a building who neglects or refuses to affix to the same the numbers designated by the director or who shall affix or retain there, for more than three days, any number contrary to such direction shall be in violation of this section, and subject to a fine accordance with section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 6-115) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for names of streets, etc., M.G.L. c. 85, § 3 et seq.; authority to provide by ordinance for the numbering of buildings, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(10). 
Sec. 24-5. - Repair of defective or dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Notice required. The director shall order the owner or person in control of any building or lot of land or portion thereof which has appurtenant thereto any bulkhead or other opening in the street or highway to repair any defective or dangerous condition of such bulkhead or other opening within 48 hours after notice thereof or within such other time as the director considers reasonable. 
(b)  Service of notice. The order referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or the authorized agent thereof by any person authorized to serve civil process, or a copy of the order may be left at the last and usual place of abode of the owner or the agent thereof, if the owner or the agent thereof is known and within the state. If the residence of the owner or the agent thereof is unknown or is outside the state, the city engineer may order the notice to be served by posting it on the premises and by advertising it in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  Failure to comply with notice; performance of work by city. If the owner or the agent thereof fails to comply with the order referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director may cause the dangerous or defective condition of such bulkhead to be repaired, and all expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the owner of the building or lot of land if the owner has had actual notice from the director of the existence thereof. All such outstanding balances shall constitute a municipal charge under M.G.L. c. 40, § 58 and the city reserves the right to proceed by all legally available means to secure receipt of said outstanding balances, including total accrued service charges together with all costs of collection, including attorney's fees. 
(Code 1994, §§ 6-139-6-141) 
Sec. 24-6. - Obstructing sidewalks and public ways. 
    No person shall stand on any sidewalk or public way in such a manner as to obstruct free passage for pedestrians or vehicles. Individuals violating this section shall be subject to arrest without warrant by any police officer of the city, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 272, § 59. 
(Code 1994, § 6-134) 
Sec. 24-7. - Obstruction in streets and gutters. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited, in any public way, any impediment or obstruction of any kind, including snow or ice from private premises, or occupy or obstruct any public way to interfere with the convenient use of the same for public travel, without a written authorization from the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-116) 
State Law reference- Removal of snow from sidewalks by abutting property owners, M.G.L. c. 85, § 5. 
Sec. 24-8. - Permanent fixtures on public ways. 
    No person shall erect any permanent fixture on any public way, except by permission of the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-118) 
Sec. 24-9. - Fences or buildings on lines of public ways. 
    No person shall erect or cause to be erected any fence or building on the line of any public way without first ascertaining the bounds of the street from the department. If any encroachment shall be made upon any street or way, and the party making it neglects or refuses to remove the same after notice so to do, the director may remove the same at the expense of the owner and shall cause the person so offending to be prosecuted for such offense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-117) 
Sec. 24-10. - Encroachment by gates, doors. 
    No person shall allow any gate or door belonging to premises under the person's legal control and adjoining any public way to swing on, over or into a public way. 
(Code 1994, § 6-119) 
Sec. 24-11. - Openings, etc., to cellars, basements, etc., in public way. 
(a)  Permit and bond. No person shall erect or maintain a passageway or other opening to any cellar, basement or other structure in or upon any public way without the written authorization of the director, and shall execute a bond to the city in such a sum as the director may prescribe in a form approved by the city solicitor. 
(b)  Guards and lighting. No platform or grate covering the entrance or passageway to a cellar or basement or any shaft or light shaft leading to a cellar or basement in any public way shall project above the even surface of such way. Every such entrance, passageway or shaft shall be kept covered with a suitable platform or grate or shall be guarded and protected by a sufficient railing on both sides thereof, and well-lighted at night. Whenever such platform, grate or railing shall be adjudged unsafe by the department of municipal inspections, the owner thereof shall be notified without delay, and shall replace the same with a safe and proper platform, grate or railing forthwith. 
(Code 1994, §§ 6-120, 6-121; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 24-12. - Raising or lowering merchandise over streets. 
    No person shall raise into or lower from the second or any higher story of a building, over any portion of a public way, any articles of merchandise, goods or other materials, except in accordance with a permit from the director, and such person shall execute a bond to the city in such a sum as the director may prescribe. 
(Code 1994, § 6-122) 
Sec. 24-13. - Leaving coalholes and other apertures open. 
    No person shall leave a coalhole or other aperture in any sidewalk or street open or unfastened, except when in actual use and properly guarded. 
(Code 1994, § 6-142) 
Sec. 24-14. - Abandonment of petroleum on private ways. 
    No person shall abandon on any public or private way, or public or private land, a vehicle, tank or other receptacle which contains or has contained petroleum or any of its byproducts that might endanger the life or property of others. 
(Code 1994, § 6-131; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 24-15. - Signs, awnings, canopies, etc. 
    No person shall place or maintain any sign, awning, canopy, which projects more than 12 inches over the public way without first obtaining a license from the director of municipal inspections. Such license may contain terms and conditions, as the director of municipal inspections deems necessary, for the protection of the public good. The person so placing or maintaining the same shall also conform to any directions given by the director of municipal inspections. The director of municipal inspections may at any time revoke such permission and order the immediate removal of any awning, canopy, shade or frame which now is or hereafter may be placed or maintained over any public way, if the public good so requires. If the owner or any person having the care thereof shall neglect or refuse to comply with such order, after due notice has been given thereof, the director of municipal inspections shall cause the same to be removed at the expense of the owner, or the person maintaining the awning, canopy, shade or frame. The property owner where such sign, awning or canopy is to be located shall execute a bond to the city in such a sum as the director of municipal inspections may prescribe. 
(Code 1994, § 6-151) 
Sec. 24-16. - Newsracks/newspaper boxes. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Certificate of compliance means the certificate of compliance issued by the director to the operator of a newsrack in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
    Director means the director of the public works department of the city or such person as said director may from time to time designate. 
    Newsrack/newspaper box means any type of self-service or coin-operated box or device for the vending or free distribution of newspapers or periodicals. 
    Operator means any natural person or other legal entity, including, but not limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures and the like, who either own, operate or are otherwise in control of a newsrack. 
(b)  Scope. This section shall apply to all newsrack boxes and devices within the city. 
(c)  Certificate of compliance. 
(1)  No person shall place, affix, erect, construct or maintain a newsrack in or on any part of a public way without first obtaining a one-time only certificate of compliance from the director in accordance with the provisions of this section. The city manager, in the manager's sole discretion, shall affix the total number of newsracks that are present in the city on a yearly basis. The purpose is to prevent an adverse effect on the public health and safety of the residents in the city and to prevent unneeded litter and refuse from collecting in the streets and public ways. 
(2)  Only one certificate of compliance shall be required for each operator of a newsrack or series of newsracks, notwithstanding the number of newsracks or similar devices dispensing such newspapers, periodicals or printed material. 
(3)  There shall be a certificate of compliance fee in the amount of $100.00 paid to the city. This fee shall be due upon initial application. If at any time after the director has issued a certificate of compliance and an operator proposes to install additional newsracks, then a new certificate shall issue at a fee of $100.00. 
(4)  In addition to the certificate of compliance fee, an annual fee of $50.00 per newsrack authorized shall be paid to the city. The annual fee is due on September 1 of each year and at the time of the initial issuance of the certificate of compliance. 
(5)  Where the director has required newsracks to be set in the public way, then additional fees shall be imposed by the director to offset the city's costs of the installation. 
(6)  Upon a finding by the director that the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this section and the standards outlined in subsection (d) of this section, the director shall issue a certificate of compliance for installation by the applicant. The commissioner shall issue a partial certificate of compliance upon a finding that some of the proposed newsrack locations are in compliance with the provisions of this section. Upon the issuance of a certificate of compliance or a partial certificate of compliance the director shall issue the appropriate number of newsrack permits for the locations that have been approved. Issuance of a certificate of compliance, or a partial certificate of compliance shall designate the applicant to be the certificate holder. The director shall issue a certificate of compliance within 21 days of the director's receipt of the completed application. 
(7)  If an application for some newsrack location shall be denied, the director shall notify the applicant within 21 days of the director's receipt of the completed application. The director shall state the specific reasons for denial. The applicant may reapply for a substitute alternative location without having to pay an additional application fee. 
(d)  Standards. Subject to the prohibitions contained in this section, newsracks shall be placed parallel to and not less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed near the wall of a building or other structure must be placed parallel to and not more than six inches away from the wall. No newsrack shall be affixed, erected, installed, placed, used or maintained: 
(1)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet in width; 
(2)  Within five feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
(3)  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire lane, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility, mail box, telephone booth or stand; 
(4)  Within five feet of any part of a curb return of a curb ramp or driveway or, in the case of a curb ramp or driveway without a curb return, within five feet of the point where the curb edge stone or edging begins a change in grade toward the driveway or ramp on each side thereof, or, in the case of a termination of the curb, edge stone or edging without a change in grade or a turn, within five feet of the point of the same terminates on each side of the ramp or driveway; 
(5)  Within five feet of any traffic control signal or traffic sign; 
(6)  Within five feet of a bicycle rack; 
(7)  Within five feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any designated bus stop taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire lane, unless such newsrack is placed parallel against a wall that is within four feet of a designated bus stop, taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire lane and the newsrack so placed does not project into or otherwise interfere with the unobstructed flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or 
(8)  Which in any way protrudes onto a public way. 
An owner is responsible for the installation and maintenance of newsracks encompassed by any certificate of compliance issued pursuant to the provisions of this section and for compliance with all provisions contained in this subsection. 
(e)  Certificate of insurance. A certificate of insurance must be furnished naming the city as an additional insured in an amount sufficient to indemnify the city and hold it harmless from any and all claims or judgments for personal and bodily injury, including death or property damage and from costs and expenses to which the city may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur by reason of the design, placement, installation, operation or maintenance of any of the applicant's newsracks. Reasonable evidence of self-insurance coverage may be substituted by the applicant for the certificate of insurance. Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the applicant's newsrack in city public ways and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this section. 
(f)  Advertising prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any operator to use a newsrack for advertising or publicity purposes other than to display the publication's name and/or company logo. 
(g)  Fees for removal and storage. 
(1)  A newsrack removed pursuant to this section may be retrieved by the certificate holder at any time within 30 days of its removal upon payment of a removal fee of $5.00 per day, to a maximum combined removal and storage fee of $150.00 per newsrack. The director shall send a notice to the certificate holder that newsrack/newspaper box is being removed. After 30 days, any newsracks removed by the director pursuant to this section shall be deemed abandoned property and become the property of the city. The director shall destroy any newsracks that are deemed to be abandoned property. 
(2)  Failure of a certificate holder to retrieve a newsrack within the specified 30-day period shall not operate to dismiss any fees owed to the city for removal and storage of such newsrack. Unpaid fees accrued pursuant to this section shall be considered a debt payable to the city. 
(h)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the public works department. The director shall be the issuing authority and coordinator of the application process and administration of this section. 
(i)  Revocation and suspension. After notice, any certificate of compliance issued under this section may be revoked or suspended at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the director. 
(j)  Penalties. Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 per offense, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provision of section 1-8. If the city proceeds by noncriminal disposition and the violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, such outstanding fines shall be recoverable by indictment or on criminal complaint pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § 6-154) 
Sec. 24-17. - Discharges of water prohibited across public ways. 
    No person shall allow the discharge or cause the discharge of water on or across a city sidewalk or public way. 
(Code 1994, § 6-153) 
Sec. 24-18. - Depositing rubbish or filth in public ways. 
    No person shall throw, sweep into, drop, sprinkle, scatter, put, place or suffer to remain in any public way any rubbish, filth or other solid waste of any kind except as may be herein provided. 
(Code 1994, § 6-123) 
State Law reference- Littering highways or bodies of water, M.G.L. c. 270, § 16 et seq.; throwing glass in public streets, M.G.L. c. 265, § 32; throwing or dropping objects onto public way, M.G.L. c. 265, § 35. 
Sec. 24-19. - Depositing glass in public ways. 
    No person shall throw, sweep into, drop, scatter, put, place or suffer to remain in any public way any unbroken or broken glass. 
(Code 1994, § 6-126) 
State Law reference- Throwing glass in public streets, M.G.L. c. 265, § 32. 
Sec. 24-20. - Tipping over or spilling contents of boxes, barrels or vessels. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously tip over or spill the whole or any part of the contents of any box, barrel or vessel containing ashes or rubbish set upon the sidewalk. 
(Code 1994, § 6-127) 
Sec. 24-21. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Sidewalks and footways. The owner, the agent thereof or the person having charge of any building or lot of land bordering on any highway, street, land, court, square or public place within the city, where there is any footway or sidewalk duly established, shall cause all the snow to be removed from such footway or sidewalk in front of such premises within 24 hours of the time it ceased to fall. Whenever any sidewalk or footway abutting on any building or lot of land shall be encumbered with ice, the owner, agent or person having charge of such building or lot shall remove the ice therefrom, or so treat it that it shall be safe and convenient for travel. 
(b)  Roofs. The owner, the agent thereof or the person having charge of any building adjoining any highway, street, lane, court, alley, square or public place within the city, where the roof of such building slopes towards such highway, street, lane, court, alley, square or public place, shall cause all the snow and ice to be removed from such roof within 24 hours after the same has fallen or formed. 
(c)  Failure to remove. If any person who is subject to the provisions of this section shall neglect or fail to comply with the provisions of this section, then the municipal inspectors and/or the police officers of the city shall make reasonable attempts to notify such person of the neglect or failure, and, if the person does not comply forthwith, the snow and/or ice may be removed at the expense of such owner and liened to the owner's tax bill as a municipal charge, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 58. All fines and tickets for failure to remove snow and/or ice shall be issued pursuant to section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 6-124) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for removal of snow and ice from sidewalks by abutting property owners, M.G.L. c. 85, § 5 et seq. 
Sec. 24-22. - Placing snow and ice in street prohibited. 
    During or as a result of the clearing of snow and/or ice from private property, no person shall place or cause to be placed any snow or ice upon any street, way or private way open to the public. 
(Code 1994, § 6-125) 
Sec. 24-23. - Street games. 
    No person shall play ball, football, handball, basketball or any other game involving the use of a ball or hockey equipment, except under the supervision of individuals authorized by the proper city officials on any public way, nor on any private way except with the written permission of the owners of such private way. 
(Code 1994, § 6-132) 
Sec. 24-24. - Sidewalk construction supervision, materials, etc. 
    Every sidewalk ordered to be constructed or completed within the city shall be built or completed under the direction of the department of public works. 
(Code 1994, § 6-133) 
Sec. 24-25. - Construction of concrete sidewalks adjacent to new construction or substantial rehabilitation. 
(a)  Every developer and/or contractor who: 1. constructs any new residential or commercial building; or 2. substantially renovates an existing commercial building or residential building of four units or more, such that 75 percent or more of the existing floor area is being renovated, shall be required to install along the perimeter of any public way abutting the property line a new sidewalk. 
(b)  Such sidewalk shall be concrete with granite curbing and shall be constructed in accordance with specifications approved by the department of public works. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the department of municipal inspections until such concrete sidewalk is completed to the satisfaction of the DPW. 
(c)  At its sole discretion, the DPW may determine that the existing abutting sidewalk along the property line is not in need of replacement. In such cases, the DPW shall require a payment in lieu of replacement to be deposited into the Community Improvement Trust Fund. The amount of the payment shall be the cost of installation of a new sidewalk along the entire public way perimeter of the building. 
(d)  The department of municipal inspections and the DPW shall each have authority to enforce this provision. 
( Ord. of 6-4-2018(2) ) 
Secs. 24-26-24-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 24-52. - Wells, cisterns and other excavations near public ways. 
    Any person who shall make any excavation to a depth greater than one foot from the surface, adjacent to or adjoining any public way, shall maintain on the line of such way a sufficient and suitable railing or fence, which shall be kept well-lit at night. 
(Code 1994, § 6-135) 
Sec. 24-53. - Asphalt street and sidewalk openings-Procedure. 
(a)  No excavation of a street or sidewalk in the city may take place without a permit having been obtained for such work from the director, which shall satisfy the local authorization required by M.G.L. c. 82A, § 2. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code), the director, subject to the approval of the city manager, may establish such fees as are deemed necessary and reasonable for all permits issued pursuant to this section. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the director. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(c)  Prior to issuance of a permit, the contractor must furnish the city with a certificate of insurance for general liability in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(d)  All permittees must comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  The payment of all required fees. 
(2)  The DPW must be notified 24 hours before commencement of any excavation. Dig Safe must also be properly notified before the commencement of any excavation. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of the permit, the permittee shall be provided with a copy of this section. This section has been deemed to be satisfied if a single individual or corporation shall have obtained a valid street opening permit and a copy of this section within the six months prior to the pending application. 
(f)  Permittees who fail to restore the excavated area according to all required guidelines or according to a procedure approved by the director which placed the excavated area in as good repair as they were in when opened, shall be guilty of a nuisance. 
(g)  Pavement cracks, which develop after the permanent repair has been performed and which are immediately adjacent to the excavated area, will be filled and/or sealed by a contract representative of the city. The permittee shall bear complete and full responsibility for the repair of these cracks. 
(h)  At the direction of the city, the appropriate contract representative shall bill the permittee for all services rendered relative to the permittee's excavation and trench. Payment for these services shall be due and payable within 30 days of receipt. All invoices past due shall accrue service charges of 11/2 percent per month, provided that the rate does not exceed the amount permitted by law. Invoices exceeding 90 days shall be paid by the city. 
(i)  The city reserves the right to bill the permittees directly, including assessment and conveyance of reasonable administrative charges, as provided by Massachusetts General Laws. 
(j)  Excavations opened without a permit shall be subject to cancellation of existing permits, refusal to issue such future permits as may be requested, revocation of all licenses granted by the city, and the levying of any associated fines. 
(k)  Police protection, if required, shall be paid by the permittee either directly or billed by the city's contract representative at cost, plus allowable administrative charges. 
(l)  Failure to make proper payment of the required fees and/or other costs shall constitute grounds for cancellation and refusal of all existing permits, such future permits as may be requested, revocation of all licenses granted by the city, and the levying of any associated fines. All such outstanding balances shall constitute a municipal charge under M.G.L. c. 40, § 58, and the city reserves the right to proceed by all legally available means to secure receipt of said outstanding balances, including total accrued service charges, together with all costs of collection, including attorney's fees. 
(m)  Excavation and trench safety. 
(1)  No person or entity shall, except in an emergency, excavate or make a trench in any public way, public property or privately owned land until a permit is obtained from the director of the department of public works which is the permitting authority pursuant to M.G.L. c. 82A. 
(2)  All such persons shall comply with M.G.L. c. 82A and 520 CMR 14.00 and any and all rules promulgated by the city permitting authority and the rest of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 6-136; Ord. of 3-10-1997) 
Sec. 24-54. - Same-Protection of public. 
    Where the flow of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic will be impeded or rerouted by any work coming under the provisions of section 24-53, the holder of the permit shall procure at the holder's expense sufficient police details furnished by the police department, as the regulations of the chief of police of the duly authorized agent thereof may require. When a permit is issued by the DPW for a street opening, the DPW and the petitioner shall notify the chief of police immediately. 
(Code 1994, § 6-137) 
Sec. 24-55. - Emergency phone numbers. 
    Any utility company and/or contractors opening or doing work on streets in the city requiring overnight protection of open or covered areas must leave their name and telephone number on site and visible, so that they may be contacted in the event of an emergency. 
(Code 1994, § 6-138) 
Secs. 24-56-24-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OR IMPROVEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Excavation and trench safety, M.G.L. c. 82A. 

Sec. 24-84. - Construction, laying out, alteration, etc.-Approval of planning board required. 
    No street or way shall be laid out or constructed as a public way, except with the approval of the planning board. 
(Code 1994, § 6-148) 
Sec. 24-85. - Same-Procedure. 
(a)  Every petition for the laying out, widening, altering, discontinuing or defining lines of streets or ways must have endorsed thereon the approval of the planning board, and shall be accompanied by a copy of an approved plan and profile, showing: 
(1)  The present length, width, lines and grade of the street which it is proposed to have laid out, widened, altered, discontinued or defined; 
(2)  The abutting lands, with the fences and buildings thereon, and the length of frontage of each estate; 
(3)  The land to be taken and the names of the owners of such lands; and 
(4)  The proposed lines and grade of such street, in red ink, and giving sufficient reference to stakes or other boundary marks on the premises, to enable city officials to locate such street with accuracy. 
Such plan shall be accompanied by an agreement referring thereto, bearing the signatures of such owners, parties and other parties in interest as may be willing to release all claims and demands against the city for property or other damage that may arise out of the proposed change in accordance with such plan, together with the amount of damage. A list of the names of all owners and other parties in interest who may decline to release or state their prospective damages shall be filed also. 
(b)  The city council, before ordering the laying out, accepting, widening, altering, discontinuing or defining of the lines of any street or way, shall issue an order of notice as to the proposed action for a public hearing thereon before the traffic and parking commission. Such notice shall be published for two successive weeks in some newspaper published in the city, the last publication to be at least seven days before such hearing, and such additional service thereof, as may be prescribed by law. Such notice shall state the time and place appointed for such hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 6-149) 
Secs. 24-86-24-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE FOR BUILDING REPAIRS 

Sec. 24-114. - Permit for use of public way required. 
(a)  Every person intending to erect or repair any building upon land abutting on any public way in the city, and desiring to use any portion of the public way in connection therewith, shall make application to the traffic and parking commission or its designee for a permit so to do. Any permit granted pursuant to this article may be revoked by the traffic and parking commission or its designee at any time when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted or when the public good requires such revocation. 
(b)  Any person excavating land or any person in charge of such excavation and any owner of land which has been excavated shall erect safety barriers around such excavation. After such person has been notified, in writing, by the building inspector, stating that such excavation continues to constitute a hazard to public safety, such person shall immediately take whatever measures are prescribed by the building inspector. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall be found guilty of a violation of this provision, nor shall a person be compelled in equity to comply therewith unless, in the opinion of the court, such excavation constitutes a hazard. 
(Code 1994, § 6-143) 
Sec. 24-115. - Use of unallotted portions of public way; removal of rubbish, etc. 
(a)  No part of a public way, other than that part so allotted, shall be used for depositing materials for work to be done or receiving rubbish arising from such work. Immediately after the expiration of the time fixed, and at such other times as the traffic and parking commission may direct, the person so building or repairing shall remove all rubbish or other substances resulting from such work. 
(b)  In case of neglect or refusal of such person to remove such rubbish, the same shall be removed by the city, the cost of which shall be borne by such person, and shall constitute a municipal charge under M.G.L. c. 40, § 58. 
(Code 1994, § 6-144) 
Sec. 24-116. - Barrier required; lighting. 
    Whenever a permit is granted under the provisions of section 24-114, the portion of a public way thereby allotted shall be enclosed with a sufficient barrier, which shall be maintained during the whole time for which the occupation of such portion of the public way continues. Sufficient lights shall be fixed to some parts of such barrier or in some other proper manner, and lights shall be kept lit from the beginning of twilight through the whole of every night during such occupation. 
(Code 1994, § 6-145) 
Sec. 24-117. - Passageway for pedestrians required. 
    Whoever is duly permitted to occupy a part of a public way while erecting or repairing a building or making an excavation or for any other purpose shall provide a safe and convenient passage for pedestrians around or over the obstructions so caused, which shall meet the approval of the DPW. 
(Code 1994, § 6-146) 
Sec. 24-118. - Responsibility for injuries. 
    Every person who is duly permitted to occupy a part of a public way while erecting or repairing a building shall be responsible to the city for all injuries sustained in consequence of the person's neglect to so do or the person's neglect to maintain the same in proper condition, and shall in all other respects be subject to the provisions of section 1-8. 
(Code 1994, § 6-147) 
Secs. 24-119-24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY POLES AND WIRES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Telephone and telegraph companies, and lines for the transmission of electricity, M.G.L. c. 166. 

Sec. 24-150. - Annual report of overhead and underground wiring systems. 
    Every person owning, leasing or operating any wires within the city, either overhead or underground, shall annually furnish to the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector plans or other suitable information providing an accurate record of all additions or alterations to or removals from their overhead or underground wiring systems. 
(Code 1994, § 4-59) 
Sec. 24-151. - Petitions for location of poles. 
    Any petition to the department of public works for locations of poles, or other apparatus for the transmission of electricity, shall be accompanied by a written report from the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector, including therein such recommendations as either of the inspectors may deem necessary. 
(Code 1994, § 4-51) 
Sec. 24-152. - Removal of poles. 
    Whenever a utility company abandons a pole, it shall remove such pole within 60 days from the installation of a new pole. Whoever willfully neglects or refuses to remove such pole shall be subject to a noncriminal fine of $50.00 per day for each day beyond the 60-day period. 
(Code 1994, § 4-52) 
Sec. 24-153. - Reserved space in all conduits for use of city. 
    In all conduits constructed under the provisions of any general or special law, ordinance or authority, such sufficient and necessary space as shall be determined by the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector shall be reserved free of expense for the use of the city exclusively for municipal purposes. The city, by its electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector, shall be allowed access to such conduits at all times. The city shall be allowed equal facilities and privileges with others using the same conduits in installing, removing and maintaining wires. The extent and location of such space shall be subject to the approval of the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector. 
(Code 1994, § 4-60) 
Sec. 24-154. - Reports to be filed after installations made. 
    Whenever installations shall be made under the provisions of any general or special act or ordinance or authority to erect and maintain poles, or to construct conduits or other fixtures in the public ways, bridges or grounds, to support or carry lines or wires for the transmission of electricity, the person to whom such permission is granted shall file with the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector within 30 days from the date of such installations a detailed report of the installations that have been made. Failure to file such report in detail satisfactory to the electrical inspector and/or the city building inspector shall cause such authorization to be null and void. 
(Code 1994, § 4-61) 
Sec. 24-155. - Relocation of conduits where sewers to be enlarged or other public works to be constructed. 
    In case the city finds it necessary to construct or enlarge sewers or other public works in streets where conduits are laid, which shall require changing the locations of such conduits, such changing, required by the city, shall be at the expense of the company owning the conduits, who shall forthwith carry out the same, but the director of public works, upon a determination of such need, shall give the company notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1994, § 4-62) 
Chapter 26 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Assessment and collection of local taxes, M.G.L. c. 59, c. 60. 

Sec. 26-1. - Affidavit of address for owner of property. 
    The city hereby accepts the provisions of M.G.L. c. 59, § 57D, requiring an affidavit of address, to be signed and sworn to by the owner of record of real estate located in the city, in accordance with the aforementioned statute. 
(Code 1994, § 4-14; Ord. of 6-8-1998) 
Sec. 26-2. - Senior citizens property tax work-off abatement program. 
(a)  The city senior citizens property tax work-off abatement program, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 59, § 5K, is hereby established, pursuant to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  Program description. The program description provides an abatement of up to $1,000.00 for senior citizens willing to volunteer within city departments at an hourly rate equal to the state minimum wage. The director of elder affairs will be responsible for the management of the program, solicitation of applicants and departments willing to participate in the program, and oversight and certification of program participants. 
(2)  Number of participants. The maximum number of participants shall be 25 persons. 
(3)  Selection of participants. The selection of participants shall occur via lottery, if necessary. 
(b)  Assignment of specific volunteer positions shall be determined by interview and assessment of volunteer skills. 
(Code 1994, § 8-58; Ord. of 10-20-2003; Ord. of 2-24-2014 ; Ord. of 3-11-2019(2) ) 
Sec. 26-3. - Veterans property tax work-off program. 
(a)  Authority. The City of Chelsea hereby accepts M.G.L. c. 59, § 5N, in order to authorize establishment of a program to allow veterans, as defined in clause M.G.L. c. 4, § 7(43), or a spouse of a veteran in the case where the veteran is deceased or has a service-connected disability, to volunteer to provide services in exchange for a reduction in the real estate property tax obligations of that veteran on the veteran's tax bills, which reduction shall be in addition to any exemption or abatement to which that person is otherwise entitled. 
(b)  Program goals. The goals of this program are to assist veterans of the city with payment of residential property tax bills and to increase the involvement of veterans in municipal government. 
(c)  Eligibility requirements. An applicant must meet or exceed all the following requirements in order to be eligible to participate in the program: 
(1)  Must be a veteran, as defined in clause M.G.L. c. 4, § 7(43), or be the spouse of a veteran where the veteran is either deceased or has a service-connected disability. 
(2)  Must own and occupy the residential property for which real estate taxes are paid to the city by the applicant. 
(d)  Selection process. 
(1)  An applicant must meet eligibility requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The personnel department shall administer the program and, working in conjunction with the veterans affairs department, it shall have full discretion to assign applicants to appropriate work situations. 
(3)  The veteran's real property tax work-off program shall include no more than 25 individuals on an annual basis. In the event there are more applications than positions available, the selection shall occur by means of a public lottery. 
(e)  Reduction of real property tax bill guidelines. 
(1)  The hourly rate for services shall be set at the state's minimum wage. 
(2)  The maximum reimbursement credited to any individual during a program year shall be based upon 125 volunteer hours at the state's minimum wage, or the maximum allowed by M.G.L. ch. 59, § 5N, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Upon completion of the hours of work service, or a fraction thereof, participants will be entitled to receive a reduction of their next real property tax bill. The personnel department shall maintain a record for each taxpayer including, but not limited to, the number of hours of service and the total amount by which the real property tax has been reduced and to provide a copy of that record to the assessor in order that the actual tax bill reflect the reduction of the real property taxes. 
(4)  Applicants shall be made aware that the city will issue a "W-2" form for federal income tax purposes only. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2017; Ord. of 3-11-2019(2) ) 
Sec. 26-4. - Retail sales tax on marijuana and marijuana products. 
    The City of Chelsea accepts the provisions of M.G.L. c. 64N, § 3 and imposes a local sales tax upon the sale or transfer of marijuana or marijuana products by marijuana retailers operating within the City of Chelsea to anyone other than a marijuana establishment at a rate of three percent of the total sales price received by the marijuana retailer in consideration for the sale of marijuana or marijuana products. As used here[in], "marijuana products" are intended to include products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils, and tinctures. 
( Ord. of 3-26-2018(2) ) 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate vehicles, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22; rules of the road, M.G.L. c. 89; motor vehicles generally, M.G.L. c. 90; public ways and works regulations and bylaws, M.G.L. c. 85. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  The traffic and parking commission may prescribe penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter and for violations of the rules and regulations of the traffic and parking commission, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. 
(b)  Police officers of the city shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any rules, regulations or orders of the traffic and parking commission. 
(Code 1994, § 5-11) 
Sec. 28-2. - Existing traffic regulations. 
    All existing traffic regulations relating to the flow and control of vehicles shall remain in full force and effect until superseded by regulations adopted by the traffic and parking commission. At least three copies of the current traffic regulations shall be maintained on file at the city clerk's office, and shall be open for public inspection during the business hours of city hall. The traffic and parking commission shall be responsible for placing said regulations on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 5-2) 
Sec. 28-3. - Inoperable, abandoned or unregistered vehicles on public or private ways. 
(a)  Inoperable or abandoned vehicles of every description, left standing on any public street, way, place or private way, open to the public for at least 72 consecutive hours shall be towed at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Unregistered vehicles of any and every description, left on a public way for any duration of time, including, but not limited to, a vehicle halted for a traffic stop, shall be towed at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  The last registered owner or other person having custody or control of such vehicle, whether or not towed, shall, notwithstanding subsection (a) or (b) of this section, be subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations concerning stopping, standing, parking and operation of vehicles and be subject to the penalties for violation thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 5-4; Ord. of 12-18-2000) 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, M.G.L. c. 90, §§ 22B, 22C. 
Secs. 28-4-28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-25. - Traffic and parking commission. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the city a traffic and parking commission, to consist of the chief of police, who shall serve as chairperson, the fire chief, director of public works, director of community development, or their designees, and one resident member appointed in accordance with section 6-3 of the city Charter. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall receive no compensation for their services as commissioners, but all expenses incurred for their purposes shall be paid by the city from an appropriation provided for that purpose. All statutes, administrative orders and policies applicable to departments shall apply to the commission. 
(c)  The commission may prescribe penalties for the violation of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder. 
(d)  All rules and regulations promulgated by authorized vote of the traffic and parking commission shall become effective upon publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(e)  Public notice, as required in subsection (d) of this section, shall not be required for temporary rules and regulations. The commission shall have authority to declare temporary rules and regulations, where urgently required by consideration of public safety or convenience. No such rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this subsection may be effective for more than 30 days from the date of enactment. 
(f)  Petitioners before the traffic and parking commission may be represented by any interested party or legal representative. 
(Code 1994, § 5-1) 
Sec. 28-26. - Public safety details on roadway projects. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to establish the city's operation and control regarding the public safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic during private and public roadway projects in the city. 
(b)  The chief of police and/or designee shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations in regards to details assigned to public and private roadway projects. This authority shall include the determination as to whether a police officer is required for a public or private roadway project. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2008, § 7-13) 
Secs. 28-27-28-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE TOWING AND REMOVAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Removal of vehicles parked in violation of law, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D. 

Sec. 28-56. - Violating vehicles to be towed; exemption. 
    Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, except those specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place in accordance with the procedures of the traffic and parking commission and the regulations of the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 5-5) 
Sec. 28-57. - Authorization of police to tow. 
    The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter shall be by and at the direction of the chief of police or such other officer of the rank of sergeant or higher, as the police chief may from time to time designate. 
(Code 1994, § 5-6) 
Sec. 28-58. - Towing on private property. 
    In accordance with this division, the police department is authorized to tow, subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 22C. 
(Code 1994, § 5-7) 
Sec. 28-59. - Record of towed vehicles. 
    The police department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed under the provisions of this division. Such record shall be retained for one year and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The registration of the vehicle; 
(2)  The location from which it was towed, date and time; 
(3)  The location to which it was towed; 
(4)  The fee charged for towing and storage; 
(5)  Name of towing contractor, if any; 
(6)  Name and rank of officer who authorized towing. 
(Code 1994, § 5-10) 
Sec. 28-60. - Release. 
(a)  No motor vehicle impounded pursuant to an arrest for violation of M.G.L. c. 90, § 24, operating under the influence (OUI), may be released prior to the passing of 12 hours following the arrest. 
(b)  No motor vehicle impounded pursuant to an arrest for or an arrest related to manufacturing, compounding, processing, delivering, dispensing, disturbing, importing or exporting of any controlled substances in violation of any provision of M.G.L. c. 94C, § 32, 32A, 32B, 32C, 32D, 32E, 32F, 32G, 32I, 32J, or 40 or otherwise involving possession of a controlled substance, purchase of a controlled substance and/or distribution of a controlled substance, may be released until: 
(1)  48 hours have passed from the time of the related arrest; and 
(2)  Seizure proceedings, if commenced, have been closed. 
(c)  No vehicle impounded under the circumstances enumerated in this section shall be released until a service charge of $300.00 has been paid to the city and evidence of payment is presented. All service charges collected for impoundments under the circumstances enumerated in subsection (b) of this section shall be dedicated and directed to drug treatment programs in the city and law enforcement programs targeting drug trafficking in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 7-11; Ord. of 6-16-2003) 
Secs. 28-61-28-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC RULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-79. - Vehicles not permitted to cross sidewalks except at driveways. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1994, § 6-130; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 28-80. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  No person shall move a building in a public way without a permit. Such permit may be issued by the traffic and parking commission and upon such terms as in its opinion public safety may require, and such person shall execute a bond to the city in such a sum as the traffic and parking commission deems appropriate. 
(b)  At the commission's discretion, any permit granted pursuant to this section may be suspended by the director of public works or the chief of police, if necessary for the continued safety of the public. 
(c)  An individual aggrieved by the decision of the director of public works or the chief of police may appeal to the licensing commission. 
(d)  At its discretion, any permit granted pursuant to this section may be suspended, modified or revoked by the licensing commission, if necessary for the continued safety of the public. 
(Code 1994, § 5-3) 
State Law reference- Permission to move buildings, M.G.L. c. 85, § 18; cutting of wires in order to move buildings, M.G.L. c. 166, § 39. 
Sec. 28-81. - Materials deposited from tires and cleats. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause any trucks, contractor's equipment of any kind or any vehicle to operate from any premises adjoining any street, highway or alley within the city so as to enter upon such street, highway or alley from such premises with the wheels, tires, lugs, cleats or other portions of the equipment containing earth, mud or other materials without providing proper means of cleaning up such street, highway or alley and removing all earth, mud, dirt and other materials so deposited thereon. 
(b)  Any failure to so remove such materials after each day's operations shall be considered a violation of the terms of this section, and each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-150; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 28-82. - Driving over a fire hose. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle upon or over any hose, placed in any street by order of any officer of the fire department, without the consent of an officer of the department. 
(Code 1994, § 7-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7A. 
Sec. 28-83. - Right-of-way of fire department. 
    In case of fire, the fire department shall have the right-of-way in the public streets of the city at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 7-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7A. 
Secs. 28-84-28-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 28-108. - Emergency parking restrictions. 
(a)  Whenever impending weather conditions relating to ice or snow threaten to constitute a traffic hazard impairing transportation, the movement of food and fuel supplies, medical care, and fire, health and police protection and other vital facilities of the city, the chief of police shall declare an emergency period. 
(b)  Whenever such an emergency period exists and the chief of police shall have caused announcement thereof through the state highway department by the use of available news media, any or all of the parking prohibitions shall become effective at either the time designated or upon posted snow emergency arteries becoming in effect at either the time designated or upon the accumulations of two inches of snow, in the absence of a declaration. 
(Code 1994, § 7-7) 
Sec. 28-109. - Repairing vehicles on public ways, sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall repair a motor vehicle, except in an emergency, on a public way or a sidewalk. The police department shall have the authority to tow and impound the vehicle of any violator of this section until their fine has been paid. Upon conviction, the court shall notify the registry of motor vehicles of said violations, giving the name of the person, address and date of birth. 
(b)  Any person or entity that violates this section shall be subject to a fine in the amount of: 
(1)  $50.00 for the first violation, plus towing charges; and 
(2)  $l00.00 for each subsequent violation, plus towing charges. 
Fines shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before the district court, or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with section 1-8. Each separate instance of noncompliance, following the issuance of any warning or citation pursuant to this section, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1994, § 6-128; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21. 
Sec. 28-110. - Washing vehicles in streets prohibited. 
    No person shall wash any vehicle in any public way in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-129; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Chapter 30 - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Abandonment means the condition in which water service to a building or structure has been discontinued at the owner's request for a period of at least one year, and the owner has made no commitment as to possible future use. 
    Applicant means any person or entity applying for water and/or sewer service or for water and/or a sewer main extension, replacement, alteration, removal or relocation. 
    Approved means accepted by the director of the department of public works or designee as meeting any applicable specifications stated or cited in these rules, regulations and ordinances, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    AMRB means automatic meter reading and billing. 
    ASSHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    ASTM means the American Society of Testing and Materials. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public potable water supply. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. 
    Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source, other than its intended source, caused by a sudden reduction or pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Blowdown means the minimum discharge of recirculated water from a heating or cooling system for the purpose of preventing the concentration of materials contained in the water from exceeding limits established by best engineering practices. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Building drain means the lowest horizontal piping of a plumbing or drainage system which extends from inside or outside the walls of a building to a point ending ten feet (3.048 meters) outside the inner face of the building's foundation wall. The building drain conveying wastewater from plumbing fixtures within the building shall discharge to a building sewer, while the building drain conveying stormwater and other drainage shall discharge to a building storm drain. 
    Building sewer, house connection, sewer connection, sewer service or sewer lateral means the pipe which connects to a building drain conveying wastewater from plumbing fixtures within a building to a city sewer, a private sewer, an MWRA sewer (where allowed by MWRA) or other place of disposal. The building sewer begins ten feet outside the inner face of the building foundation wall and extends to and includes the connection to the city sewer, MWRA sewer or private sewer. 
    Building storm drain, house or drain connection, drain service or drain lateral means the pipe which connects a building drain conveying stormwater to a storm drain, combined sewer or other place of disposal. The building storm drain begins ten feet outside the inner face of the building foundation wall and extends to and includes the connection to the public storm drain, combined sewer or private combined sewer or drain. 
    Clay means very finely textured soil which: 
(1)  When moist, forms a cast which can be handled freely without crumbling/breaking, that exhibits plasticity; and 
(2)  When dried, breaks into very hard lumps (i.e., high dry strength) and is difficult to pulverize into a soft, flour-like powder. 
    Cold patch means bituminous concrete made with slow-curing asphalt and used primarily as a temporary patching material when hot-mix plants are closed. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer designed to receive both sanitary sewage and stormwater. 
    Compaction means the compressing of suitable material and gravel that has been used to backfill an excavation by means of mechanical tamping to within 95 percent of maximum dry density, as determined by the modified Proctor test in accordance with ASSHTO-T180. 
    Consumption means the amount of water use, as measured by a meter or as estimated by the city in accordance with its billing, termination and appeal sections of this chapter. 
    Contamination means an impairment in the quality of the water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or though the spread of disease. 
    Control density fill (CDF) or flowable fill means a mixture of Portland cement, fly ash, sand and water meeting Massachusetts Highway Department Specification M4.08 type 2E (flowable excavatable). High air entrained (25 percent plus) may be used instead of fly ash with an adjustment in sand content. CDF must be hand-tool excavatable. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any system of condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other system of heat transfer. 
    Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or backsiphonage may occur into the potable water system. 
    Cross connection control by containment means the installation of any approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises, or the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where these are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross connection. 
    Cross connection, controlled, means any connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device, properly installed, that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Customer means any person, tenant, firm, entity, corporation, body politic or organization of any type supplied with water and sewer use by the city. 
    DEP means the state department of environmental protection and all of its divisions. 
    Department (DPW) means the city's department of public works. 
    Design criteria means standards for design used by the DPW for construction, rehabilitation, and replacement of public water, sewer and drain infrastructure, including service connections. 
    Dewatering drainage means groundwater or surface water which is removed from a site and discharged beyond the limits of the site by means of gravity or pumping. 
    Director means the director of public works for the city. 
    Discharge means flow from a canal, conduit, sewer, drain, outfall, pump, stack, tank or treatment process, or any emission, intentional or unintentional, including, but not limited to, flow resulting from spilling, leaking, seeping, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, depositing, dumping, releasing, injecting, escaping, leaching or infiltrating, whether direct or indirect. 
    Discontinuance means the cessation of water service at the premises at the request of an owner or customer, except that a request for a temporary cessation for repair does not ordinarily give rise to discontinuance. 
    Downspout means a pipe which conveys water from the roof of a building into a storm drain or combined sewer or into or onto the ground. The term "downspout" is also called a roof drain or roof leader. 
    Drainage system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and discharging stormwater. 
    Dry well means a pit or underground cavity having porous walls installed to drain surface water and storm drainage into underground strata. 
    Easement means an interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited use or enjoyment. 
    Emergency repair work means street opening work which must be commenced immediately to correct a hazardous condition, whose continuation would unreasonably risk injury, loss of life or property damage. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for controlling the erosion of soil and preventing the introduction of sediment to a sewer or storm drain during and after construction. 
    Excessive means more than the limits established in this chapter, directly or by reference, or more than the limits determined by the city or the MWRA to be acceptable. 
    Exfiltration means to pass water through pores or openings out of a closed container or structure, such as in the case of waters exfiltrating from pipes. 
    Fire flow test means the measurement of flow from a hydrant performed by the department or its authorized agent in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices. 
    Fire service pipe means the private water piping, control valve and appurtenances installed solely to furnish water for extinguishing fires. 
    Floor drain means an intended drainage point in an otherwise impervious floor which serves as the point of entry into any subsurface drainage, treatment, disposal, containment or other plumbing system. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce or otherwise defined in section 22-1. 
    Grab sample means a sample of wastewater or stormwater taken on a one-time basis without consideration of time. 
    Gravel means coarse grained soil ranging from approximately 0.1 inch to 3.0 inches. Gravel has no plasticity characteristics. 
    Hazard, degree of, means a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health (high hazard), means any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create or, in the judgment of the director of public works, creates a danger to the health and well-being of the water customer. 
    Hazard, plumbing (high hazard), means a plumbing-type cross connection between the customer's potable water system and a nonpotable water system which contains or may contain a substance that will impair the quality of the potable water system to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning or the spread of disease and is not protected by an air-gap separation or a reduced-pressure principle backflow preventer. 
    Hazard, pollution (low hazard), means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potable nature of the public or the consumer's potable water system, but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hydrant means a device connected to a public water main for purpose of extinguishing fires or other authorized purposes. 
    Hydrant permit means a written permit granted by DPW for the temporary use of a hydrant. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a public storm drain, building drain or building storm drain that is not composed entirely of stormwater, including, but not limited to, illegal sanitary sewer or floor drain connections, illegal dumping, improper disposal of waste, sanitary wastes infiltrating from failing sewer service pipes or septic systems. 
    Impervious means a surface or material through which water cannot penetrate, such as asphalt or concrete. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as a distinct form of sanitary sewage. 
    Infiltration means to pass water through pores or openings into a pipe or surface such as in the case of groundwater infiltrating into pipes through defective pipes, joints or connections, or rainwater and snowmelt infiltrating into ground. 
    Inflow means precipitation or surface runoff that enters a sanitary sewer through direct and indirect sources such as downspouts, catchbasins, area drains, sump pumps, subsurface drains, interconnections between sanitary sewers and storm drains, etc. 
    Infrared process means a recycling procedure whereby an infrared heater plasticizes the surfaces of an asphalt pavement, preparatory to the introduction of additional compatible paving materials uniformly reworked and compacted to achieve a density and profile consistent and thoroughly integrated with the adjacent pavement. 
    Interconnection means a physical connection between a sanitary sewer and a storm drain which allows the two separated flows to intermix. 
    Lien means the statutory lien of the city as defined in M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F. 
    Main pipe means the water main, so-called, from which service connections are made to supply water to customers. 
    Massachusetts Highway Standards means the commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, 1998 edition. 
    Master meter means a meter used for billing purposes serving a building or group of buildings or any other meter used on a water service connection that has more than one meter on water lines attached to the water service connection. 
    Meter means an instrument for measuring the flow of water. 
    Meter pit means an underground vault enclosing a meter. 
    MHD means the Massachusetts Highway Department. 
    MWRA means the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority. 
    National categorical pretreatment standards means the requirements under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a publicly owned treatment works by new or existing sewer users in specific industrial categories which are established as separate regulations under the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) exclusion means a written determination from the EPA that a discharge does not require an NPDES permit. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) multisector general permit (MSGP) means the permit issued by the EPA that authorizes a class of discharges such as stormwater associated with industrial activity, noncontact cooling water, construction dewatering and water treatment backwash. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means the permit required and issued jointly by the EPA and DEP to control point source discharges of pollutants to waters of the United States from sewers, combined sewers and storm drains, and nonpoint source discharges of pollutants from construction activities disturbing one acre or more, including smaller sites in a larger common plan of development or sale. 
    National pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means the general prohibitions and specific prohibitions of 40 CFR 403.5(a) and (b) of the national categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body, or surface water or groundwater. 
    Newly paved road means a road where repaving is less than five years old. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Noncontact industrial process water means water used in an industrial or manufacturing process, or in the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any waters discharged to the sewers or storm drains that are not composed primarily of rainfall or other precipitation that runs off surfaces during or after a storm. 
    Oil trap or oil separator means a receptacle designed to separate petroleum-based oil and grease from water. 
    Organic soil means soil high in organic content: 
(1)  Which is usually dark brown (brown or black) in color; 
(2)  In which plant remains or a woody structure may be recognized and the soil usually has a distinct odor; and 
(3)  Which may exhibit little or trace plasticity. 
When considerable fibrous material is the principal constituent, it is generally classified as peat. 
    Outfall or outlet means the point of discharge from a storm drain or combined sewer to a water body, wetland or land surface. 
    Owner means a person who, alone or jointly or several with others, has the legal title to any premises or has care, charge or control of any premises as agent, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title. 
    Particle separator means a receptacle designed and installed to separate sand, grit and oil from water. 
    Permanent patch means a final repair of a street opening work to be performed in accordance with this chapter and intended to permanently return the opened portion of the roadway to as good a condition as it was prior to the performance of the street opening work. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Plasticity means that property of soil that allows it to be deformed or molded without crumbling (e.g., like dough or soft rubber). The property of plasticity reflects the capacity of soil to absorb moisture. 
    Plumber means a person licensed as a plumber by the state. 
    Point-of-entry device means a purported water treatment device applied to the drinking water entering any building for the purpose of reducing contaminants in the drinking water entering that building. 
    Pollutant means any element, constituent or property of sewage, stormwater, or of agricultural, industrial, manufacturing or commercial process waste or leachate, or any other substance which causes the alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water through its introduction therein. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
    Poorly graded soil means soil that contains a large percentage of its constituent particles within a relatively narrow range. The term "poorly graded soil" is also referred to as nonuniformed soil. 
    Potable water means water fit for human consumption in conformance with the regulations of the state department of environmental protection. 
    Private drain means a drain owned by a private owner and not controlled by public authority. The term "private drain" includes, but is not limited to, building drains conveying stormwater and other drainage; building storm drains; drains; catchbasins and manholes located on private property and not located within an easement held by the director; and storm drains owned by other public agencies. 
    Private fire protection means private water mains, fire pipes and other appurtenances installed for the purpose of fire protection at particular premises. 
    Private sewer means a sewer owned by a private owner and not controlled by public authority. The term "private sewer" includes, but is not limited to, building drains conveying wastewater from plumbing fixtures within the building; building sewers; sewers; and manholes located on private property and not located within an easement held by the city; and sewers owned by other public agencies. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public drain means a drain in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Public fire protection means the public water mains, hydrants, and appurtenances installed for the purpose of fire protection in a public way, city-owned easement or private way open to public travel. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Public water main means the piping and associated valve, hydrants and appurtenances installed in a public way, city-owned easement, or private way open to public travel, for the purpose of supplying water to one or more customers or for public fire protection. 
    Receiving waters means any watercourse, river, pond, wetland, ditch, lake, aquifer, ocean or other body of surface water or groundwater that receives a discharge of wastewater, stormwater or effluent. 
    Recreational spray or sprinkler pool means an indoor or outdoor spray or sprinkler pool which is designed and constructed for the purpose of human contact recreation. 
    Residential meter means a meter one inch in size or smaller used to measure the flow of water to predominantly residential property. 
    Roof drain or roof leader. See Downspout. 
    RPBP means a reduced-pressure zone backflow prevention device. 
    Sand means coarse grained soil: 
(1)  In which individual grains can be visually detected; 
(2)  When moist, it forms a cast which will crumble when lightly touched; 
(3)  When dry, it will not form a cast and will fall apart when confirming pressure is released; and 
(4)  Exhibiting no plasticity. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Service pipe or service connection means the pipe running from the public sewer, storm drain, or water main to the building or meter on the premises of the customer. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, stormwater or surface water. 
    Shut off means the closing of a control valve to temporarily stop water service or to terminate water service. 
    Silt means a finely textured soil: 
(1)  When moist, it forms a cast which can be freely handled; 
(2)  When wet, it readily puddles; 
(3)  When dry, it may be cloddy and readily pulverizes into powder with a soft flour-like feel (i.e., low dry strength); and 
(4)  Exhibiting little or no plasticity. 
    Site plan review means minor and major review in accordance with the definitions thereof provided in section 34-241. Drainage plans for residential structures that have less than a four-unit site plan shall be approved by the DPW. 
    Slug or slug discharge means any discharge of water, sewer or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer. 
(1)  The term "storm drain" or "storm sewer" means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage. 
(2)  The term "storm drain" or "storm sewer" does not include sewer and industrial wastes, other than as specifically allowed in this chapter. 
    Storm drainage system means pipes, conduits, pumping stations and appurtenances, including tidegates, catchbasins and manholes used in the collection and transport of stormwater. 
    Stormwater means water resulting from precipitation events, snowmelt or over-irrigation that does not soak into the ground and becomes runoff from land and impervious surfaces such as paved streets, parking lots and building rooftops flowing into surface waterways or channeled into storm sewers. 
    Stormwater management means regulatory, structural, administrative, managerial, maintenance, physical and chemical measures or devices that are designed to prevent the discharge of pollutants to stormwater. Nonstructural measures and low-cost structural devices are often referred to as best management practices or BMPs. 
    Street opening work means any cutting, excavating, compacting, construction, repair or other disturbance in or under a public way together with restoration of the public way in accordance with this chapter, municipal ordinances and any other applicable law following such disturbance. 
    Surface water means all water appearing on the earth's surface exposed to the atmosphere, such as rivers, lakes, streams and oceans. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Temporary patch means the application of either cold-patch or type 1 bituminous concrete compacted to achieve a density equal to that of the surrounding pavement. 
    Treatment system or pretreatment system means any and all devices, equipment or works used in the pumping, storing, treating, recycling and reclaiming of sewage, industrial waste or stormwater. 
    User means any person who obtains water, sewer or drain service through connection to public facilities. 
    Utility means any corporation, city, town or other governmental subdivision, partnership or other organization or any individual engaged within the state in any business which is, or the persons engaged in which are, in any respect made subject to the supervision or regulation by the department of telecommunications and energy. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "utility" also means any person or entity engaged by or on behalf of a utility to perform street opening work. 
    Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system (i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system). 
    Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waterworks means all facilities for supplying, treating, pumping and distribution of potable water. 
    WEF means the Water Environment Federation. 
    Well-graded soil means soil having its constituent particles within a wide range, also referred to as nonuniform soil. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. In accordance with section 1-8, general schedule of noncriminal fines, all violations shall be punishable by: 
(1)  A fine of $50.00 for a first offense; 
(2)  A fine of $150.00 for a second offense; 
(3)  A fine of $300.00 for a third offense; 
(4)  Imprisonment for not more than one year; or 
(5)  Both a fine and imprisonment; 
pursuant to chapter 40, section 39G of the General Laws (M.G.L. c. 40, § 39G). The applicable penalty for each such violation shall be immediately due and payable. Violations which, in the opinion of the director or any other governmental regulatory agency, endanger the health and life safety of any individual or group of individuals shall cease or be corrected immediately and the person or entity responsible for such violation shall be immediately liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation and shall forfeit to the city three times the amount of damages. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation and penalties shall be incurred on a daily basis for continuing violations of the provisions of this chapter. A separate penalty will be incurred for each violation when more than one violation occurs. 
(c)  If the city elects to file an enforcement action in a court of competent jurisdiction, the damages then recoverable by the city shall not be limited to amounts recoverable under this chapter. 
(d)  Any penalty imposed remaining unpaid will be added and applied to the water and sewer bill for the affected property should the penalty remain unpaid at the time of posting of the next water and sewer billing cycle. In addition to all other penalties, fines and liabilities imposed by this chapter, violators shall also to be subject to all fines, penalties and liabilities imposed by the MWRA and all other state and federal agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1994, § 6-22; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 20. 
Sec. 30-3. - Regulations; fees; conditions. 
(a)  The director is authorized and directed to promulgate such regulations or conditions as may be required to effect compliance with federal or state requirements, or to otherwise provide management oversight and supervision of the water and sewage works and the drainage system of the city. 
(b)  Service fees for the adequate funding of the water and sewage works and the drainage system of the city shall be chargeable and collectible by the city for any and all of the activities as shall be set by the director, subject to the approval of the city manager, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerks' office by the director of public works. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(c)  The city may require advance payment of any and all fees. Any fee not paid in advance when due to an emergency situation will be added and applied to the water and sewer bill for the affected property, should the fee remain unpaid at the time of the posting of the next water and sewer billing cycle. 
(Code 1994, § 6-19; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-4. - Authority of city personnel. 
    The city manager and DPW director and/or their designees shall have the following authority and all others outlined by ordinance: 
(1)  The DPW director or designee shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of water supply piping and appurtenances, sanitary sewer piping and appurtenances, storm drain piping and appurtenances, and combined sewer piping and appurtenances, and installing water meters and addressable read devices, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The director or designee shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers, storm sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(2)  While performing any necessary work on private properties as set out in this chapter, the director or designee shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by this chapter. 
(3)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage and/or waterworks lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms and duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(4)  The contractor installing sewer, storm drain, or water pipes and appurtenances shall give reasonable notice, as determined by the director, for the need for inspection of installed sewer, storm drain and water pipes and appurtenances prior to covering up any work. 
(5)  The director shall set and collect reasonable charges for providing inspection of sewer, storm drain and waterworks covered under these regulations and applicable state and federal laws, including but not limited to cross connection control surveys. The director may require that an applicant for sewer, storm drain and/or water service pay the cost of providing full-time inspection of the sewer, storm drain and waterworks installed as a result of approval of such application by the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-2; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-5. - Notice and hearing rights. 
    In the implementation and enforcement of this chapter, the following provisions shall be observed: 
(1)  Whenever the DPW and/or the state water resources authority (MWRA) denies or modifies a permit, issues an order, or assesses charges for damage or other violations occasioned by the noncompliance with any permit or other lawful requirement, the DPW and/or the MWRA shall inform the user to whom such action is addressed of the user's right to submit, within ten working days, a written request for reconsideration of that action. The request shall set forth in detail the facts supporting it. The DPW and/or the MWRA shall schedule an informal interview with the user submitting the request, to be held within 15 working days of receiving it, and shall rule in writing on the request within ten working days of the completion of the interview. 
(2)  When the DPW and/or the MWRA proposes to revoke a permit, the DPW and/or the MWRA shall notify the user in writing of such proposed ruling and of the right to submit, within ten days, a written request for reconsideration of that ruling. The request shall set forth in detail the facts supporting it. The DPW and/or the MWRA shall schedule an informal conference with the user submitting the request, to be held within 15 working days of the receiving it, and shall rule in writing on the request within ten working days of the completion of the conference. 
(3)  Every ruling under subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall inform the person to whom it is addressed of that person's right to request, within 30 calendar days, a hearing under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 30A. Within 15 calendar days of receiving such a request, the DPW and/or the MWRA shall schedule such a hearing, to be held not sooner than 15 calendar days and not later than 30 calendar days after giving notice of the hearing to the requesting party. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to interfere with any and all rights of the MWRA under state law to take direct enforcement action through application of its regulations or the courts. 
(Code 1994, § 6-23; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-6. - Cease and desist order; compliance schedule. 
    When the DPW, DEP and/or the MWRA finds that a discharge of sewage or stormwater, or a taking of water, has taken place or threatens to take place in violation of this chapter or the provisions of a permit, the following actions may be taken: 
(1)  The DPW, DEP and/or the MWRA may issue an order to cease and desist any such discharge of sewerage and/or drainage, taking of water or violation to any user not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions, and direct the users as follows: 
a.  To comply forthwith; 
b.  To comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the DPW and/or the MWRA; or 
c.  To take appropriate remedial preventive action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(2)  The DPW, DEP and/or the MWRA may require the user to submit a detailed time schedule setting forth specific actions to be taken to modifications as the DPW and/or the MWRA deem necessary for the user to follow in order to prevent or correct a violation. The DPW and/or the MWRA may issue an implementation schedule to the user containing such specific actions and time schedule. 
(Code 1994, § 6-24; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-7. - Exhibition of permit. 
    Every person granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the permit for such occupation at all times when requested by the DPW or any agent thereof, an inspector of the department of municipal services or by a police officer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-152; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-8. - Plans and records of systems. 
    Plans and descriptions of all public and private sanitary sewers, storm drains, and water mains, and services connections thereto, shall be kept in the DPW office. 
(Code 1994, § 6-3; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-9. - Protection from damage. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break or damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage or waterworks or the drainage system. No person shall obstruct or in any way interfere with the flow of water, sewage or drainage through same. No person shall in any manner place obstructions which prevent the ready operation, replacement or repair of any valve, hydrant, water post, stopcock, water meter or other fixture or appurtenance of the water and sewage works or drainage system. No person shall prevent access to any water, sewer or drain appurtenance covered by this chapter The applicable provisions of M.G.L. c. 272, §§ 59 and 60 and M.G.L. c. 40, § 39G apply to this subsection. 
(b)  All gates, valves, shutoffs and standpipes which are the property of the DPW are not to be opened or closed, or in any other way tampered with, by any person other than an authorized agent of the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-12; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Damaging sewer works, M.G.L. c. 40, § 39G. 
Secs. 30-10-30-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT TRANSFER AND DISCONTINUANCE; GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 

Sec. 30-37. - Servicing of and application for system service. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, repair, relocate, use, alter or disturb any water main, water service connection, water meter, hydrant, sanitary sewer main, storm sewer main, combined sewer main, building sewer or building storm drain, building drain, sewer manhole, drain manhole, combined sewer overflow, drainage work, catchbasin or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the director. The director shall specify in each permit the nature of the work to be performed, including the size, material, mode of construction, location, direction and grade of all pipes and appurtenances. Before opening, occupying and using portions of the streets for the purpose of performing work on sewer, water, or storm drain facilities contained therein, a street opening permit in accordance with section 24-53 shall be obtained. Submission of a false permit application shall be subject to applicable enforcement and penalties. 
(b)  Application for water, sewer or storm drain service must be made in writing to the director at the office of the DPW on forms provided by the DPW, stating truly and fully the various uses for which the water is to be supplied or discharge constituents and flows, signed by the owner of the premises to be supplied or the owner's properly authorized agent. An acceptance by the DPW of the application shall constitute a contract between the DPW and the applicant obligating the applicant to pay the DPW its established rates and charges, and to comply with the rules and regulations of the DPW. The DPW may hold the request for a period of 45 days in order to ascertain if more information regarding the application is deemed advisable by the director. Upon completion of the work, the permit shall be returned to the director stating and showing the location by dimensions to fixed structures the work performed. 
(c)  The DPW reserves the right to assign size and location of the water, sewer and storm drain services. 
(d)  Before commencing work on any public water main, public sewer, public storm sewer, public or private water service, public or private sewer service, or public or private storm sewer service replacement or relocation, a contractor working for the city or for an owner on city-owned property or easements shall: 
(1)  File a bond with the DPW in an amount acceptable to the director and on a bond form approved by the city; and 
(2)  Be approved by the director. 
The minimum amount of the bond shall be in the dollar amount of whichever is the greater of $10,000.00 or the dollar value as figured by the director, of completely performing the work including the cost of all regulatory requirements. Such a bond is required for each and every separate instance of work. 
(e)  Applications will be accepted subject to there being an existing main in a street, alley or right-of-way abutting on the premises to be served, but acceptance shall in no way obligate the DPW to extend its mains to service the premises, except as hereinafter provided. 
(f)  The director may deny the request of an applicant to extend, replace or relocate a public water main or service, public sewer main or service, or private sewer, if in the director's opinion adequate water pressure cannot be achieved or the proposed work does not conform to the DPW's design criteria. The director may condition approval of a request to extend, replace or relocate a main or service. Among other things, the director may require that an applicant install a larger pipe size than that required to serve the applicant, who proposes to extend, replace or relocate a: 
(1)  Public water main or service; 
(2)  Public sewer, combined sewer or storm drain; 
(3)  Private building sewer or building storm drain; or 
(4)  Building drain. 
(g)  If an applicant requests a new water service or to increase the quantity of water drawn through an existing service, requests an increase in the quantity or type of sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer collection system, or requests an increase in the quantity or type of stormwater into the storm drainage system, the director may determine that such requests impose a demand in excess of the capacity of the supply water main or receiving sewer or drain, and therefore that is necessary to replace the existing main with one of appropriate size. The full cost thereof, including any test, studies, investigations and inspections required for design and construction, shall be paid by the applicant. When the city must perform professional engineering and legal reviews for major development projects, the applicant shall pay for such reviews in amounts determined by the director. 
(h)  All excavations for water mains and services, and combined sanitary and storm sewer mains and services installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city in accordance with the requirements of section 24-53. Prior to obtaining a permit to install or repair water mains and services, and combined sanitary and storm sewer mains and services, the owner or the owner's authorized agent must notify, by certified mail at least 24 hours in advance of performing the work all public and private utility departments and companies of the applicant's intentions. Written proof of such notification must be made a part of the application submitted to the DPW. Dig Safe must be notified in accordance with state law. The MWRA is not a member of Dig Safe and must be notified separately. Normally scheduled nonemergency work is to be performed only during the weekdays of Monday through Friday, holidays excluded, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. After hours, weekend, holiday and emergency work can be scheduled with the director's permission. No laying, or repairing sewer, drain and/or water mains and services or appurtenances shall be commenced, unless the permit to do so is issued by the director and is at the site of the work, in the hands of the licensed installer or employee thereof. All work shall be completed within the time limitations stated in the permit, which shall be established by the director at the time the permit is issued. If not so completed, a new permit shall be obtained by the owner to validate continuance of the work. Whenever any ground penetration or opening is made for the purpose of installing, laying, removing, repairing any water, sewer, drain, gas, telephone or electrical facilities and appurtenances including, but not limited to, pipes, manholes, poles, valves, devices or structures, the same shall be done in a manner so as not to interfere with existing sewer, water and drain facilities without the express written permission of the director. 
(i)  Use of water and public sewers and drains is confined to the premises named in the contract. No customer shall supply another not entitled to the use of water, sewer or drainage nor shall the customer use it for any purpose, not identified in the customer's application. No person shall obtain water service from any hydrant, fountain or other fixture of the DPW without previous written consent of the director. 
(j)  All persons wishing to perform alterations, installations, maintenance, repair and replacement of connections to the public water main or public sanitary, combined sanitary and storm sewer must be licensed by the director. Application for such license must be on a form prescribed by the director and submitted to the director for approval at least 45 days prior to any work by the applicant taking place. 
(k)  The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of sanitary sewer service laterals leading from the building to and including the connection with the city public sewer. 
(l)  The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of storm sewer service laterals leading from the source to and including the connection with the city combined sanitary or storm sewer. 
(m)  The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of water services one inch and smaller leading from the connection to the curbstop into the property. 
(n)  The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of water services greater than one inch from the public water main including the connection and corporation stop into the property. 
(Code 1994, § 6-8; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-38. - Transfer of water service. 
    Whenever an owner sells or transfers property for which application for service has been granted, such owner shall promptly notify the DPW in writing, giving the name, address and telephone number of the new owners, who must forthwith make application for future service. A lien for water furnished to the prior owner, shall continue to be in effect according to M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F. 
(Code 1994, § 6-9; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-39. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Discontinuance of service may be deemed advisable by the director after written notice by reason of nonpayment of water, sewer and stormwater bills or for violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance contained directly, referenced or inferred herein. Services once discontinued, may not be reconnected until the cause of the complaint, resulting in discontinuance of service, has been removed and until all reconnection charges, plus arrears, have been paid. Any bill not paid within 20 days after due shall be considered delinquent. Upon delinquency, a notice of shutoff shall be issued to be executed ten days after issue. Service may be discontinued without notice in cases of fraudulent use or violation of the provisions of section 30-43. 
(b)  Upon notification to the owner and in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 41A, the DPW may shut off water service to any premises during a drought, hurricane, conflagration or other disaster. 
(c)  The DPW may shut off water service for denial by an owner to allow the DPW to enter the owner's buildings or premises for the purpose of reading or changing the water meter or for failure of the owner to keep the water meter accessible for the purpose of reading or changing the water meter. Services once discontinued may not be reconnected until the cause of the complaint resulting in discontinuance of service has been removed and until reconnection charges, plus arrears, if any, have been paid. 
(d)  Every person seeking to obtain a demolition permit from the inspectional services department shall submit a completed termination verification approval application for a demolition permit to the DPW. Prior to demolition of any building, the owner shall cut and cap all building sewers and building storm drains at the connection to the sewer or storm drain, and have the DPW inspect all building sewers and building storm drains to ensure that they are properly cut and capped prior to backfilling. 
(Code 1994, § 6-16; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-40. - Recovery of abatement, compensation, etc., for termination of service. 
    The person to whom water service is furnished shall not demand or recover any abatement, compensation or damages on account of the lawful shutting off or limitation of the use of water for any cause. 
(Code 1994, § 6-100; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-41. - Interrupted or unsatisfactory service. 
(a)  If, by reason of shortage of supply or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or connections or for any other reason beyond the control of the DPW, it becomes necessary to shut off water in the water mains, the DPW will not be responsible for any damages occasioned by such shutoff and no refunds of charges will be allowed, unless the interruption is in effect for a continuous period of ten days, in which case a proportional refund of charges, other than for metered water used will be made. Notice of shutoff will be given, when practicable, but nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the giving of such notice. 
(b)  The city will not be responsible for damage caused by dirty water, which may be occasioned by repairs, extensions or connections, cleaning pipes, reservoirs or standpipes, or opening and closing of any gates or hydrants, when the same is due to no lack of reasonable care on the part of the utility. 
(Code 1994, § 6-17; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-42. - Applicable regulations and codes. 
    Any users of public or private water mains, private or public sewer mains, private or public storm sewer mains, and sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be subject to whatever rules, regulations, policies and charges, rates, fees and assessments are from time to time established by the city, the state through its agencies and governing bodies, including, but not limited to, the state water resources authority, the department of environmental protection and the department of public health, and the United States federal government through its agencies and governing bodies. Any user of public or private water, sewer and storm drain facilities shall be subject to this chapter and all state and federal regulations. In instances where various regulations contain conflicting requirements, the most stringent requirement shall be met. In addition to this chapter, the most recent editions of the following rules or guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  State department of environmental protection, bureau of resource protection, division of water supply, guidelines for public water systems. 
(2)  State department of environmental protection, bureau of resource protection, division of water supply, private well guidelines. 
(3)  State department of environmental protection, drinking water regulations, 310 CMR 22.00. 
(4)  State department of environmental protection, bureau of resource protection, guidelines for performing operations and maintenance of collection systems. 
(5)  State department of environmental protection, the state Environmental Code, title 5: Standard Requirements for the Siting, Construction, Inspection, Upgrade and Expansion of On-Site Sewage Treatment and Disposal Systems and for the Transport and Disposal of Septage, 310 CMR 15.00. 
(6)  State water resources authority, sewer use regulations, 360 CMR 10.000. 
(7)  State water resources authority, enforcement and administrative penalty regulations, 360 CMR 2.00. 
(8)  State water resources authority, leak detection regulations, 360 CMR 12.00. 
(9)  State department of public health, state sanitary code, article I and article II. 
(10)  Board of state examiners of plumbers and gasfitters: uniform state plumbing code and state fuel gas code (state plumbing code). 
(11)  Regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR 1.0 et seq. 
(12)  M.G.L. c. 21G; c. 30; c. 40, § 21(5)(6); c. 40, § 41A-F; c. 83, § 1; c. 83, § 11; c. 92, app. § 1-10. 
(Code 1994, § 6-18; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-43. - Maintenance of plumbing. 
(a)  All customers shall maintain the plumbing and fixtures within their own premises in good repair and protected from freezing at their own expense. They shall make any repairs which may be necessary to prevent leaks and damage. No cross connection between the public water supply and any other supply will be allowed. No connection capable of causing backflow between the public water distribution system and any plumbing fixture, device or appliance, or between any waste outlet or pipe having direct connection to waste drains will be permitted. The owner shall also not tamper with or block access to the water meter AMRB outside reading device. 
(b)  No customer shall install any additions or alterations of any service pipe or pipes for any purpose not mentioned in the customer's application without first giving written notice to the DPW and obtaining its approval. 
(Code 1994, § 6-10; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-44. - Work on customer's premises. 
(a)  In places where the DPW undertakes to do work on the customer's premises, applications for such work shall be made in writing on forms provided by the DPW and a deposit may be required equal to the DPW's estimated cost of the work. Upon completion of the work, a bill will be rendered. Any excess deposit will be returned, and any amount due in excess of deposit will be payable within 30 days. The DPW shall charge for labor, material, permit and administrative costs necessary to perform the work and to process permit applications for such work. Bills rendered and not paid within 30 days shall be subject to the application of and the city shall collect interest charges of not more than 14 percent per annum, unless prior agreement is reached by the director and the applicant, and approved by the city manager for payment on another payment schedule. 
(b)  The DPW shall not allow the installation of any service pipes or service connections between December 1 and April 1, except by special arrangement with the director, in which case the customer will also pay for any extraordinary and excess costs borne by the DPW. 
(Code 1994, § 6-11; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-45. - Joint use of service pipe trench. 
(a)  Water service pipes shall not be placed in the same trench with gas pipes, electric conduits, sewers, drains or similar structures, except under special conditions and only with prior approval of the director. 
(b)  Sewer service pipes, including building sewers and building drains shall not be placed in the same trench with gas pipes, electric conduits, water pipes or similar structures, except under special conditions and only with prior approval of the director. 
(c)  Storm drain service pipes, including building storm drains and building drains, shall not be placed in the same trench with gas pipes, electric conduits, water pipes or similar structures, except under special conditions and only with prior approval of the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-14; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-46-30-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 30-64. - Assessments. 
(a)  The city council shall make all assessments upon persons and estates benefited by the laying of public sanitary sewers, combined sewers or storm drains in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 83 and of acts in amendment thereof or addition thereto. All persons or estates so benefited shall be assessed an amount equal to one-half of the cost of construction, and for that purpose the DPW shall furnish the city council with such facts as to cost of construction, owners of abutting estates, and other persons benefited thereby and such other information as may be required in making such assessments. 
(b)  The city council shall deliver a list of such assessments provided for in subsection (a) of this section, when made, with their warrant to the collector of taxes, who shall demand payment of the same forthwith, in writing, and proceed in the collection thereof in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Code 1994, § 6-4; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Sewer assessments, M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 14-24. 
Sec. 30-65. - Establishment of water and sewer billing rates. 
(a)  On all premises where water meters have been set, the owner of the premises shall pay the rates according to the schedule established by the director for the entire amount of water used upon such estates, irrespective of leases or individual consumers. Sewer rates shall be calculated based upon metered water use and amounts of both BOD and suspended solids in the discharge to the sewer as determined by the director. Rates chargeable by the DPW for water and sewer service and payable by the customer shall be determined by the director and approved by the city manager, based upon recognized accounting methods for a water enterprise system in conjunction with M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F and to fairly distribute the burden of maintenance of plant, capital improvement costs and other costs upon respective customers. All premises in the city connected to the public sewer collection system, or the water distribution system, including direct and indirect connections to the MWRA systems, shall be liable for use charges applicable to same. 
(b)  Bills for water and sewer service will be due and payable monthly, upon presentation of the bill. The failure of the customer or the customer's agent to receive notice of the water bill does not relieve the customer from the obligation of its payment or from the consequences of its nonpayment. All charges are due and payable upon presentation of the bill and are past due 20 days after the date of the bill. 
(c)  When a customer's credit is, or becomes, impaired, the DPW may, when it deems it necessary to guarantee payment of current bills, require a deposit. Such a required deposit shall not exceed the amount of money for the largest estimated single bill expected during the subsequent year, provided that a deposit in an amount determined by the director may be required, such deposit to be refunded when the customer has established credit satisfactory to the DPW. 
(d)  Upon termination of service, the DPW shall have the right to apply any deposit in payment of any billing in arrears, if such billing shall be unpaid for a period of 20 days beyond the due date. Such application of the deposit by the DPW shall not constitute a waiver of the DPW's rights otherwise to enforce collection of the remaining required payment in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-5; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Collection of water and sewer charges, M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F. 
Sec. 30-66. - Establishment of an infiltration/inflow mitigation fund and fee. 
(a)  All new connections to the public sanitary sewer or combined sewer, and all existing connections where the property is completely or substantially reconstructed resulting in additional wastewater flow to the city sewer collection system, shall be subject to an infiltration/inflow mitigation fee. The mitigation fee shall be based upon the additional wastewater flow to be discharged to the city collection system as calculated by the applicant and approved by the director. In the case of existing connections, the additional wastewater flow shall be that portion above usage for said connection during the prior five years as established from DPW water and sewer billing records. 
(b)  Fees chargeable by the DPW for infiltration/inflow mitigation and payable by the applicant shall be determined by the director and approved by the city manager based upon recognized accounting methods for a revolving fund in conjunction with M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F, and to fairly distribute the burden upon respective customers of maintenance, capital improvement, and other costs relative to ensuring that sufficient capacity is maintained in the sewer collection system on a perpetual basis through the prevention or removal of extraneous flows. All premises in the city connected to the public sewer collection system, including direct and indirect connections to the MWRA systems, shall be liable for mitigation charges applicable to same. The infiltration/inflow mitigation fee shall be deposited in a revolving account to be used only for improvements to the city's sewer and drainage systems to accomplish said objectives, as determined by the director and approved by the city auditor. 
(c)  Charges for infiltration/inflow mitigation are due and payable upon presentation of the bill and are past due 20 days after the date of the bill. 
(d)  When a customer's credit is, or becomes, impaired, the DPW may, when it deems it necessary to guarantee payment of current bills, require a deposit. Such a required deposit shall not exceed the amount of money for the largest estimated single bill expected during the subsequent year, provided that a deposit in an amount determined by the director may be required, such deposit to be refunded when the customer has established credit satisfactory to the DPW. 
(e)  Upon termination of service, the DPW shall have the right to apply any deposit in payment of any billing in arrears, if such billing shall be unpaid for a period of 20 days beyond the due date. Such application of the deposit by the DPW shall not constitute a waiver of the DPW's rights otherwise to enforce collection of the remaining required payment in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-7; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
State Law reference- Collection of water and sewer charges, M.G.L. c. 40, § 42A-F. 
Sec. 30-67. - Vacant premises. 
    If premises are to be vacated for a period of six months or more, abatement of water and sewer charges may be had by notifying the DPW in writing, in advance of the date such vacancy is to occur. The DPW will then discontinue service at the shutoff or, in case two or more occupancies are supplied by a single service, seals will be placed upon the stop and waste or fixtures of the vacant occupancy. The director may charge reasonable fees relative to services provided under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of section 30-3. Abatement will not be available for partial vacancy of multiple units served through a single meter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-15; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-68-30-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public water supply for cities and towns generally, M.G.L. c. 40, § 38 et seq.; water supply, M.G.L. c. 111, § 159 et seq.; cities to make rules and regulations relative to pipes, etc., through which water is supplied, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(7), (8). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-93. - Installation, ownership and maintenance of service pipe. 
(a)  Any person proposing a new connection into the water distribution system or a substantial change in the volume or use of the supplied water that is being taken from the system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(b)  All pipe and other fixtures from the water main in the street to the outlet of the meter on the house side of the curbstop may be furnished and laid by the city, its authorized representative or an installer licensed by the city at the expense of the owner of the property. The service from the water main to the curbstop shall be maintained by the city. Four valves permitting control of the water supply are required as follows: 
(1)  The first to be located directly at the water main; 
(2)  The second to be located on or near the property line common with the street, alley way or right-of-way containing the water main; 
(3)  The third inside the building wall; and 
(4)  The fourth valve adjacent to and on the house side of the meter. 
The first valve in the case of service pipes one inch and smaller in inside diameter shall be a corporation valve and is permitted to be buried without access. The first valve in the case of service pipes of over one inch inside diameter shall be fitted with a disc or gate valve and access to such valve through a valve street box of sufficient size shall be provided. The second valve shall be provided with a valve street box for access to the valve. The director may allow the second valve to be located on the street, alley or right-of-way if a permitted structure prevents the valve location at property line. All second valves greater than one inch, and third and fourth valves shall be the responsibility of and maintained by the owner in operating and accessible condition at all times. 
(c)  The valves shall be of a make and type approved by the director. For this installation and the maintenance thereof, the customer shall employ an individual or business licensed by the city to install service pipes for work up to ten feet outside of a structure and a licensed plumber within the structure and ten feet outside of it, and all work shall be performed in a manner satisfactory to the director. If any defects in workmanship or materials are found or if the customer's service has not been installed in accordance with such specifications or with the director's requirements, water service either will not be turned on or will be discontinued if such defects are not remedied. 
(Code 1994, § 6-70; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-94. - Extensions. 
(a)  Extension of the main pipe shall be made only upon written request to the director and subject to such terms and conditions as the director shall impose. The cost of such extension shall be borne by the customer to such extent as shall be determined by the director. 
(b)  Applications for water mains in private ways must be accompanied by a grant of lawful rights and easements therein to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-80; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-95. - Application for permanent service. 
    If the director approves the installation of such water service, the director shall furnish the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of making such connections, which must be paid in advance. Any amounts so paid in excess of the actual cost will be refunded to the applicant, and any amount due by reason of the cost exceeding the estimate must be paid by the applicant before service commences. 
(Code 1994, § 6-98; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-96. - Temporary service. 
    Application of builders, contractors, real estate developers and others for temporary water service will be accepted and temporary water service will be supplied, providing it does not interfere with the use of water for general purposes and meets all other applicable sections of these rules and regulations. The quantity of water taken for such purposes shall be determined by a meter approved for such installation by the department, and shall be paid for in accordance with the rate schedule applicable to metered general purposes. Customers requiring temporary water service shall reimburse the department for all of its expense in connection with providing the necessary temporary service connections and removal of same, including, but not limited to, the labor, materials, permit and administrative costs of performing the physical work and processing the application for such work. 
(Code 1994, § 6-71; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-97. - Winter provisions. 
    In those cases where customer-owned service pipe or main is frozen, the thawing may be done by the DPW at the expense of the customer. To avoid a recurrence, the director may order an examination of the customer's service pipe or main, and if the same is not at a depth of at least 41/2 feet, as required, the director reserves the right to require it to be relocated at the owner's expense before service is resumed. All expenses of examination to determine the depth of the pipe or main shall be the owner's responsibility. 
(Code 1994, § 6-72; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-98. - Safeguarding use of hot water tanks. 
    All customers having direct pressure hot water tanks must place proper vacuum and pressure relief valves in the pipe system to prevent any damage to such tanks should it become necessary to shut off the water on the pipe service or water mains. The city will not supply water to premises where direct pressure hot water tanks or appliances are used except at the risk of the customer. 
(Code 1994, § 6-73; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-99. - Restriction of water use. 
(a)  The director as in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 41A, reserves the right in periods of drought or emergency, or when deemed essential to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, to restrict, curtail or prohibit the use of water for secondary purposes, such as sprinkling, car washing or filling swimming pools, and shall have the right to fix the hours and periods and conditions when any water may be used, if at all. 
(b)  The director reserves the right in periods of emergency to waive any and all rules, regulations and ordinances contained herein whenever it is in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 6-74; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-100. - Water conservation. 
(a)  The director may restrict the use of decorative fountains, irrigation systems and outside water during drought conditions as follows: 
(1)  During a drought watch, as identified or declared by the MWRA, the director may require that nonrecirculating, decorative fountains be turned off. 
(2)  During a drought warning, as identified by the MWRA, the director may require that all decorative fountains and outside water systems not be used. 
(3)  During a drought emergency, as identified or declared by the MWRA, the director shall require that all decorative fountains and outside watering systems not be used. 
In no case shall an outside decorative fountain be run during the period between October 15 to March 31, inclusive. 
(b)  No user shall knowingly allow water to leak or run to unnecessary waste. 
(c)  Upon determination that conditions exist which so limit the water supply that unrestricted water use could endanger the adequacy of supply and the public health, safety and welfare, the director may adopt conservation restrictions in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 21G. Conservation restrictions shall remain in full force and effect until the director determines that the conditions requiring their imposition no longer exist. 
(d)  All water-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration units utilizing more than 60 cubic feet of water hourly shall be equipped with a recycling mechanism. 
(e)  Any person or entity that violates this section, shall be liable to the city in the amount of: 
(1)  $50.00 for the first violation; and 
(2)  $100.00 for each subsequent violation; 
which shall inure to the city for such uses as the director may direct. These fines shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before the district court or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D and shall in all other respects be in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8. Each separate instance of noncompliance following the issuance of any warning or citation pursuant to this section shall constitute a separate violation. 
(f)  The director, the director's designee or the director's agents may enter any property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating any violation of this section or enforcing against the same. 
(Code 1994, § 6-96; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-101. - Public recreational sprinkler devices and hoses. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the department may install free-flowing, nonrecirculating sprinkler and hose devices on city property, for public recreational purposes, provided such devices are: 
(1)  Used only during the period between Memorial Day and Labor Day, inclusive, in parks; 
(2)  Equipped with shutoff mechanisms, which need not be automatic; and 
(3)  Turned on and off on a daily basis by persons authorized by the director to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 6-97; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-102. - Public hydrants. 
(a)  Hydrants may be used only for the extinguishment of fires or for such other purposes as may be approved by the city. Hydrants shall be opened only by an agent of the director or appointed firefighter of the city. After any hydrant has been opened, the director must be notified of such opening to ensure that the hydrant is in operable condition and is self-draining. 
(b)  No person may tamper with the public hydrants. Unless otherwise authorized by the chief of the fire department or the director, no person shall draw water from the public hydrants. 
(c)  All hydrants must meet the specifications of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-78; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-103. - Limitations on opening fire hydrants. 
    No person, without previous permission in writing from the director or the director's duly authorized agent, shall unscrew the cap of or open any hydrant erected for the extinguishment of fires, except in cases of fires in the neighborhood, or leave a fire hydrant open for a longer time than the director may stipulate, or use the water for other purposes than that for which such permission is granted. 
(Code 1994, § 6-99; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-104. - Private fire protection. 
(a)  Customers desiring private fire protection should first consult with the director as to availability of mains, etc., and such service will be rendered under separate rules and regulations to be made a part of their rate schedule. 
(b)  Installation of the private fire protection service shall be by, or under the direction of the city and in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal life and safety codes. 
(c)  The customer shall pay all costs borne by the DPW in conjunction with permitting and installation of private fire protection services. 
(d)  No private fire connection will be made from a department water main of six inches or less in nominal interior diameter, and no private fire connection service itself shall be less than six inches in diameter. The customer will be responsible for the cost of connecting the fire to a water main of sufficient size. No private fire protection service is to be used for any purpose other than fire protection. 
(e)  No connection, other than fire connections, will be allowed to be connected to the pipes of the private fire protection system. All sprinkler pipes and other private fire connection pipes shall be placed as to be readily inspected. Water services for private fire protection service and drinking water shall be separate. 
(f)  All new fire service and any existing unprotected private fire protection service systems shall be required to be protected, at a minimum, by a double-check valve assembly with detector check. 
(Code 1994, § 6-79; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-105-30-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METERS 

Sec. 30-122. - Required; placement; responsibility for costs; testing; billing adjustments. 
(a)  The DPW may install meters whenever deemed expedient. No water shall be drawn from any fixture except as permitted by this chapter, without such fixture being supplied by a metered connection. 
(b)  All meters shall be set, as nearly as possible, at the point of entrance of the service pipe into the building, and the customer shall provide and maintain a clean, dry, warm and accessible place therefor. The cost and responsibility of installing piping and couplings for the installation of a water meter in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances contained herein shall be by the customer. The cost of meter setting within the provided couplings for water meters three-quarters of one inch and smaller, and provision of the meter and any accessory for sealing and reading the meter shall be borne by the department. The cost of providing and installing water meters greater than three-quarters of an inch shall be borne by the customer. Meters once set may be changed in location at the request of the customer, only at the customer's expense, and the work may be done only by an agent of the director. 
(c)  When the customer fails or neglects to furnish a suitable location for the meter inside the customer's building or where for other reasons it is necessary or expedient to locate the meter in an underground box or vault exterior to the building, the customer shall bear the expense of constructing and fitting a box or vault suitable to contain a water meter of sufficient size for the size of service, including all valves and devices required by the rules, regulations, and ordinances contained herein, in such a manner as to provide unimpeded accessibility and prevention of freezing or flooding by surface water and groundwater. The expense of repairs made by the city on private meters or meters damaged through the negligence of the owner/user, or otherwise caused by the owner/user, shall be paid by the owner/user. 
(d)  Meter repairs or replacements necessitated by ordinary wear or manufacturing defects will be paid for by the DPW at no expense to the customer for those meters supplied and installed by the DPW. Those repairs and/or replacements caused by freezing, hot water or by other fault of the customer shall be charged to the customer. 
(e)  If additional or auxiliary meters are desired by the customer for showing subdivisions of the supply, the customer shall furnish, install and maintain them at such customer's expense. In all cases the customer shall have a meter on all pipe services prior to any point of taking water. A master meter which is to be used by the city for water and sewer consumption billing purposes shall be installed on the water service connection prior to any further subdivision. The city shall not be responsible for the collection of billing data and collecting of charges related thereto for any additional meters located after the master meter. 
(f)  If a meter fails to register or if it is removed for the purpose of making repairs, the director will make a charge for the water used based on an average of the amount registered over similar periods preceding or subsequent thereto. 
(g)  Meters installed by the DPW are to be guaranteed by the manufacturer to measure flows accurately within two percent plus or minus. Meters three-quarters of an inch and less will be carefully tested on an occasional and random basis by the department before installation. Meters greater than three-quarters of an inch will be certified by a testing laboratory or service approved for meter testing by the department prior to installation at a cost to be borne by the customer. Water meters tested shall be sealed by such tester. The water meter shall also be marked in a manner, so as to identify the individual and firm performing testing, date and time of testing, and method of testing. If the customer requests a test, the customer shall bear the expense of the testing as determined by the director. The director may require the customer to make a deposit which will cover the reasonable cost of the test that would be borne by the customer. If the meter is found to over-register by more than two percent over the meter flow range, described herein, the percentage of error will be applied for the duration of the last billing period and the overcharge refunded. If the meter is found to under-register by more than two percent over the meter flow range, the customer will be charged such percentage of error computed for the duration of the last billing period. If the meter registers within two percent, plus or minus, it will be deemed correct and no billing change will be made. No billing adjustments will be made if the water meter registers over or under by two percent or less at the intermediate or maximum flow rate. A written report, giving the result of such test, shall be sent to the customer within a reasonable period of time. 
(h)  The DPW reserves the right to test meters periodically or to replace them, whether or not requested by the customer. The director also reserves the right to pursue the collection of payment for water used and sewage discharged based on estimates or underbilled consumptions in prior billing periods at the water and sewer rates in effect for such billing periods when a customer disputes current and past measured consumptions and consequent billings for a period of six years prior to the date of inquiry and dispute. 
(i)  To determine the accuracy of meters, the following standards of the American Water Works Association shall be used for all testing of positive displacement cold water meters. Meter accuracy is determined by dividing by two the algebraic sum of the intermediate and maximum flow error as set out in section 30-123, standards for meter accuracy. 
(Code 1994, § 6-75; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-123. - Standards for meter accuracy. 
    No meter shall be placed in service if it registers over or under by more than two percent at the intermediate or maximum flow rate or less than 90 percent of the minimum flow rate. 
Nominal Meter Size (inches) Minimum (gpm) Intermediate (gpm) Maximum (gpm) - 0.25 2 15 3/4 0.50 3 25 1 0.75 4 40 1.5 1.50 8 80 2 2.00 15 120 3 4.00 20 250 4 7.00 40 350 6 12.00 60 700  
(Code 1994, § 6-76; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-124. - Tampering, etc. with meters. 
    No person or customer, except an agent authorized by the city shall at any time tamper with, damage, remove, alter or repair any meter, outside reading device or fixture connected therewith which has been set or used by the DPW. The city shall fully prosecute and pursue damages for any violations of this section pursuant to M.G.L. c. 165, § 11. 
(Code 1994, § 6-77; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-125-30-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 30-147. - Water system defined. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: 
(1)  The utility system; and 
(2)  The customer system. 
(b)  In accordance with the city's facility containment policy, the director can require containment on any service the city determines to be a hazard to the public water supply. All nonresidential properties are required to have a reduced-pressure zone backflow prevention device (RPBP) installed directly downstream of the water meter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-82; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-148. - Utility system. 
    Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
(1)  The source facilities shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(2)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(Code 1994, § 6-83; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-149. - Customer system. 
    The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond termination of the utility distributions system which are utilized in conveying utility delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Code 1994, § 6-84; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-150. - Authorization; purpose. 
(a)  The authority for implementation of backflow and cross connection control rules, regulations and ordinances is given under PL 93-523, the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and the state drinking water regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, cross connections. The water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any other substances, from entering the public potable water system. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the area served by the city DPW from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customer's internal distribution system or its customer's private water system, such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the public water supply system; 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between its customers in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross connection. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If in the judgment of the director an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety of the water system, the director shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the customer's premises. The customer shall, within 30 days, install such approved devices at the customer's expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said devices within ten days of second notice shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such devices have been properly installed. 
(d)  The director may upon discovery of a connection capable of contaminating the public potable water system through backflow or backsiphonage that in the director's opinion constitutes an immediate life safety threat, cause such connection to be immediately discontinued by the customer. The director shall terminate water service to the premises should the customer not immediately discontinue the condition with the potential of causing contamination through backflow or backsiphonage. 
(Code 1994, § 6-81; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-151. - Connection requirements. 
    No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the DPW unless the water supply is protected, as required by state law and ordinances. Service of water, to any premises, shall be discontinued by the director, if a backflow prevention device required by this regulation is not installed, tested, and maintained or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(Code 1994, § 6-85; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-152. - System operation. 
    The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the director to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with state and city statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All expenses relating to the disconnection and reconnection shall be at the customer's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-86; Ord. of 3-10-1997; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-153. - Installation of backflow prevention device. 
    An approved backflow prevention device where required shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(3)  In the case of premises having: 
a.  Internal cross connection that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled; or 
b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist; 
the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(Code 1994, § 6-87; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-154. - Authority over backflow device installation and operation. 
    All decisions relating to the determination of backflow devices will be made by the director. Failure to comply with any directive from the director will result in termination of service. 
(Code 1994, § 6-88; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-155. - Type of protective device required. 
    The type of protective device required under section 30-153 shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in this chapter; 
(2)  Where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system; 
(3)  Where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection; or 
(4)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant, cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or backsiphonage from the premises by the installation of a back flow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises. 
(Code 1994, § 6-89; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-156. - Approved protective devices. 
(a)  The term "approved backflow prevention device" means a device that is on the approved list of backflow preventers and double check valves, as revised by the American Society of Sanitary Engineering or is on the University of Southern California Approval List. Said approval lists have been adopted by the director. 
(b)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-90; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-157. - Customer/user duties. 
(a)  All industrial and commercial establishments attached to the city water distribution utility system will be required to install, at the service entrance and immediately downstream of the meter, a reduced-pressure (RP) backflow device when required to do so by the director. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the customer/user, at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed, to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year, as required under state regulations and this chapter. The DPW will conduct testing on these devices twice a year. The owner of the device will be charged for these tests in accordance with the appropriate schedule of fees maintained on file in the city clerk's office, as provided by section 30-3. The director may have these tests performed by a designated representative. 
(Code 1994, § 6-91; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-158. - City required inspections, etc. 
    In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough, the director may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water customer/user, and shall be performed by department personnel or by a certified tester approved by the director and approved by the state. It shall be the duty of the director to see that these timely tests are made. The director shall notify the customer/user in advance when the tests are to be undertaken, so that the director or representatives thereof may witness the test if so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer/user, whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests shall be kept by the director. The owner shall pay the costs for an initial cross connection survey to be performed by the city or its authorized agent, and shall pay the costs of any additional surveys requested by the owner or required by law. 
(Code 1994, § 6-92; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-159. - Existing devices. 
    All presently installed backflow prevention devices installed as of October 19, 2009, which do not meet the requirements of this chapter, but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under section 30-93, be excluded from the requirements of this chapter so long as the director is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever an existing device is moved from the present location, or when the director finds the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 6-93; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-160. - Point-of-entry device-Buildings serving more than 25 people. 
    In accordance with state regulations, the installation of a point-of-entry device with respect to any building serving more than 25 people shall be deemed to create a new public water system. No such point-of-entry device can be installed with respect to any building serving more than 25 people unless and until the building owner: 
(1)  Applies for and receives express written approval from the director for the installation of such a device; 
(2)  Applies for and receives express written approval for the installation of such a device from the state department of environmental protection; 
(3)  Installs a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device before the point-of-entry device to avoid contamination of the city's entire water supply system; 
(4)  Installs a master meter prior to the reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device and point-of-entry device; 
(5)  Utilizes a point-of-entry device approved by the state board of plumbers and installed in conformity with the state plumbing code; 
(6)  Hires an operator duly certified by the Massachusetts Board of Registration of Operators of Drinking Water Supply Facilities; 
(7)  Monitors the building's drinking water for all water quality parameters and with the frequency required by 310 CMR 22.00 and maintains a record of such monitoring; and 
(8)  Informs building occupants and users in writing of the existence of the point-of-entry device. 
(Code 1994, § 6-94; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-161. - Same-Buildings serving 25 people or less. 
    In accordance with state regulations, the installation of a point-of-entry device with respect to any building serving 25 or fewer people is deemed to create a new private water system. No such point-of-entry device can be installed with respect to any building serving 25 or fewer people unless and until the building owner: 
(1)  Installs a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device before the point-of-entry device and after the master meter; 
(2)  Utilizes a point-of-entry device approved by the state board of plumbers and installed in accordance with state plumbing code; and 
(3)  Informs building occupants and users in writing of the existence of the point-of-entry device. 
(Code 1994, § 6-95; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-162-30-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND STORM DRAINS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-191. - Regulations and authority of others. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to contravene or render ineffective any valid federal or state laws, regulations or standards pertaining to, or permitting the agency having jurisdiction over public health, safety and welfare, and the environment or the proper and safe operation of sanitary and combined sewers and storm drains. When duplicate provisions are in effect, the more stringent shall govern. 
(Code 1994, § 6-62; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-192. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city and the MWRA for transportation and treatment. 
(Code 1994, § 6-52; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-193. - Measurements. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. Sample analysis shall be performed by an independent laboratory currently certified by the DEP for the parameters being analyzed. The use of a laboratory with provisional DEP certification is prohibited. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1994, § 6-46; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-194. - Records. 
(a)  An owner or user shall retain on its premises and make available to the DPW upon request all documents pertinent to any of the following: 
(1)  The volume, components or frequency of its discharges to the public sewer, combined sewer and storm drain systems; 
(2)  Its industrial pretreatment equipment and procedures, if any; 
(3)  Its design, installation, maintenance, and operation of any special facilities, particle separators, grease or oil traps, building drains, building sewers, building storm drains, or sewers, private sewers, private storm drains or other related facilities or equipment; 
(4)  Its permits or orders issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter or in any permit or order issued by the DPW or the MWRA, every such document shall be maintained for at least five full years following its preparation or receipt by the user. All records pertaining to matters covered by an order issued under this chapter, or to any enforcement action or litigation involving the DPW, shall be retained until the enforcement action is concluded and all appeal periods concerning the order or action have expired, unless a longer period of retention is otherwise required. 
(Code 1994, § 6-13; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-195. - Notification of city of violations. 
(a)  Users shall notify the DPW by telephone immediately upon discharge or receiving knowledge of a discharge of water or wastes in violation of this chapter and of any spill or other nonpermitted pollutant release that may reasonably be expected to discharge whether directly or indirectly to any public or private sewer, combined sewer or storm drain, or to a natural outlet. When directed by the DPW or if the user fails to reach the DPW by telephone, the user shall also notify the DEP, EPA and MWRA immediately by telephone. 
(b)  Each notification shall be followed within 15 days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement addressed to the director and, as appropriate, the DEP, EPA, and the MWRA, describing the causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent a recurrence. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the public sewer or storm drain systems, to the MWRA sewer system, or for any fines imposed on the DPW, the MWRA, or the owner as a result of such discharge. 
(Code 1994, § 6-61; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-196. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Owners of a building situated upon any street, easement or way through which a public sewer has been constructed shall construct and maintain building drains, building sewers, and/or private sewers through their premises in their entirety from such structures to the public sewer main, including any chimney, as may be necessary to conduct the sewage from the building or buildings to enter the public sewers. Any person included within the provisions of this section who refuses to make a permit application to the DPW for the construction of such building drains, building sewers and private sewers and connecting the same to the public sewer, or neglects to make such permit application within the space of 14 days after written notice from the director, shall pay the penalty provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a building sewer shall at all times keep such sewers clean and in good repair in order not to cause excessive infiltration, exfiltration or inflow, depletion of groundwater, discharge of pollutants to the environment, damage to property, odor, or harm to the public sewers. Whenever any building drain, building sewer, or private sewer becomes clogged, broken, obstructed, out of order or detrimental to the use of a public sewer or unfit for sewage purposes, the owner, agent, occupant or person having charge of any such sewers shall, when directed by written notice from the director, remove, reconstruct, alter, cleanse or repair such sewers, as the conditions thereof require. In case of neglect or refusal to comply with such notice within five days after the same is given, the director may cause the building sewer, sewer service or private sewer to be removed, reconstructed, repaired, altered or cleaned, as the director may deem expedient, at the expense of the owner, agent, occupant or other person so notified, who shall also be liable to pay the penalty provided for in this chapter. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(c)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or the owner's agents shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. Every user discharging industrial wastes to the public sewerage system or directly into the MWRA sewerage system shall obtain a joint permit from the director and the MWRA. Industrial users proposing new discharges shall obtain such permits prior to constructing a building sewer. The director and the MWRA may change the conditions of the permit from time to time as circumstances, including regulations enacted or promulgated by the state or federal governments or their agencies, may require. The director and the MWRA may stipulate special conditions and terms upon which the permit will be issued. No user may increase the daily volume, strength or rate of the user's permitted discharge beyond 15 percent without first securing an amendment to the permit. 
(d)  All costs and expense incident to the permitting, installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(e)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, in which case, the building sewer from the front building may, after permission from the director has been obtained, be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The extension of a building sewer from a front building to a rear building may only be constructed when permitted by the director. The director may condition the construction of such a building sewer extension upon approval of construction methods and written agreement by both affected building owners to provide maintenance of such an extended building sewer. 
(f)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the proponent of utilizing an existing sewer connection to pay all cost associated with all physical examinations and repairs ordered by the director including the case in which the director determines the existing sewer connection is unsuitable for reuse. 
(g)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of such specifications or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM, the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, Design and Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems and Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission Guides for the Design of Wastewater Treatment Works, title V of the State Environmental Code and the Uniform State Plumbing Code, 248 CMR 10.00 shall apply. 
(h)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the sanitary sewer carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the plumbing inspector and the director and discharged by gravity (i.e., not under pressure) to the public sewer. 
(i)  Prior to installing below-grade plumbing, the owner shall submit a plan of the proposed plumbing to the DPW for review and approval. Plumbing that is subject to the requirements of this section shall include faucets, showers, baths, toilets and washing machine hookups. All plumbing fixtures located at an elevation below the top of the manhole on the public sewer serving the proposed plumbing shall be considered to be liable to backflow and shall be equipped with a backwater valve in accordance with 248 CMR 10.15 of the Uniform State Plumbing Code. The backwater valve shall be installed and maintained at the owner's expense. 
(j)  Building sewer connections shall be laid at least ten feet apart from any new or existing water service connection. 
(k)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains and other sources of stormwater or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer without written permission of the director. Floor drains shall be connected to a building sewer or a building drain which is in turn connected to a building sewer. In no case shall stormwater be discharged to sewers which only conduct sanitary sewage except as otherwise provided herein and within the state building code. 
(l)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer or combined sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(m)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or designee. If the applicant fails to make such notifications, any and all costs to uncover the connection as necessary for inspection shall be borne by the applicant. 
(n)  Prior to activating water service, every new building sewer shall be dye tested by owner or designee in the presence of a DPW inspector to establish that the building sewer is properly connected to the public sewer. The director may direct an owner to conduct dye testing of an existing building sewer to establish that it is properly connected to the public sewer. The director may require the owner forthwith to eliminate a connection from a building sewer to a storm drain (also referred to as an illicit connection) at the owner's expense. Where separate sanitary sewers and storm drains exist, the director may also require the owner to dye test in the presence of a DPW inspector, a new or existing building storm drain to establish that the building storm drain is properly connected to the public drain. The director may also require the owner forthwith to eliminate a connection from a building storm drain to a sanitary sewer at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-40; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-197. - Sewage-stormwater separation. 
(a)  The plumbing of any existing or new building shall be so constructed as to keep all stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof and surface runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water and uncontaminated industrial process water, noncontact cooling water and noncontact industrial process water, separate from sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, and from the building drain or building sewer. 
(b)  The building drain conveying wastewater from plumbing fixtures within the building shall discharge to a building sewer, while the building drain conveying stormwater and other drainage shall discharge to a building storm drain. 
(c)  Where separate storm drains and sanitary sewers are provided, and the DPW has determined that on-site retainage of stormwater is not possible, building storm drains shall be connected to a storm drain. Connection of a building storm drain to a sanitary sewer is prohibited. 
(d)  Where separate storm drains and sanitary sewers are provided, building sewers shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Connection of a building sewer to a storm drain is prohibited. 
(e)  Where only a combined sewer has been provided, and the DPW has determined that on-site retainage of stormwater is not possible, building storm drains shall be connected directly to the combined sewer. No building storm drain shall be connected to the building sewer and such building sewer made a combined sewer unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(f)  The director shall require an owner to eliminate a source of infiltration or inflow whenever the director determines that the source is resulting in excessive infiltration or inflow to be discharged directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1994, § 6-53; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-198-30-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORM DRAINS 

Sec. 30-218. - Building storm drains and connections. 
(a)  Owners of a building or buildings situated upon any street, easement or way through which a public drain has been constructed may make voluntary application to the DPW to construct and maintain building storm drains, private drains and appurtenances through their premises in their entirety from such structures to the public drain as may be necessary to conduct the drainage from the property to enter the public drain. If, in the opinion of the DPW, the lack of private drains is or may endanger public health, create a public nuisance, increase flooding, impair water quality, or pose other negative impacts, the director may make written notice to the owner directing the owner to construct and maintain building storm drains, private drains and appurtenances through the owner's premises as may be necessary to conduct the drainage from the property to the public drain. Any person included within the provisions of this section, who refuses to make a permit application to the DPW for the construction of such building storm drains or private drains and connecting the same to the public drain or neglects to make such permit application within the space of 14 days after written notice from the director, shall pay the penalty provided for in this chapter. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(b)  The owner of a building storm drain shall at all times keep such drains clean and in good repair in order not to cause excessive infiltration, exfiltration or inflow, depletion of groundwater, damage to property, odor, or harm to public drains. Whenever any building drain, building storm drain or other private drain becomes clogged, broken, obstructed, out of order or detrimental to the use of a public drain or unfit for drainage purposes, the owner, agent, occupant or person having charge of any such drain shall, when directed by written notice from the director, remove, reconstruct, alter, cleanse or repair the drain, as the conditions thereof require. In case of neglect or refusal to comply with such notice within five days after the same is given, the director may cause the building drain, building storm drain or other private drain to be removed, reconstructed, repaired, altered or cleaned, as the director may deem expedient, at the expense of the owner, agent, occupant or other person so notified, who shall also be liable to pay the penalty provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  There shall be one class of building storm drain permit. The owner or agents thereof shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, analytical data or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. No user may increase the daily volume or rate of the user's permitted discharge beyond 15 percent, or alter the characteristics or strength of the user's permitted discharge, without first securing an amendment to the user's permit. 
(d)  All costs and expense incident to the permitting, installation and connection of the building storm drain shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building storm drain. 
(e)  A separate and independent building storm drain shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private drain is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, in which case, the building storm drain from the front building may, after permission from the director has been obtained, be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building drain. The extension of a building storm drain from a front building to a rear building may only be constructed when permitted by the director. The director may condition the construction of such a building storm drain extension upon approval of construction methods and written agreement by both affected building owners to provide maintenance of such an extended building storm drain. 
(f)  Old building storm drains may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the proponent of utilizing an existing building storm drain connection to pay all cost associated with all physical examinations and repairs ordered by the director including the case in which the director determines the existing drain connection is unsuitable for reuse. 
(g)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building storm drain, and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of such specifications or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials, the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, Design and Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems and Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission Guides for the Design of Wastewater Treatment Works, title V of the State Environmental Code and the Uniform State Plumbing Code, 248 CMR 2.00 shall apply. Building storm drains shall be laid at least ten feet apart from any new or existing water service connection. 
(h)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public drain, drainage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the plumbing inspector and the director of public works and discharged by gravity (i.e., not under pressure) to the public drain. 
(i)  No person shall make connection of illicit discharges directly or indirectly to a building drain or public drain. 
(j)  The connection of the building storm drain into the public drain shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM, WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, and Design and Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems and Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(k)  The applicant for the building storm drain permit shall notify the director when the building storm drain is ready for inspection and connection to the public drain. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or designee. If the applicant fails to make such notifications, any and all costs to uncover the connection as necessary for inspection shall be borne by the applicant. 
(l)  The building storm drain permit shall be denied, revoked, suspended or reissued if the director determines that the discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is or may cause or contribute to a water quality problem, or may cause or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES permit. 
(m)  For a project requiring site plan review, the proponent shall assess the use of methods to contain stormwater on the proposed site and submit such assessment with a sewer or storm drain service application. Connections to public storm drain systems or combined sewer systems will not be approved by the city without an assessment of on-site drainage. For such projects involving more than 25,000 square feet of impervious surface, drainage calculations for runoff shall include the storm frequency, time of concentration, peak rate runoff and total volume of water. 
(n)  Drainage plans for residential structures that have less than four units shall be approved by the DPW. 
(Code 1994, § 6-55; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-219. - Use of the public drains. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutants, as defined by federal and state surface water quality standards, to any building storm drain, public drain or natural outlet. No person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be discharged, any sewage or any other waters not composed entirely of stormwater into a building storm drain or public drain except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. Each user shall provide reasonable and appropriate protection from any discharge, including accidental discharges, in violation of this chapter or any federal or state laws or regulations. No person shall directly or indirectly dump, discharge or cause to be discharged into any catchbasin, any solid waste, construction debris, paint or painting product, antifreeze, hazardous waste, oil, gasoline, grease and all other automotive and petroleum products, solvents and degreasers, drain cleaners, commercial and household cleaners, soap, detergent, ammonia, food and food waste, grass or yard waste, leaves, animal feces, dirt, sand, gravel or other pollutant. Any person determined by the director to be responsible for the direct or indirect discharge of any of the substances stated in this subsection to a catchbasin may be held responsible for cleaning the catchbasin, paying the cost for such cleaning or for paying any penalties assessed by the DPW. 
(b)  Sewage and all other polluted waters shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or sanitary sewers unless otherwise required by the state building code. Floor drains shall be connected to the building drain. New or substantially rehabilitated decorative fountains shall be recirculating and shall not discharge to a storm drain. New or substantially rehabilitated recreational spray and sprinkler pools shall be not be recirculating and shall not discharge to a storm drain. 
(c)  Discharges to storm drains which are authorized by this chapter are those specifically permitted under the city's NPDES general permit for discharges from its small municipal separate storm sewer as follows, unless identified by the DPW as significant sources of pollutants or as causing or contributing to a violation of water quality standards: 
(1)  Discharges composed entirely of stormwater. 
(2)  Nonstormwater discharges for which the owner has obtained an NPDES permit or NPDES permit exclusion from the EPA, and a building storm drain permit. 
(3)  Nonstormwater discharges from the following sources or as otherwise permitted under subsequent revisions of the NPDES general permit for discharges from the city's municipal separate storm sewer: 
a.  Water line flushing; 
b.  Landscape irrigation; 
c.  Diverted tide, river or stream flows; 
d.  Rising groundwater; 
e.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20); 
f.  Uncontaminated pump groundwater; 
g.  Discharge from potable water sources; 
h.  Foundation drains; 
i.  Air conditioning condensation; 
j.  Irrigation water, uncontaminated springs; 
k.  Water from crawl spaces pumps; 
l.  Footing drains; 
m.  Lawn watering; 
n.  Individual resident car washing; 
o.  Flow from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
p.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
q.  Street wash waters; 
r.  Residential building wash waters that do not contain detergents. 
(d)  Any area which is used to dispense fuel and is covered by a canopy or other type of roof or enclosure shall drain into an approved oil trap and then into a sanitary sewer, or if not available, a combined sewer. An alternative is to contain all runoff within the fuel dispensing area so that it is not drained off. The owner shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of any runoff which is contained in such a manner. The fuel dispensing area shall be graded so as to prevent any runoff to surrounding areas which drain into a storm drain. Runoff from canopies of gas stations and from fuel dispensing areas not in a building or covered by a canopy shall be drained according to city rules or, in the absence of such rules, as prescribed by the director. 
(Code 1994, § 6-56; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-220. - Pollution prevention in the stormwater collection system. 
    In order to maintain the city's efforts in prohibiting pollutants from being discharged into its waterways the following is required: 
(1)  In accordance with the city's illicit discharge detection and elimination plan nonstormwater discharges to the city's small MS4 system are strictly prohibited. Failure to comply with this section will require the immediate stoppage of such discharge and removal of any condition causing such discharge upon the order of the director or designee. If such orders are not complied with within seven days of issuance, the city will take such action that is necessary to remedy the situation and the cost of such action shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(2)  The proponents of all construction projects within the city must submit to DPW for approval a plan to manage sediment and erosion control, which includes stormwater and drainage, at the proposed location prior to or in conjunction with its building permit application. No building permits shall be approved and issued until such plan has been approved by the director. 
(3)  The proponents of all development and redevelopment projects within the city must submit to DPW for approval a plan to manage post construction runoff at the proposed location prior to or in conjunction with its building permit application to DPW. No occupancy permits shall be issued by the inspectional services department until such plan has been approved by the director and such approval has been communicated to the inspectional services department. 
(Code 1994, § 6-25; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-221. - Discharges exceeding standards. 
(a)  If any stormwater or other waters proposed to be discharged to the public drains or a natural outlet, which waters contain substances in excess of local, federal or state surface water quality standards, the director shall: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require treatment to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public drains or natural outlet. 
(b)  If the director permits the treatment prior to discharge to the public drain or combined sewer, or natural outlet, the owner shall at the owner's own expense design, construct and maintain a system to reduce such substances to a concentration of no greater than federal and state water quality standards prior to connection to the public drain or combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Code 1994, § 6-57; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-222. - NPDES permits. 
    Every person who is required to be covered under an NPDES permit for a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activities or for stormwater discharges from construction sites shall submit to the director a copy of the completed notice of intent or individual application as submitted to the EPA, and the following information: 
(1)  Address of the building or premises where the discharge will take place and the name and address of the building or premises owner; 
(2)  Name of a contact person, title and phone number; 
(3)  A site plan or sketch which shows the location of the connection of the building storm drain or the points of discharge to the public storm drain or combined sewer, including the street name, size of the storm drain or combined sewer to which the stormwater will discharge and, if the discharge is to a public drain the outfall location to which the discharge will be conveyed and discharged; 
(4)  Standard industrial code (SIC code) of the facility; 
(5)  A description of the product or services provided by the facility; 
(6)  A description of the nature of the discharge; 
(7)  Existing NPDES permit number, if any; 
(8)  Facility's water service account number; 
(9)  A copy of all reports and other correspondence required to be submitted under the NPDES permit. 
(Code 1994, § 6-60; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-223. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  All owners of existing properties shall implement industry standard structural and nonstructural best management practices (BMPs) to minimize the discharge of pollutants carried by stormwater runoff from their properties to any public drain or natural outlet. 
(b)  Every owner seeking to establish a new connection to the public drain or combined sewer, or natural outlet; to reconstruct, repair or modify an existing connection for a facility undergoing expansion; or as otherwise deemed necessary by the director under this chapter, may be required to do the following: 
(1)  Prepare and implement a stormwater management plan that identifies regulatory, structural, administrative, managerial, maintenance, physical and chemical measures or devices designed to prevent the discharge of pollutants to stormwater. 
(2)  Prepare and implement an erosion and sedimentation control plan to prevent the erosion of soil and the introduction of sediment into the public sewers and drains, during and after construction. 
(3)  Monitor their discharges to ensure compliance with federal and state surface water quality standards, or as the director or designee may reasonably require including, but not limited to: 
a.  Laboratory analysis of discharges; 
b.  Installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment; 
c.  Keeping records; and 
d.  Reporting the results of such monitoring to the director. 
Such records shall be made available upon request by the director to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
(4)  Implement on-site retainage of stormwater and other stormwater management measures to control the rate and volume of stormwater discharged to the public combined sewer or drains as determined by the director. 
(5)  Design and install on-site stormwater management measures such as BMPs and treatment systems to control the characteristics of stormwater discharged to the public combined sewer or drains. At a minimum, oil and particle separators shall be required on all newly constructed private storm drains from existing and new outdoor parking or paved areas which connect directly or indirectly to the public storm drain or natural outlet. Particle separators may be required on existing private storm drains from existing or expanded outdoor parking or paved areas whenever appropriate as determined by the director. All separators must be of a type and capacity appropriate for the drainage area served and approved by the director. 
(c)  All systems required by this section shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for operation, maintenance, cleaning and inspection. The design and installation of the systems shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of such specifications or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials, the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, Design and Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems and Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design and Construction, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission Guides for the Design of Wastewater Treatment Works, and title V of the State Environmental Code shall apply. Design and installation shall be at the facility owner's expense. The owner shall notify the director when the systems are ready for inspection and connection to the public drain. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or designee. If the applicant fails to make such notifications, any and all costs to uncover the systems as necessary for inspection shall be borne by the applicant. 
(d)  Prior to startup of all systems required by this section, owners of such systems shall submit to the director for review and approval, an operation and maintenance (O&M) plan for the system. The O&M plan shall include, at a minimum, a detailed listing of all operation, inspection, maintenance, cleaning or other procedures or activities required to ensure that the system operates in a continuously satisfactory and effective manner. The O&M plan shall be prepared at the owner's expense, and include site-specific procedures and activities as recommended by the system manufacturer for the particular installation. 
(Code 1994, § 6-58; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-224. - Maintenance, cleaning and inspection of systems to manage stormwater. 
(a)  Where systems are provided on a property to treat or otherwise manage stormwater prior to discharge to the public drain, public combined sewer, or natural outlet, the system shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense, including all maintenance and cleaning of the system as may be recommended by the system manufacturer, and annual inspection of the system by a person authorized by the manufacturer. Whenever such systems become clogged, broken, obstructed, out of order, unfit for drainage purposes, or detrimental to the public drain or to the receiving water, the owner, agent, occupant or person having charge of any such system shall, when directed by written notice from the director, remove, reconstruct, alter, cleanse or repair the system, as the conditions thereof require. In case of neglect or refusal to comply with such notice within five days after the same is given, the director may cause the system to be removed, reconstructed, repaired, altered or cleaned, as the director may deem expedient, at the expense of the owner, agent, occupant or other person so notified, who shall also be liable to pay the penalty provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of such facilities shall maintain a written record describing the date and type of all cleaning, maintenance and inspections performed, and the identity and qualifications of the person who performed such tasks. Records shall be maintained for six years and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the DPW. By March 31 of each year, the owner shall submit to the DPW a written record of the date and type of all maintenance, cleaning, and inspection performed during the prior calendar year. Records shall be specific to the site, system, and work performed. The director may reject any records that are not site specific. 
(Code 1994, § 6-59; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-225-30-241. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 30-242. - Generally. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged directly or indirectly into a public sanitary sewer or into a sanitary sewer tributary thereto any groundwater, dewatering drainage, subsurface drainage, tidewater, accumulated surface water, noncontact cooling water, noncontact industrial process waters, uncontaminated contact cooling water and uncontaminated industrial process water, or waters associated with the excavation of a foundation or trench, hydrological testing, groundwater treatment/remediation, removal or installation of an underground storage tank or dewatering of a manhole. Authorization for such discharge may be obtained in writing by the DPW and the MWRA when the discharger has taken all reasonable efforts to eliminate and minimize the flow, there is no reasonable access to a storm drain, surface water or another disposal alternative, and the amount to be discharged will not have an actual or potential adverse impact on the sewer system, the quality of receiving water or the DPW's ability to meet its obligations under any law, regulation, including MWRA regulations, permit or order. 
(b)  Any building sewer or private sewer connecting with a combined sewer shall be constructed with a plug or clapper to prevent completely the reflux of drainage matter, stormwater or tidewater. In order to prevent the direct discharge of wastewater to receiving waters under dry weather conditions, a building sewer shall not be connected to a combined sewer overflow. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer or combined sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to human or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works including, but not limited to, ash, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes, can harm either the sewer, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment processes, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 21 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (between zero degrees Celsius and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of one horsepower (1.00 hp) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  No person shall deposit in any sanitary, storm and combined sewers and appurtenances materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as that term is defined in section 30-1. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  No person shall allow the discharge or cause the discharge of water on or across a city sidewalk or way. 
(Code 1994, § 6-41; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-243. - Penalties for discharge. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 30-242, and which in the judgment of the director, DEP or MWRA, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1994, § 6-42; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-244. - Grease and oil separators. 
(a)  Grease, oil, gas, and sand interceptors/separators shall be provided when in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. At a minimum, oil traps or separators shall be installed on all building sewers and building floor drains from commercial garages, and enclosed parking areas. 
(b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Where grease, oil, gas, and sand interceptors/separators are provided for any waters or wastes, the system shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-43; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-245. - Preliminary treatment. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, the system shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 6-44; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-246. - Owner manholes. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a public sewer, combined sewer or drain shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters, and other appurtenances in the building to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the waters or wastes being discharged. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 6-45; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-247. - Special facilities. 
    When required by the director a user shall design, construct, install, operate and maintain special facilities which will provide for the regulation and control of the rate, volume and characteristics of discharges to the public sanitary sewers, combined sewers or drains. The design of such special facilities shall be subject to the approval of the director. Such special facilities shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained at the owner's expense. The DPW shall have the right to inspect such special facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to ascertain compliance with these regulations. 
(Code 1994, § 6-54; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-248. - Industry monitoring. 
    All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the director or designee may reasonably require, including installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the director. Such records shall be made available upon request by the director to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1994, § 6-47; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Secs. 30-249-30-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMITS 

Sec. 30-275. - Required. 
(a)  Every industrial user shall be required to obtain a permit and shall, within 90 days of the promulgation of the regulations codified in this chapter, complete and file at their own expense a permit application form with the director and the MWRA, unless a current permit is on file with both the director and the MWRA. Known industrial users who have not filed a permit application will be notified by the director or the MWRA to apply for a permit. All industrial users are advised to apply for a permit prior to such notification. Permit application forms may be obtained from the director and shall be filed within 30 calendar days of notification to both the director and the MWRA. Industrial user permits shall be renewed on a yearly basis on or before the expiration date of the current permit. 
(b)  The director and the MWRA shall evaluate the adequacy of data furnished in the application form. If insufficient data has been furnished, the director and/or the MWRA will notify the industrial user to provide additional data within a specified time. After acceptance of data, and satisfactory completion of any investigations deemed pertinent, the director and the MWRA will issue the permit. The director and the MWRA may stipulate special conditions and terms upon which the permit may be issued. 
(Code 1994, § 6-48; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-276. - Conditions. 
(a)  Industrial waste permits may contain the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on rate, time and characteristics of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Installation of inspection, flow measurement and sampling facilities, including access to such facilities; 
(3)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include flow measurement, sampling chemical and biological test, recording of data, and reporting schedule; 
(4)  Pretreatment requirements and schedules for implementation, including schedules for reporting progress toward meeting these requirements; 
(5)  Submission of discharge reports; 
(6)  Special service charges or fees; 
(7)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director and/or the MWRA to ensure compliance with this chapter and with applicable requirements of state or federal law. 
(b)  The conditions of all permits shall be enforced by the director and the MWRA in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  When required by the permit, each industrial permittee shall submit a duly signed discharge report to the director and the MWRA containing all information requested by the director and/or the MWRA in a form acceptable to the director and the MWRA. The director and the MWRA will evaluate the data furnished. If insufficient data has been furnished, additional information shall be furnished as required. 
(d)  The director and the MWRA may use the information provided in the permit applications, permits and discharge reports as the basis for determining user charges. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the limitations set forth herein, a special permit between the MWRA and the city and the user may be issued whereby a waste of unusual character or strength may be accepted on an interim basis when, in the opinion of the MWRA and the director, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and/or conditions of temporary duration. Such permit or amendment will be issued only when, in the opinion of the MWRA and the director, it would not cause any interference with or disruption in the treatment works, would not violate the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or state water quality standards, and would not force additional controls on other discharges to achieve compliance with effluent limitations. 
(Code 1994, § 6-49; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-277. - Transferability. 
    An industrial waste permit shall not be reassigned or transferred. 
(Code 1994, § 6-50; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Sec. 30-278. - Revocation. 
    If an individual user discharges amounts or rates of pollutants in violation of this chapter, the director or the MWRA may revoke the existing permit. If an industrial user shows that changes in the industrial process have improved the characteristics and/or volume of its discharge, the permit may be modified upon application by the industrial user to the DPW and the MWRA. 
(Code 1994, § 6-51; Ord. of 10-19-2009) 
Chapter 32 - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sealer of weights and measures, M.G.L. c. 41, § 85 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Establishment of city scales. 
    The city manager shall establish as many scales as may be necessary for the public good and convenience. 
(Code 1994, § 4-75) 
Sec. 32-2. - Fee for weighing on city scales. 
(a)  The fees for weighing on the city scales shall be set by the director of municipal inspections, subject to the approval of the city manager, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F and the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the director of municipal inspections. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(b)  However, no fee shall be charged for weighing done on account of the city, the state division of standards or the state registry of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1994, § 4-76) 
Sec. 32-3. - Fees for testing, sealing, adjusting or condemning a weights and measures device. 
    The director of municipal inspections or designee is authorized to charge reasonable fees for the testing, sealing, adjusting or condemning of weights and measures devices, all in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22F. A copy of the current fee schedule shall be placed on file in the city clerk's office by the director of municipal inspections. Such fee schedule shall be open for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during the regular business hours of city hall. 
(Code 1994, § 4-77) 
Chapter 34 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning, M.G.L. c. 40A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter are to achieve the objectives of the Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  The objectives include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  To conserve health; 
(3)  To secure safety from fire, flood, panic, congestion, confusion and other dangers; 
(4)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(5)  To prevent overcrowding of land; 
(6)  To avoid other dangers, to avoid undue concentration of population; 
(7)  To encourage housing for persons of all income levels; 
(8)  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements; 
(9)  To conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; 
(10)  To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city; and 
(11)  To preserve and increase amenities. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 1.1) 
Sec. 34-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority provided by, and in accordance with the provisions of chapter 103 of the Acts of 1994, the Charter Act; the provisions of chapter 200 of the Acts of 1991, an act establishing a receivership for the City of Chelsea; the Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A; and article 89 of the amendments to the state constitution. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 1.2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  Force and effect. The adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall have the force and effect of repealing all presently existing zoning ordinances and regulations and amendments thereto, heretofore adopted by the city. This chapter and the repeal of all presently existing zoning ordinances and regulations heretofore in force shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, or any penalty or liability incurred on any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived becomes effective. 
(b)  Effective date. The effective date of the regulations and restrictions of this chapter and the establishment of the respective districts shall be May 19, 2003, except as otherwise modified or amended by specific or general provision enacted after the date set out in this subsection. 
(c)  Other regulations. In general this chapter is supplementary to other ordinances affecting the use and dimensions of buildings, structures and premises. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than imposed by other ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(d)  Uniformity. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as establishing regulations or restrictions which are not uniform for each class or kind of buildings, structures or land, and for each class or kind of use in each district. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 1.3) 
Sec. 34-4. - Adoption of amendments. 
(a)  Generally. This chapter may be amended from time to time by a two-thirds (8 of 11) affirmative vote of the city council in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, § 5. 
(b)  Public hearing. No amendment to this chapter shall be adopted until after the planning board and the city council have each held a public hearing, together or separately. 
(c)  Notice. Notice of the time, place and subject matter of each required hearing shall be given as provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 5. 
(d)  Action. After the appropriate hearings have taken place the city council may adopt, reject, or amend and adopt any such proposed ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 1.4) 
State Law reference- Amendments, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 5. 
Secs. 34-5-34-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-27. - Specific districts. 
(a)  Established. For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R1 Residential R-1 District R2 Residential R-2 District R3 Residential R-3 District B Business District BR Retail Business District BR2 Retail Business 2 District BH Highway Business District SC Shopping Center District W Waterfront District I Industrial District LI Light Industrial/Office District LI2 Light Industrial/Office 2 District Naval Hospital Development District: NHR  Residential NHC  Commercial  
(b)  Residential 1 (R1) District. The purpose of the R1 district is to provide an area for residential and associated uses. 
(c)  Residential 2 (R2) District. The purpose of the R2 district is to provide an area for multifamily dwellings and associated uses. 
(d)  Residential 3 (R3) District. The purpose of the R3 district is to provide an area for higher density, multifamily dwellings. 
(e)  Business (B) District. The purpose of the B district is to provide areas for professional, business and governmental offices and related and complimentary uses. 
(f)  Retail Business (BR) District. The purpose of the BR district is to provide a downtown area with the range of business sales and services which generally constitute a central business district. 
(g)  Retail Business 2 (BR2) District. The purpose of the BR2 district is to encourage uses supportive of the adjacent residential areas and to allow for the development of residential buildings and residential units above ground floor retail. 
(h)  Highway Business (BH) District. The purpose of the BH district is to provide areas for retail businesses serving vehicles and for automotive sales and services. 
(i)  Shopping Center (SC) District. The purpose of the SC district is to provide areas of retail sales and services developed with more than one establishment on one lot with shared common facilities and on-site parking. 
(j)  Waterfront (W) District. The purpose of the W district is to provide an area for uses which are water related and/or which benefit from proximity to the airport or the harbor, and to encourage public access to the waterfront. 
(k)  Industrial (I) District. The purpose of the I district is to provide for research, manufacturing, wholesaling, and related distribution activities in locations with suitable access and where such activities can occur without an adverse impact upon residential areas. 
(l)  Light Industrial/Office (LI) District. The purpose of the LI district is to provide for office, light industry, research and development, wholesale and related distribution activities in locations with suitable access and where such activities can occur without an adverse impact upon residential uses. 
(m)  Light Industrial/Office 2 (LI2) District. The purpose of the LI2 district is to provide an area for light industrial uses compatible with the adjacent residential district. 
(n)  Naval Hospital Development-Residential (NHR) District. The purpose of the NHR district is to redevelop a portion of the former naval hospital site for residential purposes. 
(o)  Naval Hospital Development-Commercial (NHC) District. The purpose of the NHC district is to redevelop a portion of the former naval hospital site for office uses, recreational uses and related purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 2.1) 
Sec. 34-28. - Overlay districts. 
    The following overlay districts are also hereby created and are set forth in article VIII of this chapter: 
WIOD Waterfront Industrial Overlay District AROD Airport Related Overlay District IPOD Interim Planning Overlay District SCIPOD Shopping Center Interim Planning Overlay District WCFOD Wireless Communication Facilities Overlay District GASGOD Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District FOD Floodplain Overlay District RPOD Residential Planned Overlay District  
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 2.2) 
Sec. 34-29. - Zoning map. 
    Said districts are located and bounded as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map, Chelsea, Massachusetts," copies of which are on file in the offices of the city clerk, zoning enforcement officer and the planning board, dated August 5, 2008 and any amendments thereto. The zoning map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter and may be reissued by the planning board to incorporate such amendments as may be made by the city. The zoning enforcement officer shall maintain at least two currently accurate zoning maps of which one shall be displayed in the office of the zoning enforcement officer and one in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 2.3.1) 
State Law reference- Zoning map, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 4. 
Sec. 34-30. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    The location of district boundary lines shown upon the zoning map shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Street, railroad or utility. Where a boundary is shown as following a street, railroad or utility, the boundary shall be the centerline thereof unless otherwise indicated. 
(2)  Parallel. Where a boundary is shown outside of a street, railroad or utility, and is approximately parallel thereto, it shall be deemed parallel to the nearest property line thereof and the figure placed on the zoning map between the boundary and such line shall be the distance in feet between them, as measured at a right angle from such line unless otherwise indicated. 
(3)  Watercourse. Where a boundary is shown as following a watercourse, the boundary shall coincide with the centerline thereof as said centerline existed at the date of the zoning map. 
(4)  Property line. Where a boundary apparently follows a property line, it shall be interpreted as coincident. 
(5)  Divided lot. Where a district boundary line divides a lot, the more restricted zoning district shall be interpreted as extending no further than 20 feet into the adjacent district. 
(6)  Boundary dispute. In case of uncertainty, the building inspector shall determine the exact location of the boundary. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 2.4) 
Secs. 34-31-34-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-49. - Principal uses. 
(a)  Compliance; maximum principal uses. No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or used except as set forth in the table of principal use regulations in section 34-300, including the notes to the table, or as otherwise set forth herein, or as exempted by Massachusetts General Laws. Any building or use of premises not herein expressly permitted is hereby prohibited. Not more than one principal use shall be allowed on any lot, except as otherwise may be provided herein. 
(b)  Symbols. Symbols employed in the table of use regulations shall mean the following: 
Y A permitted use N An excluded or prohibited use SP A use authorized under special permit from the zoning board of appeals as provided under section 34-214  
(c)  Applicability. When an activity might be classified under more than one of the following uses, the more specific classification shall govern; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern. Where a use qualifies as a major commercial project, that category shall govern. 
(d)  Table of principal use regulations. See appendix C set forth in section 34-300. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 3.1) 
Sec. 34-50. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Generally. Accessory uses shall be on the same lot as the principal uses to which they are accessory except as provided in section 34-106(c) and shall not significantly alter the character of the premises on which they are located. 
(b)  Floor area. No accessory use or uses within a building other than an accessory garage shall occupy more than a combined total of 25 percent of the floor area of the related approved occupancy permit. 
(c)  Location. No accessory building, structure or use shall be located within the required front yard area nor shall be located nearer than five feet to any side or rear lot line except by special permit from the zoning board of appeals and conditional upon the following: 
(1)  Adequate access on the lot shall remain for the unobstructed passage of emergency equipment to the rear of the principal building; and 
(2)  In the case of a garage, the owner of the lot shall demonstrate that substantial hardship results where the parking is provided in another location or manner, and that such provision would not adversely affect surrounding properties or interfere with the movement of vehicles on the adjacent street. 
(d)  Accessory uses available in all districts. 
(1)  Accessory scientific uses. Activities accessory to activities otherwise permitted within the district as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, may be authorized in all districts by the grant of special permit by the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Retail business or personal service establishments. Retail business or personal service establishments conducted within and accessory to a principal building used as a parking facility may be authorized in all districts by the grant of special permit by the zoning board of appeals. 
a.  All such accessory uses occupy not more than 5,000 square feet of the floor area of the principal building unless otherwise allowed under special permit. 
b.  There shall be no exterior storage of materials or equipment. 
(e)  Accessory uses prohibited in all districts. Except as otherwise provided herein, the following accessory uses are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Nonpermanent residential structures. Nonpermanent residential structures, trailers and mobile homes. 
(2)  Nonpermanent nonresidential structures. Nonpermanent nonresidential structures, including trailers, trucks, open air stands and carts used for office space, retail space, wholesale storage or storage accessory to a principal use, except when use applies to provisions of section 34-50(g)(4). 
(f)  Accessory uses in the residential districts. In the R1, R2 and NHR districts, the following accessory uses are permitted: 
(1)  Home occupation. Home occupation or professional office conducted within and incidental to a principal building used for living purposes, provided that: 
a.  It does not change the residential character of such building and neighborhood; 
b.  It is operated by a resident of the building and has not more than one employee; 
c.  It shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the habitable space, as defined in the state building code; 
d.  There is no exterior storage of materials or equipment; 
e.  There is no display of signs and products visible from the street; 
f.  Only one home occupation shall be permitted per dwelling unit; and 
g.  There shall be no retail sale of merchandise on the premises. 
(2)  Barbershops. Barbershops shall only be allowed as an accessory use in R1 and R2 districts subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (f)(1) of this section and the following conditions: 
a.  There shall be a minimum of three off-street parking spaces on the lot in addition to those required for primary use; 
b.  There shall be a maximum of two chairs; 
c.  There shall be a separate means of egress for customers; 
d.  Services shall be provided by appointment only; 
e.  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 
f.  The barbershop shall be handicap accessible; 
g.  There shall be a bathroom (handicap) separate from the living space; and 
h.  If the barbershop has a maximum of one chair then there shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces on the lot in addition to those required for the primary use. 
(3)  Parking generally. Parking on public ways is governed by the regulations of the traffic and parking commission. Accessory parking as required in section 34-106 for use solely by residents of the premises is permitted provided that: 
a.  An additional parking space may be provided for one commercial vehicle up to 9,500 gvw (gross vehicle weight) for the business purpose of a resident of the premises. By special permit, parking may be authorized for one vehicle larger than the limit set forth in this subsection; and 
b.  The parking is on the same lot as the dwelling to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Community parking areas. In the case of community parking areas in the R2 and R3 districts only, a community parking area accessory to residential use is allowed by site plan review. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Private accessory structures not operated as part of a business, such as a private greenhouse, work shop, tool shed, bathhouse, garage or swimming pool. 
(6)  Motor vehicle operations. No repair, servicing, sale or storage of motor vehicle and vehicle parts may be conducted as an accessory use in any residential district. 
(g)  Accessory uses in the nonresidential districts. Any use permitted as a principal use is also permitted as an accessory use provided such use is customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land. Any use authorized as a principal use by special permit may also be authorized as an accessory use by special permit provided such use is customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land. Any use not allowed in the district as a principal use is also prohibited as an accessory use. Accessory uses are permitted only in accordance with lawfully existing principal uses. No repair, servicing, sale or storage of motor vehicle and vehicle parts may be conducted as an accessory use. In all instances where site plan review and approval is required for a principal use, the addition of any new accessory use to the principal use, where such addition exceeds the thresholds established in section 34-215, shall also require site plan review and approval. 
(1)  Parking area for residential structures. Parking areas serving one or more residential structures are permitted as an accessory use in the BR and W districts. 
(2)  Parking lot or garage. A parking lot or garage, solely for the parking of passenger cars of tenants, employees, customers or guests of adjoining buildings or establishments is permitted as an accessory use in all nonresidential districts. 
(3)  Retail sales in the industrial district. Retail sales may be offered accessory to a permitted use, provided that: 
a.  The sale of goods is limited to those compounded, processed, packaged, or treated on the premises; 
b.  All sales and storage is within an enclosed structure; 
c.  Floor area devoted to sales is not to exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the use to which it is accessory; and 
d.  There is sufficient off-street parking and off-street loading in accordance with the provisions of sections 34-106 and 34-107. 
(4)  Nonpermanent, non-business structures accessory to a medical center. Any self-contained nonpermanent, nonresidential facility in which medical or dental services will be practiced by Massachusetts licensed medical and dental professionals, which may be moved, towed, or transported from one location to another and used on a temporary or semi-permanent basis may be offered accessory to, and located on the same campus of, the principal medical center use. This accessory use will be subject to special permit approval by the zoning board of appeals and site plan approval by the planning board and must provide alternative parking if the proposed use utilizes existing parking on the site. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 3.2; Ord. of 5-4-2015(2) , §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 34-51. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  This chapter shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing, required by M.G.L. c. 40A, § 5, at which the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted. Such prior, lawfully existing, nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no modification of the use or structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder. 
(2)  Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to this chapter as hereafter amended unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of not more than six months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses. The zoning board of appeals may grant a special permit to change a nonconforming use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to nonconforming uses may be considered by the zoning board of appeals: 
(1)  Change or substantial extension of the use; 
(2)  Change from one nonconforming use to another, less detrimental, nonconforming use. 
(c)  Nonconforming structures. The zoning board of appeals may grant a special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with this section only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration or change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the zoning board of appeals: 
(1)  Reconstructed or extended; 
(2)  Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent. 
(d)  Findings. In order to make the required finding pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of this section, the zoning board of appeals shall obtain from the petitioner and verify information necessary to make the following determinations: 
(1)  Baseline conditions. The extent to which the existing nonconforming structure or use does not currently conform to the requirements of this chapter with regard to permitted use, dimensional controls, parking, loading, or other requirements. 
(2)  Proposed changes. The extent to which the proposal would: 
a.  Increase the nonconformity with respect to each of the dimensional controls set forth in the table of dimensional regulations in section 34-262; 
b.  The extent to which the proposal would increase any nonconformity with respect to required parking and loading; and 
c.  Whether the proposal would intensify the existing nonconformities or result in additional ones. 
(3)  Review and consideration of zoning board of appeals. In order to assist in making their decision, the zoning board of appeals shall also review and consider information related to the following: traffic; noise; lighting; heat, glare and vibration; drainage; air quality; intensity of use; other factors which might create a public nuisance. 
(e)  Variance required. The reconstruction, extension or structural change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to increase an existing nonconformity, or create a new nonconformity, including the extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a required yard, shall require the issuance of a variance from the zoning board of appeals; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures, which shall be governed by subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures. Nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed but not by more than 300 gross square feet upon the issuance of a building permit after a determination by the building inspector that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration or change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. The following circumstances shall not be deemed to increase the nonconforming nature of said structure: 
(1)  Alteration to a structure which complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements but is located on a lot with insufficient area, where the alteration will also comply with all of said current requirements; 
(2)  Alteration to a structure which complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage and building height requirements, but is located on a lot with insufficient frontage, where the alteration will also comply with all of said current requirements; 
(3)  Alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required yard or setback areas, where the alteration will comply with all current setback, yard, building coverage and building height requirements; the provisions of this subsection shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with current area and frontage requirements; 
(4)  Alteration to the side or face of a structure which encroaches upon a required yard or setback area, where the alteration will not encroach upon such area to a distance greater than the existing structure; the provisions of this subsection shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with current area and frontage requirements; and 
(5)  Alteration to a nonconforming structure which will not increase the footprint of the existing structure provided that existing height restrictions shall not be exceeded. 
In the event that the building inspector determines that the proposed change exceeds 300 gross square feet or that the nonconforming nature of such structure would be increased by the proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration or change, the zoning board of appeals may, by special permit, allow such reconstruction, extension, alteration or change where it determines that the proposed modification will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood. 
(g)  Abandonment or nonuse. A nonconforming use or structure which has been abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its protected status and be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Special permit for nonconforming structures or uses abandoned or not used for more than two years. Notwithstanding the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, § 6 or subsection (g) of this section, the zoning board of appeals may grant a special permit authorizing the reconstruction, alteration or rehabilitation, and occupancy and use of a nonconforming structure or use that has been abandoned or not used for a period of more than two years. 
(i)  Reconstruction after catastrophe. A nonconforming structure may be reconstructed after a catastrophe or after demolition in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Reconstruction of said premises shall commence within one year after such catastrophe, unless for good cause such period is extended, in writing, by the building inspector. The applicant must request such extension in writing, and if granted by the inspector, such extension shall be limited to six month intervals; 
(2)  Buildings as reconstructed shall be located on the same footprint as the original nonconforming structure, shall be only as great in volume or area as the original nonconforming structure, and shall meet all applicable requirements for yards, setback, and height; and 
(3)  In the event that the proposed reconstruction would: 
a.  Cause the structure to exceed the volume or area of the original nonconforming structure; 
b.  Exceed applicable requirements for yards, setback, and/or height; or 
c.  Cause the structure to be located other than on the original footprint; 
a special permit shall be required from the zoning board of appeals prior to such demolition. 
(j)  Reversion to nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 3.3) 
State Law reference- Nonconformities, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 6. 
Sec. 34-52. - Residential units in basement/ground floor in retail business districts. 
    Within the Retail Business (BR) and Retail Business 2 (BR2) Districts, residential units in the basement or on the ground floor shall only be allowed by special permit from the ZBA, except that no such special permit shall be allowed or considered by the ZBA for a residential unit on the ground floor or basement floor in that portion of the Retail Business District on Broadway between City Hall Avenue and Williams Street if such residential unit abuts Broadway. 
( Ord. of 11-21-2016(4) ; Ord. of 12-3-2018 , § 5) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted, Dec. 3, 2018, changed the title of § 34-52 from "Retail Business (BR) District" to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 34-53-34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-76. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  Generally. No structure shall be erected or used, premises used, or lot changed in size or shape except in conformity with the requirements of this section, unless exempted by this chapter or by statute. Dimensions shall meet the requirements of the table of dimensional regulations in section 34-262. 
(b)  One structure per lot. Except as otherwise provided herein, not more than one principal structure may be placed on any lot. 
(c)  Reduction in dimension. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 
(d)  Conversion of dwellings. No new dwelling unit created by the conversion of an existing dwelling into a greater number of units or by addition or enlargement of an existing dwelling shall be permitted unless the requirements of minimum lot area for each dwelling unit, maximum ratio of floor area to lot area, usable open space and off-street parking are satisfied for all dwelling units (in existence and proposed) in the dwelling after the conversion or enlargement. 
(e)  Table of dimensional requirements. See section 34-262. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.1) 
Sec. 34-77. - Notes to dimensional table. 
(a)  Retail Business (BR) District. A residential use or business use with dwelling permitted in the retail business district shall conform to the requirements of height, lot size, yard, useable open space, and floor area ratio as provided for in the R2 district. 
(b)  Airport related uses. All airport related uses as defined herein shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the Industrial (I) District. 
(c)  Waterfront (W) District. There shall be a land setback and/or easement of 15 feet from the mean high-water line or harbor street. 
(d)  Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.0 if the lot is two acres or more or if all parking is provided in a parking structure. 
(e)  Access road. An access road divided by a median strip shall be considered one access point. 
(f)  LI2 district. In the LI2 district, residential use shall conform to the requirements of the R3 district. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.2; Ord. of 11-21-2016(1) ) 
Sec. 34-78. - Special dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Reduction of lot area. No lot on which a building exists or is erected shall be altered and no structures shall be rearranged so as to create or increase a nonconformance with this chapter. This section shall not apply to a lot when a portion of it is taken for a public purpose. 
(b)  Area of corner lots. The area of a lot located at the intersection of streets may be computed as the area enclosed by the straight line extension of the right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets abutting the lot provided that the existing lot exclusive of this area contains at least 75 percent of the required area. 
(c)  Corner clearance. In order to eliminate interference with traffic visibility at the corner of any intersection, no building or structure, fence or wall, or off-street parking space may be located or vegetation other than shade trees may be maintained above a plane 21/2 feet above the curb grades of the property lines of intersecting streets 20 feet back from the point at which the tangents to the said property lines intersect; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the Retail Business District. 
(d)  Usable open space and balconies. Required usable open space may be provided either on grade level, on balconies, on decks or on the roof of the building and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Such areas shall be located at any level and shall be open to the sky (except for overhead balconies) and shall be unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of skylights, parapets and permitted signs above the bottom of such open spaces, and except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, eaves, chimneys and other ornamental features to the extent of not more than 30 inches. The 30-inch limitation does not apply to balconies; 
(2)  Such areas, except for balconies, roofs or decks, shall be developed and permanently maintained in grass or other plant materials or appropriately designed for outdoor recreational use for the occupants of the lot and shall be free of automotive traffic and parking; 
(3)  Service areas such as laundry yards, rubbish storage yards, and loading areas; entrance and service walkways, parking areas and driveways shall not be counted as usable open space; 
(4)  At least 75 percent of the required area or at least 100 square feet per bedroom, whichever is lesser, shall have a grade of less than eight percent if the open space is provided on grade level; 
(5)  When provided on grade level, the width and shape of such space shall be determined by the building inspector, and each dimension shall be at least ten feet; and 
(6)  In the R3 district, open space at ground level must be visually or physically accessible from public sidewalks/streets. A minimum of 50 percent of open space must be at grade; private balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can account for a maximum of 25 percent of the required open space; common balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can be used to satisfy the remaining requirement. 
(e)  Required yards in R1, and R2 and R3 districts. In the R1, R2 and R3 districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Upon application and authorization by the inspectional services department, in consultation with the planning and development department, a dwelling to be erected on a lot between two existing dwellings adjacent to the lot may seek approval to vary the front yard setback so as to be the average of the front yard setback in front of the two existing dwellings. 
(2)  The aggregate width of two side yards shall not be less than 20 feet in the R1 district or 12 feet in the R2 district and no single yard shall be less than five feet in either district. 
(f)  Side yards in BR and BH districts. In the Retail Business District and the Highway Business District, side yards between buildings without dwelling units may be omitted, provided that: 
(1)  The side yard does not adjoin a residential district or building used for residential purposes; 
(2)  The access of emergency equipment to the rear yard of any building is not thereby obstructed; and 
(3)  No off-street parking or loading area is thereby rendered inaccessible. 
(g)  Gasoline service stations and automobile repair services and washing in BH district. In the Highway Business District, the following dimensional requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations, including routine maintenance operations, as licensed under article V of chapter 14 in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  The minimum lot area shall be at least 8,000 square feet; 
b.  The minimum frontage on the principal street shall be at least 100 feet; 
c.  The minimum building setback from the street right-of-way shall be 30 feet and the minimum side and rear yard shall be 20 feet. There shall be no more than two 30-foot curb cuts (access or egress points) on each abutting street. Such curb cuts shall not be located less than 50 feet from any intersection; 
d.  All pump islands shall be set back at least 15 feet from the street right-of-way; 
e.  No vehicles in any inoperative condition are to remain on the site for more than a two week period unless enclosed in a building; 
f.  Screening shall be provided and maintained along adjoining properties in accordance with section 34-108; 
g.  Areas not covered by buildings or pavement shall be maintained in grass, trees, shrubs or similar landscape material; and 
h.  Hours of operation will be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise permitted by the license to operate. 
(2)  Automobile repair services and automotive washing and waxing establishments as licensed under article V of chapter 14, provided that: 
a.  All service is performed within an enclosed structure; 
b.  Such building shall be located not less than 100 feet from properties used or zoned for residential purposes; 
c.  Such building shall be set back at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way; 
d.  No motor vehicles in an inoperative condition are to remain on such site for more than a two week period unless enclosed in a building; 
e.  Screening in accordance with section 34-108 shall be provided and maintained along all adjacent properties; 
f.  All cleaning operations are wholly enclosed within a building; and 
g.  Hours of operation will be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise permitted by the license to operate. 
(h)  Yard requirements in SC and I districts. In the Shopping Center District and Industrial District, for a lot adjoining a residential district, the adjacent yard (front, side or rear) shall be at least equal to that required in the adjoining residential district. 
(i)  Projections into required yards. The following may project into required yards: 
(1)  Open steps. 
(2)  Terraces and porticos but to a distance no greater than five feet into the required front yard (exclusive of the open steps). 
(j)  Special height regulations. 
(1)  Exceptions. The height regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Erection of belfries and towers designed exclusively for ornamental purposes, flagstaffs, chimneys, flues, electric generating plants, passive solar devices, elevator shafts, water tanks, standpipes, bulkheads and mechanical equipment. 
b.  Parapet walls or cornices extending not more than three feet above the height limit. 
(2)  NHR district. In no event shall the height of structures in the Naval Hospital Development District-Residential be greater than 170 feet above mean sea level. 
(3)  Limitation of height due to Logan Airport. Reference should be made to Federal Aviation Regulations, 14 CFR, part 77, objects affecting navigable air space, or any amendments thereto, with regard to limitations on height of structures due to existing or planned approaches to Logan Airport. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, no structure shall be erected or maintained in any district to a height in excess of any limitations established by these regulations. 
(k)  Lot coverage. In the industrial district, a greater percent of site coverage may be permitted by special permit provided that the off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter are met. 
(l)  Floor area ratio in R2 and R3 districts. In a Residential R2 District or a Residential R3 District, the bonus floor area ratio delineated in the table of dimensional regulations in section 34-262 may apply, provided that: 
(1)  At least 50 percent of the required parking is enclosed underground, and/or within the principal building, and/or in a structure not more than ten feet high. 
(2)  100 square feet of the recreation space minimum required per family is provided in addition to the minimum required usable open space. Said recreation space may be provided in one or more of the following ways: 
a.  Usable open space as defined in subsection (d) of this section (one square foot measured shall equal one square foot credited); 
b.  Rooftop, safely railed, developed and maintained for recreational use and accessible to all tenants (one square foot measured shall equal 1.5 square feet credited); 
c.  Balconies, each reserved for the exclusive use of the dwelling unit from which it is directly reached, safely railed, having no side of less than six feet and not enclosed by walls of the principal building for more than half of the perimeter (one square foot measured shall equal two square feet credited); 
d.  Community or common rooms, at least one of which shall contain kitchen facilities, designed for social or recreational use by the tenants (one square foot measured shall equal three square feet credited); or 
e.  Arcades under the principal building, but screened from any adjacent parking areas, for pedestrian circulation or for recreational purposes (one square foot measured shall equal two square feet credited). 
(3)  In the R3 district only, the allowable floor area ratio (FAR) may be increased to 1.5 provided that the project accommodates ten percent of family housing or ten percent affordable housing. Family housing is defined as units with three or more bedrooms. Affordable housing is defined as housing targeted to families with incomes at or below 80 percent of the median area income. 
(4)  In the R3 district, the bonus floor area ratio delineated in the table of dimensional regulations in section 34-262 may apply provided that at least 50 percent of the required parking is enclosed underground (see definition in this subsection), and/or within the principal building, and/or in a structure not more than ten feet high. In the R3 district, the underground parking bonus is subject to the approval of a special permit, design review and site plan review. As described in the design guidelines, all underbuilding parking should be concealed from view from the street and the elevation should not be visible in the main facade of the building. For the purposes of this subsection only, the term "underground" means the location of the entire parking facility below the finished grade of the ground abutting the structure, or the underground portion thereof, which grade is maintained naturally without any structural support. No more than two access drives, which in combination total no more than 30 feet in width, shall be permitted to be above the finished grade and still be considered to be located underground. 
(m)  Floor area ratio in I district. In the Industrial (I) District, the maximum floor area ratio may be increased to 2.0, provided that: 
(1)  The area of the lot is two acres or more; or 
(2)  All required parking is provided underground or in a parking structure contained within the principal building. 
(n)  Siting of buildings. Permanent buildings shall be sited so that the entrance is oriented to face the frontage unless otherwise approved on a site plan. 
(o)  Indoor commercial recreation, theaters, concert halls and cinemas. Buildings and structures housing indoor commercial recreation, theaters, concert halls and cinemas shall be located not less than 25 feet from property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.3; Ord. of 9-27-2010(01), § 2) 
Sec. 34-79. - Temporary structures and use of land for development purposes. 
    The building inspector may authorize the use of land for temporary structures and other uses related to the staging of development on or near the locus, with an anticipated duration of not more than six months. The zoning board of appeals may authorize by special permit, subject to proper conditions to protect the district, such structures and uses with an anticipated duration of more than six months, provided that: 
(1)  No such permit shall be for more than a one-year period, subject to renewal as needed for the special purpose; and 
(2)  Upon expiration of such permit, the structure shall be removed and the use cease and the land shall be restored to usable condition. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.4) 
Sec. 34-80. - Special permit for dimensional relief. 
    The zoning board of appeals may vary the following otherwise applicable dimensional requirements upon the grant of a special permit: 
(1)  BH, LI, I, districts. In the Highway Business (BH), Light Industrial (LI), and Industrial (I) Districts, building heights greater than that permitted in the district as listed on the table of dimensional regulations in section 34-262 may be allowed by special permit and after site plan approval, provided that such height shall not be greater than 80 feet. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.5) 
Sec. 34-81. - Municipal uses. 
    Municipal uses shall be exempt from all regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 4.6) 
Secs. 34-82-34-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-106. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Accessible off-street parking facilities for the parking of motor vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Table of required off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking facilities shall meet the requirements of the table of off-street parking spaces in section 34-283. Off-street parking requirements for uses not specifically identified in the table of principal uses in section 34-300 shall be determined by the building inspector based on a use listed in the table which has characteristics similar to the use in question. 
(c)  Location of parking uses. 
(1)  Generally. Parking within the ground floor of dwelling structures shall require an intervening driveway of 20 feet in depth, unless a special permit is obtained. Drive curb cuts shall have a width no greater than that specified by the department of public works, unless a special permit is obtained. Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, required off-street parking areas shall be provided on the same lot they serve. Outdoor parking spaces shall not be allowed within any required front yard, nor within five feet of any wall containing ground floor or basement windows, nor within five feet of any side or rear lot line. 
(2)  Exemption. Off-street parking areas may be provided on another lot if: 
a.  The lot is under the same ownership as the lot of the principal use, or it shall be demonstrated that such lot constitutes a common parking lot serving several uses or a community parking facility intended for and used by residents in the area and that such lot furnishes the aggregate number of spaces required for each use or dwelling; 
b.  Access to such areas is not more than 300 feet from the nearest street line of the lots they are designed to serve; and 
c.  Such lot is not diverted to other uses except insofar as it can be shown that substitute parking meeting all other requirements of this subsection (c)(2) has been made available. 
(d)  Parking lot design. The following regulations are applicable to parking lots with five or more spaces: 
(1)  Access. Off-street parking spaces shall be so laid out that they are not directly accessible from a public way, but each space shall be accessible by means of an intervening private drive. 
(2)  Front yards. Parking areas within required front yards shall not be permitted except when a special permit is granted. 
(3)  Size of parking space. Each parking space (except in a commercial parking lot where cars are parked by an attendant) shall not be less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long. Parking spaces for disabled persons shall comply with the standards of the state architectural access board. 
(4)  Lots with ten or more spaces. In lots with over ten parking spaces, up to 25 percent of all parking spaces may be designed for small cars. Specifically, up to 25 percent of all parking spaces may be sized at an eight-foot by 15-foot standard, provided that said spaces are clearly reserved for small cars only. 
(5)  Lots with 20 or more spaces. No more than 20 spaces shall be provided in a row without separation by a pedestrian walkway, where required by the zoning enforcement officer, and by a landscaped area providing that in the case of double rows, this section shall mean 20 spaces on each side of the parking space area. 
(6)  Lighting. Any illumination for a parking area shall be arranged or designed so as to prevent glare and shall be shielded to prevent light from directly shining upon any adjoining building or property in residential use or adjacent streets. 
(e)  Access and aisles. All required parking areas shall be construed to include access driveways, median strips, landscaping, walks and other related installations in addition to the parking stalls. 
(1)  Access location. No entrance or exit for any off-street parking area with four or more parking spaces shall be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any two street lines. 
(2)  Aisle width. No aisle along which parking is permitted shall have less than the following widths: 
a.  12 feet for parallel parking; 
b.  12 feet for 30-degree angle parking; 
c.  15 feet for 45-degree angle parking; 
d.  19 feet for 60-degree angle parking; and 
e.  24 feet for 90-degree angle parking. 
(3)  Aisle design. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible circulation route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 in all directions. 
(f)  Enclosed parking. Part or all of the parking required herein may be enclosed within a structure conforming to all dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the following parking requirements shall apply to parking facilities in an enclosed structure: 
(1)  Size. Standard parking spaces shall be not less than 8.5 feet wide and 18 feet long. 
(2)  Small cars. Up to 50 percent of all parking spaces may be designed for small cars which shall be sized at 7.5-foot by 16-foot standard, provided that said spaces are reserved for small cars only and are clearly marked as reserved for small cars. 
(3)  Aisle. No aisle along which parking is permitted shall have less than the following widths: 
a.  19 feet for 60-degree angle parking (minimum angle of parking shall be 60 degrees). 
b.  22 feet for 90-degree angle parking. 
(g)  Maintenance. All parking areas and driveways, except those for single- or two-family structures, shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  Surface. A paved surface, properly drained, shall be provided. Parking areas not required by this chapter and which are used only occasionally may be maintained in grass. 
(2)  Signage. Required parking spaces, except for dwellings containing six units or less, shall be clearly marked and any one-way driveways serving them shall have the direction of travel clearly indicated. 
(3)  Prohibited uses. Required parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, dead storage, loading/unloading, trash removal, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. 
(h)  Special district regulations. 
(1)  Retail Business District. In the BR district, no off-street parking requirements shall be required for any change of use, new construction or addition that results in a new use, new construction or addition that is less than 5,000 gross square feet excluding basement, cellars and below grade parking areas. 
a.  No owner shall as a result of a change of use or addition remove any existing off-street parking in order to expand the existing building unless said parking is replaced elsewhere on site. 
b.  Any change of use, new construction, or addition in excess of 5,000 gross square feet shall provide off-street parking at a rate consistent with section 34-283 for the amount of the resulting structure in excess of 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (h)(1) of this section shall apply to all nonresidential uses allowed in the BR district by right and by special permit except the following uses, which shall remain subject to section 34-283 and all applicable subsections of this section: inns, hotels, motels, tourist homes, cinemas, clubs, concert halls, schools, theaters and religious institutions/religious purposes. 
(i)  Shared parking. Notwithstanding any other parking requirements set forth in this chapter for individual land uses, when any land or building is used for two or more distinguishable purposes (i.e., joint or mixed use development), the minimum total number of parking spaces required to serve the combination of all uses shall be determined in the following manner: Multiply the minimum parking requirements for each individual use by appropriate percentage (as set forth in the table of shared parking credits in this subsection for each of the five designated time periods and then add the resulting sums from each vertical column. The column total having the highest total value is the minimum shared parking space requirement for that combination of land uses. 
TABLE OF SHARED PARKING CREDITS (WEEKDAYS) 
Use 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m. (percent) 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (percent) 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight (percent) 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (percent) 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (percent) Residential 100 60 90 80 90 Office or industrial 5 100 10 10 5 Retail 5 90 50 100 70 Hotel 70 70 100 70 100 Restaurant 10 50 100 50 100 Restaurant associated with hotel 10 50 60 50 60 Entertainment or recreation facility 10 40 100 80 100 Child care facility 5 100 10 20 5 All other uses 100 100 100 100 100  
(j)  Special permit. Any parking requirement set forth in this section may be reduced upon the issuance of a special permit by the zoning board of appeals, if the board finds that the reduction is not inconsistent with public health and safety, or that the reduction promotes a public benefit. Such cases might include: 
(1)  Use of a common parking lot for separate uses having peak demands occurring at different times; 
(2)  Age or other characteristics of occupants of the facility requiring parking which reduces auto usage; 
(3)  Peculiarities of the use which make usual measures of demand invalid; 
(4)  Availability of on-street parking or parking at nearby municipally owned facilities; or 
(5)  Where a special permit is granted, a reserve area to be maintained indefinitely, as landscaped open space may be required, sufficient to accommodate the difference between the spaces otherwise required and the spaces reduced by special permit. The parking/site plan shall show (in dotted outline) how the reserve area would be laid out to provide the otherwise required number of spaces. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 5.1) 
Sec. 34-107. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Compliance. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in all districts in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Location of facilities. 
(1)  Generally. Loading facilities, whether docks or spaces, shall be adjacent to, partly within, or completely enclosed within a structure. Such facilities shall be on the same lot as the building or use they are intended to serve. 
(2)  Industrial district. In an I district, no loading facility shall be permitted closer than 100 feet to any residential district. 
(c)  Table of off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for each type of indicated use according to the table of off-street loading requirements, which states the number of spaces permitted, except for food distribution uses, in which case only the minimum shall apply. In the table: 
(1)  Category 1 shall include retail, trade, wholesale, storage, industry and utilities; 
(2)  Category 2 shall include office buildings, hotel, institutional, recreational and educational uses. 
TABLE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Gross floor area of structure(s) (times 1,000) 4-15 15-50 50-100 100-150 For each additional 150 Category 1 1 2 3 4 1 Category 2 1 1 2 3 1  
(d)  Design. Loading facilities shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Access. No entrance or exit for any loading berth shall be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any two street lines. Access shall be provided via an intervening driveway or maneuvering areas, but not directly from a public way. 
(2)  Size. Each loading bay shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 14 feet in height, and 25 feet in length for normal usage and 65 feet in length for tractor trailer usage (exclusive of platforms, maneuvering space, access drives and screening). 
(3)  Maneuvering space. Required loading bays shall include sufficient reserved space on the lot in addition to the bays so that vehicles can be maneuvered into position without interference with streets or required off-street parking. 
(e)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Areas or facilities designed for off-street loading shall be used exclusively for loading, maneuvering access and landscaping. They shall not be used in a manner which will interfere with their required purpose, nor to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of section 34-106. 
(2)  Off-street loading facilities shall not be reduced in number or encroached upon in any manner after their initial provision unless a change in use occurs which permits a reduction in quantity. 
(3)  No part of an off-street loading facility required for any building or use shall be included as part of a loading facility similarly required for another building or use unless the type of building or use indicates that the usage or the loading facilities will not occur simultaneously. 
(f)  Special permit. Any loading requirement set forth in this section may be reduced upon the issuance of a special permit by the zoning board of appeals if the board finds that the reduction will not result in substantial detriment to the neighborhood or the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 5.2) 
Sec. 34-108. - General landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is designed to accomplish the following objectives: 
(1)  To provide a suitable boundary or buffer between residential uses and districts and nearby nonresidential uses; 
(2)  To define the street edge and provide visual connection between nonresidential uses of different architectural styles; 
(3)  To separate different and otherwise incompatible land uses from each other in order to partially or completely reduce potential nuisances such as dirt, dust, litter, noise, glare from motor vehicle headlights, intrusion from artificial light (including ambient glare), or view of signs, unsightly buildings or parking lots; 
(4)  To provide visual relief and a source of shade in parking lots and other areas, and protection from wind in open areas; 
(5)  To preserve or improve the visual and environmental character of the city, as generally viewed from residential or publicly accessible locations; and 
(6)  To offer property owners protection against diminution of property values due to adjacent nonresidential use. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to any nonresidential use and to multifamily dwellings. 
(1)  Special permit. By special permit, the planning board may authorize a reduction in the requirements of this section, where such reduction will not result in substantial detriment. 
(c)  Landscaping requirements for property lines. Property lines with residential districts shall be screened from nonresidential uses by means of plantings or maintenance of trees of a species common to the area and appropriate for screening, spaced to minimize visual intrusion and providing an opaque year-round visual buffer between uses. Such plantings shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property used for nonresidential purposes. No part of any building or structure or paved space intended for or used as a parking area may be located within the buffer area. Planted buffer areas along property lines with residential districts or uses shall be of the following minimum depth in each district: 
District B BR BH SC WF I LI NHR NHC Depth of buffer (in feet) 10 10 10 20 10 20 10 10 20  
(d)  Planted area requirements. Planted areas shall contain an appropriate mix of the types of plants set forth in this subsection. Plant species shall be appropriate to proposed use, siting, soils and other environmental conditions. Where the planning board determines that the planting of trees is impractical, the permit applicant may substitute shrubbery for trees. 
(1)  Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 2.5 feet in height at the time of planting, and have a spread of at least 18 inches. 
(2)  Grass is preferable to mulch where practical. 
(3)  Existing trees with a caliper of six inches or more shall be preserved wherever feasible. 
(4)  Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in caliper as measured six inches above the root ball at time of planting. Deciduous trees shall be expected to reach a height of 20 feet within ten years after planting. Evergreens shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting. 
(e)  Coordination with site plan approval. The planning board shall require a landscaping plan as part of the overall site plan for the premises. Such landscaping plan shall be at a scale sufficient to determine compliance with the specifications set forth in this section. 
(f)  Maintenance of landscaped areas. The owner of the property used for nonresidential purposes shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials installed in accordance with this section and shall have a continuing obligation to comply with the provisions set forth herein. All plant materials required by this chapter shall be maintained in a healthful condition. Dead limb refuse and debris shall be promptly removed. Dead plantings shall be replaced with new live plantings at the earliest appropriate season. Bark mulch and nonplant ground surface materials shall be maintained so as to control weed growth. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 5.3) 
Sec. 34-109. - Signs and illumination. 
(a)  Generally. Any sign erected or painted on a structure after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall conform to the applicable standards set forth herein. 
(1)  Permit required. The erection of any sign in excess of six square feet shall require a permit from the building inspector and the zoning enforcement officer who shall determine conformance of such signs with these provisions. 
(2)  Everett Avenue urban renewal area. In the Everett Avenue urban renewal area, signage is subject to design review and design standards. See section 34-155(h) and (i). 
(3)  Materials. Signs other than permitted temporary signs shall be constructed of durable materials. The owner of any sign shall inspect annually such sign belonging to such owner and it shall be the duty of said owner to keep such signs in good repair and of neat appearance at all times. 
(b)  Signs in residential districts. The following signs are permitted in R1, R2 and R3 districts: 
(1)  One sign per occupant not exceeding two square feet in area may be placed either on each wall of a building facing a street or in each yard facing a street provided that, if freestanding, it shall not be higher than four feet and shall be set back at least three feet from the street line. Such signs shall be for identification purposes only, displaying the number or name of the occupant, except that they may include identification of any accessory professional office and other permitted accessory uses. A sandwich sign shall not be considered a freestanding sign and is not allowed. 
(2)  One bulletin or announcement board or identification sign not exceeding ten square feet in area for each permitted nonresidential building or use provided that such sign, if freestanding, shall not be located nearer to a street line than one half of the depth of the required front yard. Churches, public educational and other institutional uses shall be permitted two such bulletin or identification signs on each building provided one does not exceed 20 square feet in area and the other ten square feet in area. 
(3)  One temporary real estate sign advertising the sale or rent of the premises on which the sign is located not exceeding six square feet in area. 
(4)  One temporary contractor's sign maintained on a building while work is actually in progress not exceeding 20 square feet in area. 
(c)  Signs in Retail Business (BR) Districts. The following signs are permitted in BR and BR2 districts: 
(1)  One sign only pertaining to each establishment or occupancy in a building, store or office painted or attached to a building not exceeding 15 percent of the area of the building face upon which the sign is attached or of 100 square feet whichever is the smaller area provided that in the case of an open air use containing no building, one freestanding sign not exceeding 60 square feet shall be permitted for each 100 feet of lot frontage on the street on which the use had direct frontage. 
(d)  Signs in Highway Business (BH), Shopping Center (SC), Industrial (I) and Waterfront (W) Districts. The following signs are permitted: 
(1)  Two signs pertaining to each establishment or occupancy in a building, store or office the total area of which shall not exceed 200 square feet shall be permitted, provided that: 
a.  One of these signs may be freestanding, further provided that such sign shall not exceed 15 percent of the area of the building face or 60 square feet whichever is the smaller area. 
b.  In the case of an open air use containing no building, one freestanding sign not exceeding 60 square feet shall be permitted for each 100 feet of lot frontage on the street on which the use had direct frontage. 
(e)  Signs in the Naval Hospital District-Commercial. The following signs are permitted in the NHC district: 
(1)  Each industrial building shall be permitted one sign on each wall facing a street on which the building has direct frontage, provided that such signs must be attached and parallel to the building. 
(f)  Off-premises signs. 
(1)  Special permit. Billboards or signs advertising a business, service or product at another location, hereinafter referred to as off-premises signs, shall not be erected except upon the issuance of a special permit by the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Nonconforming off-premises signs. Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision of this chapter, any off-premises sign or billboard which was lawfully erected and maintained, and for which a permit was issued under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 93, was in compliance with the ordinances of the city and was otherwise lawful in all respects on the date when said permit was issued, shall be permitted to be used and maintained and may from time to time be repaired or replaced without the approval of said zoning board of appeals. 
(g)  Design standards and restrictions. 
(1)  No hanging or projecting signs shall be permitted. 
(2)  All signs or advertising devices shall be stationary, except time and temperature indicators, and may not contain any visible moving or movable parts. 
(3)  No sign shall generate music or an audible message. 
(4)  No sign, other than traffic control and route signs authorized by public agencies shall be placed within a public right-of-way. 
(5)  No sign shall be so designed, colored or placed, as to endanger, obscure, confuse, blind by glare or otherwise create a hazardous condition to motor vehicle traffic or pedestrians. 
(6)  No sign painted on or attached to a building shall project more than six inches from the wall or above its roof or parapet line. 
(7)  No sign shall be placed in any side or rear yard adjoining a residential district. 
(h)  Illumination. The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Signs in residential districts may not be illuminated except for signs identifying a place open to the public, such as a church or nursing home, and such signs may be lighted only indirectly and in a manner that will not permit direct light to shine onto any street or adjacent property. 
(2)  Any lighting shall be continuous and nonflashing. 
(3)  No signs shall be of the exposed neon-type or exposed gas-illuminated type. 
(i)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Banners, flags and pennants. Banners, flags and pennants associated with an event, such as grand openings, sales or closings, are not allowed on any premises for more than two weeks in the aggregate in any calendar year. 
(2)  Removal. Temporary signs relating to a business, service, product or activity on the premises on which the sign is located shall be removed from public view within seven days after the activity advertised has ceased or after substantial damage to the sign, whichever comes first. 
(3)  Placement. No temporary sign shall be placed or allowed to be placed or affixed to any public building, land, fence, utility pole or tree within the city. 
(4)  Mobile signs. Mobile signs are prohibited in the city. 
(j)  Removal. 
(1)  Change in occupancy causes sign not apply. Any sign erected after adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which, because of a change in occupancy, ceases to refer to a bona fide business conducted, or product sold on the premises, shall be removed by the owner within 30 days after written notification from the building inspector or within such longer period not exceeding one year as the inspector and zoning officer may determine. 
(2)  Projecting sign. Any projecting sign which, because of a change in occupancy or a change in use, ceases to refer to a bona fide business conducted, or product sold on the premises shall be removed by the owner within 60 days after written notification from the building inspector and zoning enforcement officer or within such longer period not exceeding one year as the inspector and zoning officer may determine. 
(3)  Nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs may continue to be used and maintained hereafter and may be repaired or replaced from time to time, unless ordered removed in accordance with this chapter or unless abandoned. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 5.4) 
Sec. 34-110. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Compliance. All proposed uses of buildings, lots or premises within any district after passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall conform to this section. 
(2)  Burden of proof. The applicant, at the applicant's own expense, shall furnish evidence sufficient to satisfy the zoning enforcement officer that the proposed use of the building or premises will not produce any occurrences beyond the lot lines as measured by the performance standards listed below or as existing in comparable operations in the district. 
(3)  Abatement. Any activity resulting in a violation of the standards set forth in this section shall be reduced to acceptable standards or discontinued. 
(b)  Air pollutants. Except as is herein provided, all use and conditions of land, buildings and structures shall be in conformance with the regulations set forth at 310 CMR 6.00-8.00. 
(c)  Noise. Noise shall be controlled and in conformity with section 16-99, noise control. 
(d)  Odor. Emissions from plant sites or other sources as measured at the user's property line shall not exceed the established threshold limit values for odors as outlined in T.M. Hellman and F.H. Small, Journal Air Pollution Control Association, 24(10), 979-982, (1974); and amendments thereto added by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. 
(e)  Heat, glare and vibration. No heat, glare or vibration shall be discernible without instruments from the outside of any structure. 
(f)  Waste disposal, water supply and water quality. The regulations of the state department of public health shall be met and when required, approval shall be indicated on the application for a building permit. In no case shall discharge cause the waters of the receiving body to exceed the limits assigned by the state water resources commission, division of water pollution control, as published and entitled "Water Quality Standards," filed with the secretary of state on September 21, 1978, and amendments thereto, for streams and water bodies within the city. 
(g)  Storage. All materials, supplies and equipment shall be stored in accordance with the Fire Prevention Standards of the National Fire Protection Association and shall be screened from view from public ways or abutting properties. 
(h)  Exterior lighting. No exterior lighting, other than street lighting approved by the department of public works, shall shine on adjacent properties or toward any street. 
(i)  Exterior lighting in residential districts. In the R1 and R2 districts, the exterior illumination of buildings or grounds except as may be permitted for required parking areas, shall: 
(1)  Be permitted only for noncommercial uses open to the public, such as a church or playground; 
(2)  Be shown on a site plan approved by the building inspector; and 
(3)  Be continuous and nonflashing. 
(j)  Building construction. All buildings shall be of construction prescribed in the state building code. No building permit shall be granted unless the application for such permit is filed in accordance with the building code. 
(k)  Hazardous materials. 
(1)  Compliance with regulations. All hazardous materials used, created, stored, processed, disposed of by processing, diluting, burying or containment, leaching or any other manner, or transported (including piping) in the city shall be used, stored or transported in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(2)  Notice. Except for transport on Route 1, a notice for use, creation, storage, processing, disposal and transport shall be filed with the board of health, on such forms as they shall require. Notification shall include, as a minimum, identification of material, the amount involved, the process, if any, the routes of transport, carrier and conveyance, if any. The board of health may require a bond be posted to cover any and all possible damage to persons, property and environment. 
(l)  Erosion control. Whenever the existing contours of the land are altered, the land shall be left in a usable condition, graded in a manner to prevent the erosion of soil and the alteration of the runoff of water to or from abutting properties, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(m)  Dish antennas. Accessory dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard in all residential zoning districts and shall be set back at least ten feet from all property lines, principal buildings, and accessory buildings, and shall not have a diameter greater than one-third of the required rear yard. For commercial or industrial districts the dish antennas may be located in either the rear yard or on a roof at the discretion of the zoning enforcement officer after consultation with the building inspector. 
(n)  Electrical interference. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(o)  Waterways license. All uses within state trustlands, tidelands, rivers and streams shall be further subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 91 and 310 CMR 9.00. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 5.5) 
Sec. 34-111. - Community improvement trust fund. 
(a)  The community improvement trust fund. In any case where the zoning board of appeals (ZBA), with the exclusion of single, two-, and three-family dwellings, grants a special permit or variance resulting in an increase in intensity of use, the ZBA shall require the applicant to make a payment into a community improvement trust fund only for that portion of the new structure or structures which: (1) extend into the area of required open space from which the developer received relief; or (2) exceed the number of units, the FAR, the height, or the maximum building coverage beyond what is currently nonconforming within the district in which they are located. The ZBA may waive the requirements of this section upon a recommendation from the department of planning and development. 
    Payments shall be made to the community improvement trust fund in two equal installments in a sum equal to three percent of the total construction cost beyond what percent of construction is currently nonconforming. The first installment shall be made prior to the granting of any foundation or building permit, and the second installment shall be made prior to issuance of any temporary or permanent occupancy permit. The construction costs shall be determined by the applicant and for the review and approval of the department of planning and development. In determining the construction costs, the applicant shall use median square foot construction costs in the Boston metropolitan area as defined by any generally accepted construction cost estimating publication. 
(b)  Administration of the fund. The community improvement trust fund shall be established in the city treasurer and shall be kept separate and apart from other moneys. Any moneys deposited in said fund shall be expended only at the direction of the city manager as approved by the city council for the purposes mentioned below. The city treasurer shall be the custodian of the fund and may deposit the proceeds in a bank or invest the same in such securities as are legal for the investment of funds of saving banks under the laws of the commonwealth or in federal savings and loan associations situated in the commonwealth. Any interest earned thereon shall be credited to and become part of such fund. The fund shall be administered by the department of planning and development. 
(c)  Expenditure of funds. Any moneys in the fund may be expended only by a majority vote of the entire membership of the city council and shall be appropriated only for the following purposes: infrastructure and public facilities directly impacted by the project which are included in the city's capital improvement plan; traffic signalization improvements; sewer, water and drainage improvements; recreation and open space areas and the support of athletic programs; fire protection facilities and equipment; crime prevention facilities and equipment; school buildings and educational programs; and library improvements. Community improvement trust funds may also be appropriated to support affordable housing initiatives and economic development activities in accordance with any of the city's housing and/or economic development plan. No moneys in this fund shall be used for any purposes not included or directly related to the purposes listed above. 
( Ord. of 11-21-2016(5)) 
Secs. 34-112-34-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

Sec. 34-134. - Wind energy conversion systems. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide by special permit for the construction and operation of wind facilities and to provide standards for the placement, design, construction, monitoring, modification and removal of wind facilities that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources of the city or town and provide adequate financial assurance for decommissioning. 
(2)  Applicability. This section applies to all wind facilities defined in subsection (b) of this section proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. Any physical modification to existing wind facilities that materially alters the type or increases the size of such facilities or other equipment shall require a special permit. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial wind facility means a wind facility, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be sold to the wholesale electricity markets. The term "commercial wind facility" means more than 50 percent of the electrical generation of the facility is sold to the wholesale electricity markets. 
    Community wind facility means a wind facility, where two or more abutting landowners use their property or adjacent property to construct a wind turbine, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be used by the landowners. 
    Freestanding wind facility means a wind facility, not located on an existing structure, including, but not limited to, businesses and residential homes. 
    Height means the height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height. 
    Municipal wind facility means a project initiated by the local government whose primary purpose is to provide power for municipal uses. 
    Nonfreestanding (attached) wind facility means a wind facility, which is situated upon or attached to a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, businesses and residential homes. 
    Off-site wind facility means a wind project, which is located on a lot adjacent to, abutting or connected with, by power lines to a commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional or public facility that will consume more than 50 percent of the electricity generated by the project off site. 
    On-site wind facility means a wind project, which is located at a commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional or public facility that will consume more than 50 percent of the electricity generated by the project on site. 
    Rated nameplate capacity means the maximum rated output of electric power production equipment. This output is typically specified by the manufacturer with a nameplate on the equipment. 
    Residential wind facility means a wind facility, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be used by a single residence. 
    Special permit granting authority means the zoning board of appeals for the issuance of special permits, or by this section for the issuance of special permits to construct and operate wind facilities. 
    Structure means any construction, erection, assemblage or other combination of materials upon the land, necessitating pilings, footings or a foundation for attachment to the land to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, fence of more than six feet in height, platform, swimming pool, wind facility or the like. 
    Utility-scale wind facility means a commercial wind facility, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be sold to the wholesale electricity markets. 
    Wind facility means all equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity. The term "wind facility" includes, but is not limited to, transmission, distribution, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines. 
    Wind farm means a group of two or more wind facilities located on the same or adjacent lots, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be sold to the wholesale electricity markets. 
    Wind turbine means a device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a tower, nacelle body and a rotor with two or more blades. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  Special permit granting authority. No wind facility shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a special permit from the zoning board of appeals. The construction of a wind facility shall be permitted in any zoning district subject to the issuance of a special permit and provided that the use complies with all requirements set forth in this subsection and subsections (d) through (f) of this section. All such wind energy facilities shall be constructed and operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts, no special permit shall be granted unless the zoning board of appeals finds in writing that: 
a.  The specific site is an appropriate location for such use; 
b.  The use is not expected to adversely affect the neighborhood; 
c.  There is not expected to be any serious hazard to pedestrians or vehicles from the use; 
d.  No nuisance is expected to be created by the use; and 
e.  Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the use. 
Such permits may also impose reasonable conditions, safeguards, and limitations on time and use and may require the applicant to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the wind facility, should they occur. Wind monitoring or meteorological towers shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to issuance of a building permit for a temporary structure and subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard size, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. Such towers must be removed after one year in accordance with the removal procedures described in subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction and operation of all such proposed wind facilities shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications, and aviation requirements. 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance. The applicant shall be required to provide evidence of comprehensive/commercial general liability insurance in an amount and for a duration sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures occasioned by the failure of the facility. Special permits shall be conditioned upon receipt of insurance certificates proving the applicants insurance coverage and shall be provided to the special permit granting authority. 
(4)  Site control. At the time of its application for a special permit, the applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective control of the project site sufficient to allow for installation and use of the proposed facility. Documentation shall also include proof of control over setback areas and access roads, if required; control shall mean the legal authority to prevent the use or construction of any structure for human habitation within the setback areas. 
(d)  General siting standards. 
(1)  Height. The applicant for a permit to build a wind facility must obtain an airspace obstruction report and opinion letter from a qualified consultant prior to submitting an application to the zoning board of appeals. This report must specifically state the height of the proposed wind facility. Wind facilities shall be no higher than 200 feet above the current grade of the land, provided that wind facilities may exceed 200 feet if: 
a.  The applicant demonstrates by substantial evidence that such height reflects wind industry standards for a similarly sited wind facility; 
b.  The facility satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special permit under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  Established. Wind facilities shall be set back a minimum of three-fourths or 0.75 times the overall blade tip height of the wind turbine from front, side and rear property lines, and all occupied structures. A setback from a common property line shall not be required when the abutters are joint owners (community wind facility) of the wind facility or when the abutting owners grant an easement to the owner of the wind facility. Joint/community wind facilities must be set back three-fourths or 0.75 times the overall blade tip height of the wind turbine from all occupied structures whether on site or on abutting parcels. 
b.  Waiver. The zoning board of appeals may reduce the minimum setback distance as appropriate based on site-specific considerations, if the project satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special permit under the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Design standards. 
(1)  Color and finish. The zoning board of appeals shall have discretion over the turbine color, although a neutral, nonreflective exterior color designed to blend with the surrounding environment is encouraged. 
(2)  Lighting and signage. 
a.  Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Lighting of other parts of the wind facility, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. 
b.  Signage. Signs on the wind facility shall comply with the requirements of the section 34-109, and shall be limited to: 
1.  Those necessary to identify the owner, providing a 24-hour emergency contact number, and warn of any danger; 
2.  Educational signs providing information about the facility and the benefits of renewable energy. 
c.  Advertising. Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the wind energy facility. 
d.  Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate utility connections from the wind facility underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider but shall be screened from view by vegetation or fencing, as approved by the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to such wind facilities shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other and shall be contained within the turbine tower whenever technically and economically feasible. Structures shall only be used for the housing of equipment for the particular site. Whenever reasonable, structures should be screened from view by vegetation or fencing and/or located in an underground vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. 
(f)  Safety, aesthetic and environmental standards. 
(1)  Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site plan to the city emergency management department. Upon request the applicant shall cooperate with the city's public safety department to develop an emergency response plan. 
(2)  Shadow/flicker. Wind facilities shall be sited in a manner that minimizes shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses through either siting or mitigation. 
(3)  Noise. The wind facility shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the following maximum noise levels at ground level, as measured on the A scale of a type 1 sound level meter, at a point 100 feet from the tower base, with the wind speed averaging 30 miles per hour or less: 
Ambient Reading 
(without wind facility operating) Maximum Reading 
(with wind facility operating) 45 dB or less 48 dB 45 dB 50 dB 50 dB 55 dB 55 dB 60 dB 60 dB 65 dB  
Prior to the wind facility being built sound level measurements shall be taken and measured on the A scale using a type 1 sound level meter. During the daytime hours (8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.), the wind facility shall not exceed L90 65 dB(A). During evening hours (7:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.), the wind facility shall not exceed L90 55 dB(A). These criteria are measured both at the property line and at the nearest inhabited residence. An analysis prepared by a qualified engineer shall be presented to demonstrate compliance with these noise standards. 
(4)  Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the wind facility and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and other ordinances. 
(g)  Monitoring and maintenance. 
(1)  Facility conditions. 
a.  The applicant shall maintain the wind facility in good conditions. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. 
b.  A comprehensive maintenance plan shall be submitted to the city with the application for special permit. Every year starting the year the wind facility is constructed, the wind facility will be inspected by a certified engineer qualified to make determinations about structural integrity, blade integrity, and all problems associated with wind facility operations. The cost of the inspection shall be at the expense of the developer or owner of the wind facility. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the inspectional services department. 
c.  Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local fire chief or designee. The project owner shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the wind facility and any access road, unless accepted as a public way, and the cost of repairing any damage occurring as a result of operation and construction. 
(2)  Modifications. All modifications to a wind facility made after issuance of the special permit shall require approval by the special permit granting authority as provided in this section. 
(h)  Abandonment or decommissioning. 
(1)  Removal requirements. 
a.  Any wind facility which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed. When the wind facility is scheduled to be decommissioned, the applicant shall notify the city's department of planning and development by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall, at the owner/operator's own expense, physically remove the wind facility no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. Removal shall comply with all inspectional service department codes, regulations and standards. 
b.  At the time of removal, the wind facility site shall be restored to the state it was in before the facility was constructed. More specifically, decommissioning shall consist of: 
1.  Physical removal of all wind turbines, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site; 
2.  Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local and state waste disposal regulations; 
3.  Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The special permit granting authority may allow the owner to leave landscaping or designated below grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation. 
(2)  Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning, the facility shall be considered abandoned when the facility fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the special permit granting authority. The special permit granting authority shall determine in its decision what proportion of the facility is inoperable for the facility to be considered abandoned. If the applicant fails to remove the wind facility in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the city shall have the authority to enter the property and physically remove the facility. 
(3)  Financial surety. The special permit granting authority may require the applicant for utility-scale wind facilities to provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the city must remove the facility, of an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the special permit granting authority, but in no event to exceed more than 125 percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the applicant. Such surety will not be required for municipally or state-owned facilities. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for cost of living adjustment. 
(i)  Term of special permit. The term of the special permit shall be at the discretion of the special permit granting authority. The time period may be extended or the permit renewed by the special permit granting authority upon satisfactory operation of the facility. Request for renewal must be submitted at least 180 days prior to expiration of the special permit. Submitting a renewal request shall allow for continued operation of the facility until the special permit granting authority acts. At the end of the period (including extensions and renewals), the wind facility shall be removed as required by subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(j)  Application process and requirements. 
(1)  Application procedures. The application for a wind facility shall be filed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the special permit granting authority concerning special permits. Each application for a special permit shall be filed by the applicant with the city clerk pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40A, § 9. 
(2)  Required documents. The applicant shall provide the special permit granting authority with five copies of the application. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. Included in the application shall be: 
a.  The name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, as well as all coapplicants or property owners, if any; 
b.  The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the applicant; 
c.  Documentation of the legal right to use the wind facility site, including the requirements set forth in subsection (j)(3)b of this section; and 
d.  A copy of a wind study prepared by a qualified engineer, showing at a minimum: 
1.  The proposed location of the facility; 
2.  The average wind speeds for the proposed site; and 
3.  The potential energy generation based on the wind conditions. 
(3)  Siting and design. The applicant shall provide the special permit granting authority with a description of the property which shall a accompany a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS quadrangle map, using an appropriate scale, showing the proposed facility site, including turbine sites, and the area within at least two miles from the facility. The zoning district designation for the subject parcel should be included; however, a copy of a zoning map with the parcel identified is suitable. 
a.  Site plan. A one inch equals 200 feet plan, of the proposed wind facility site, with contour intervals of no more than ten feet, showing the following: 
1.  Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet; 
2.  Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g., residence, garage, etc.) on site parcel and all adjacent parcels within 500 feet. Include distances from the wind facility to each building shown; 
3.  Location of all roads, public and private on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet, and proposed roads or driveways, either temporary or permanent; 
4.  Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees, on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet; 
5.  Proposed location and design of wind facility, including all turbines, ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission infrastructure, access, fencing, exterior lighting, etc.; and 
6.  Location of view points referenced in subsection (j)(3)b of this section. 
b.  Visualizations. The planning and building departments shall select between three and six sight lines, including from the nearest building with a view of the wind facility, for preconstruction and post-construction view representations. Sites for the view representations shall be selected from populated areas or public ways within a two-mile radius of the wind facility. View representations shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  View representations shall be in color and shall include actual preconstruction photographs and accurate post-construction simulations of the height and breadth of the wind facility (e.g., superimpositions of the wind facility onto photographs of existing views); 
2.  All view representations will include existing, or proposed, buildings or tree coverage; and 
3.  Include description of the technical procedures followed in producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens, etc.). 
(4)  Landscape plan. 
a.  The applicant shall submit a plan indicating all proposed changes to the landscape of the site, including temporary of permanent roads or driveways, grading, vegetation location, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structure. 
b.  Vegetation location shall include the size, species and number of the existing vegetation and shall include a maintenance plan that includes replacement in-kind of all plantings that die or are damaged. 
c.  Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and except as required by the FAA be directed downward with full cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
(5)  Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the wind facility. 
(6)  Compliance documents. If required under previous sections of this chapter, the applicant will provide with the application: 
a.  A description of financial surety that satisfies subsection (h)(3) of this section; 
b.  Proof of liability insurance that satisfies subsection (c)(3) of this section; 
c.  Certification of height approval from the FAA; 
d.  A statement that satisfies subsection (f)(3) of this section, listing existing and maximum projected noise levels from the wind facility; 
e.  An ice throw prediction report prepared by a qualified engineer; and 
f.  A blade throw prediction report prepared by a qualified engineer. 
(7)  Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for a special permit, the special permit granting authority will be authorized to hire outside consultants, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, § 53G. As necessary, the applicant may be required to pay not more than 50 percent of the consultant's costs. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 6.1) 
Sec. 34-135. - Earth products removal, landfill and materials from demolition of structures. 
(a)  Removal. The removal from any premises of more than ten cubic yards of sod, loam, sand, gravel or quarried stone in any one year shall be prohibited except when incidental to and in connection with the construction of a building or street or other activity authorized by this chapter, and when such removal is authorized by and a permit is granted by the inspector of buildings and zoning enforcement officer. 
(b)  Filling. Any landfill operations within established floodplains shall be undertaken only in conformance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, § 40. 
(c)  Demolition materials. All sod, loam, sand, gravel, quarried stone, dredge material, construction materials, materials from demolished structures or other such materials moved, removed, dredged, dug or quarried from, or brought into the city for disposal, temporary storage, or for use as fill shall be certified by the building inspector and zoning enforcement officer as to the quality of the material and the location where it will be deposited, in or out of the city, and shall be recorded with the department of inspectional services. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 6.2) 
Sec. 34-136. - Adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide by special permit for the construction and operation of adult entertainment establishments; to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city; and to address the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on the community as determined in public hearings by the planning board and the city council. Both public bodies relied on evidence of the city's long standing history of criminal activity that emanated from adult use establishments, and the adverse secondary effects found in the court cases, including but not limited to City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., TDA "Kandyland", 529 U.S. 277 (2000), Showtime Entm't, LLC v. Town Of Mendon, 472 Mass. 102, 107, 32 N.E.3d 1259, 1264 (2015); Baby Dolls Topless Saloons, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 295 F. 3d 471 (5 th Cir. 2002); and Ben's Bar Inc., v. Village of Somerset, 316 F. 3d 702 (7 th Cir. 2003). 
(b)  Findings. The city council has reviewed studies in other communities including but not limited the City of New Orleans "Adult Live Performance Venues Study" (Sept. 2016), a 2013 study by Harvard University Law School John M. Olin Fellow study; a 1997 City of Houston review and findings as to sexually oriented businesses. Based on these findings and others, the city council has determined that regulating adult entertainment establishments will combat the secondary effects of such as increases in the need for public safety, minimize impacts on residential neighborhoods of the city, minimize adverse impacts on the quality of life and provide adequate assurance for the management and security of the establishments. The city council has further determined that the adult entertainment establishments are associated with adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to property crimes, prostitution, public intoxication and indecency, obscenity, urban blight, litter and gang activity. This determination is based on the reports and presentation from the Chelsea Police Department. 
    The city further finds that the deleterious secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments were exacerbated by the remote, poorly lit conditions in the industrial zone of the city, and that such establishments are incompatible with residential zones in the city, and that the business highway zone and shopping center zone are the most appropriate zones for such establishments because the lighting, proximity to law enforcement, and public visibility in such zones all function to decrease the deleterious secondary effects. 
(c)  Applicability. This section applies to any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this zoning ordinance [from which this section derives]. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult entertainment establishments shall include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult paraphernalia stores, adult video stores, or establishments which display live nudity for their patrons as defined by M.G.L. c. 40A, § 9A Chapter 40A, as amended. 
    Special permit granting authority means the zoning board of appeals for the issuance of special permits. 
(e)  Procedures. Any applicant seeking to operate or construct an adult use establishment/facility shall first obtain a special permit from the City of Chelsea Zoning Board of Appeals ("special permit granting authority"). Applications for shall include a site plan and be filed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the special permit granting authority concerning special permits. 
    In accordance with section 34-217, special permits, the applicant shall provide the special permit granting authority with 17 copies of the application. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. 
    Applications shall include the name and address of the legal owner of the establishment/facility, together with the names and addresses of all persons having any direct or indirect ownership or security interest in the establishment/facility. Applications shall include the name and residential address of operator of the establishment/facility. 
(f)  General requirements. The construction or operation of an adult use shall be permitted in the BH and SC districts by the issuance of a special permit pursuant to these zoning ordinances. Special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority, unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the benefit to the city and the neighborhood outweigh the adverse effects of the proposed use, taking into account the characteristics of the site and of the proposal in relation to that site. 
In addition to specific factors set forth above, all such adult entertainment establishments shall be constructed and operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts, and issued pursuant to section 34-214(b) of this zoning [chapter]. The zoning board of appeals may impose reasonable conditions to insure the location and operation of the adult entertainment establishment is consistent with the City of Chelsea zoning ordinances. 
    The special permits may also impose reasonable conditions, safeguards, and limitations on time and use and may require the applicant to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the adult entertainment establishments such as safety and noise, should they occur. 
    All operations and construction of adult entertainment establishments shall be in compliance with laws, licensing rules, ordinances and regulations at all times. 
    The term of the special permit shall be at the discretion of the special permit granting authority but shall not be greater than five (5) years. The time period may be extended or the permit renewed by the special permit granting authority upon a determination that the operation of the adult entertainment establishment has been conducted in accordance with the special permit. Request for a renewal must be submitted at least 180 days prior to the expiration of the special permit. Submitting a renewal request shall allow for the continued operation of the establishment until the special permit granting authority acts. At the expiration of the permit term (including extensions and renewals), the adult entertainment establishment the use will no longer be permitted. 
    All adult entertainment establishments facilities or establishments shall have reasonable sound barriers from any adjacent parcel that is used for residential purposes. 
    All adult entertainment facilities or establishments shall not operate before noon and shall cease operations no later than 1:00 p.m. 
( Ord. of 9-11-2017 ) 
Secs. 34-137-34-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-154. - Conversion of dwelling. 
(a)  Generally. No new dwelling unit created by the conversion of an existing dwelling into a greater number of units or by the addition or enlargement of an existing dwelling shall be permitted unless the requirements of minimum lot area for each dwelling unit, maximum ratio of floor area to lot area, usable open space and off-street parking are satisfied for all dwelling units in existence and proposed in the dwelling after the conversion or enlargement. 
(b)  Open space. The requirements for usable open space may be waived to provide areas for off-street parking provided that such a waiver is requested in writing and approved by the building inspector and provided that all other requirements of this section are met. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 7.1) 
Sec. 34-155. - Planned development. 
(a)  Purpose. Planned development may be authorized by special permit for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage intensive development in the waterfront area along Chelsea Creek; 
(2)  To provide a mix of uses and activities, which in turn provide a healthy economic environment; 
(3)  To provide and preserve views of the Boston skyline and waterfront activity; 
(4)  To provide waterfront access and view areas; 
(5)  To ensure development which is compatible with the waterfront plan; 
(6)  To maximize the locational advantage of proximity to Boston and to Logan International Airport; 
(7)  To encourage appropriate development; 
(8)  To encourage efficient allocation, distribution, and maintenance of open space; 
(9)  To ensure economical and efficient street, utility and public facility installation, construction, and maintenance; 
(10)  To ensure land use harmonious with natural features; and 
(11)  To promote purpose enumerated in the Everett Avenue urban renewal project. 
(b)  Special permit. A special permit may be granted for a planned development, subject to the provisions of this section and subject to site plan approval, for the purposes set forth in subsection (c) of this section; provided, however, that where the planned development is located in the Everett Avenue urban renewal area, it shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection and subsections (c) to (i) of this section. 
(c)  Eligible uses. Any combination of the following uses is eligible for consideration, subject to the approval of the zoning board of appeals upon a recommendation by the department of planning and development: 
(1)  Apartment buildings and townhouses; 
(2)  Residential care facility; 
(3)  Adult day care facility, small or large; 
(4)  Hotels, motels; 
(5)  Restaurants with or without alcoholic beverages; 
(6)  Trade and craft shops; 
(7)  Professional, business and governmental offices; 
(8)  Retail and personal service establishments; 
(9)  Live/work studio; 
(10)  Work/live studio and work only studios; 
(11)  Indoor commercial recreation; 
(12)  Uses accessory to permitted uses, including accessory business uses, onsite parking, and off-street loading. 
(d)  Minimum acreage. 
(1)  The site for a planned development shall have a minimum of four contiguous acres above the high-water line in the Residential R1 and Residential R2 Districts, except where the residential districts are located within the Everett Avenue urban renewal area where the two acre minimum shall apply. 
(2)  The site for a planned development shall have a minimum of two contiguous acres above the high-water line in all other Districts and in the Everett Avenue urban renewal area. 
(3)  Such acreage shall be of a shape deemed reasonable for the purpose by the department of planning and development in accordance with the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section, or in the case of a planned development in the Everett Avenue Urban Renewal District in subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Bulk and dimensional requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the bulk and dimensional requirements for a planned development, including, without limitation, square foot per unit, floor area ratio, setbacks, height, lot coverage and open space requirements, shall be determined by the zoning board of appeals in the planned development special permit process after a recommendation from the department of planning and development in accordance with the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section. In addition, the zoning board of appeals may grant relief in a planned development special permit from the requirements otherwise applicable under this chapter related to the number of structures per lot, signage, parking and landscaping after a recommendation from the department of planning and development in accordance with the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section. 
(f)  Miscellaneous conditions. 
(1)  The site for a planned development may include any parcel or set of parcels held in common or separate ownership which are contiguous and have the minimum acreage required under subsection (d) of this section. If the application for a planned development special permit involves land in more than one ownership, each owner of land included in the planned development site shall be or become a party to the application. The zoning board of appeals, in its discretion, may issue an individual special permit to each landowner within the planned development. In issuing a planned development special permit for a project that includes multiple landowners, the zoning board of appeals may impose conditions and obligations that are applicable to all parcels, and/or it may allocate conditions and obligations among the various parcels. These conditions may include a requirement, in appropriate circumstances, that one or more of the property owners record covenants and/or restrictions that shall run with the land, in order to assure that subsequent owners comply with the terms of the original planned development special permit. 
(2)  If the planned development is to be constructed in phases, each phase after the first must be constructed contiguous and adjacent to a preceding phase or phases. Phases separated only by streets or ways shall be considered contiguous. 
(g)  Procedures. 
(1)  An applicant for approval of a planned development shall apply to the department of planning and development for design review and recommendation in accordance with the provisions of subsection (h) of this section, prior to submission to the special permit granting authority. 
(2)  The application for site plan approval can be filed simultaneously with the application for design review, if in the opinion of the applicant such filing will expedite processing of the application. 
(3)  A developer desiring to obtain a special permit to construct a planned development may, prior to submitting an application for the special permit, request a preapplication conference. The purpose of the conference is for both parties to become familiar with the proposed planned development. The proponent shall not be required to present any written or graphic materials at the preapplication conference. 
(4)  At the preapplication conference, the department shall familiarize the proponent with the process for obtaining a special permit for a planned development and explain issues that should be considered in planning the project. The proponent may discuss the range of options concerning development and inform the department of the development concept. 
(5)  A developer who wishes to apply for a special permit for a planned development must submit to the department of planning and development an application obtained from the department and a development proposal. The purpose of the development proposal shall be to provide the department with an opportunity for a preliminary but substantive review of the planned development prior to making a recommendation to the special permit granting authority. 
(6)  The written and graphic information specified in subsection (h) of this section, and for planned development in the Everett Avenue Urban Renewal District, must be submitted for the entire proposed planned development when applying for a special permit. 
(7)  No building permit shall be granted until the design approval and recommendations are given, and a site plan approval and a special permit have each been granted. Where the special permit attaches conditions which necessitate modification of site plan approval, a revised site plan must be approved. 
(h)  Design review. 
(1)  Design review shall be required for all uses in a planned development except for construction, reconstruction or repair which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance of an existing building; or construction, reconstruction or alteration of any feature which the building inspector shall certify is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(2)  Within a period of 30 days after the filing of the plans and application for the design review, the department of planning and development shall determine whether the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or moving of the buildings, structures or appurtenant fixtures involved will be appropriate in terms of the purposes and conditions contained in this section, and will report to the special permit granting authority with or without recommendations. 
(3)  In considering such application for a design review, the department of planning and development may consult an architect, city planner or urban designer at the expense of the applicant, providing that in no case the applicant is charged by the department of planning and development more than one percent of the construction costs for the costs of processing an application for a design certificate. 
(4)  Application for a design review shall be made on a form supplied by the department of planning and development and shall be accompanied by the following items in addition to the items required for site plan and special permit submissions: 
a.  A performance bond of sufficient amount to install improvements which will be dedicated to the city; and a performance bond to guarantee landscaping plant material survival or a contract with a landscaping firm which adequately provides such guarantees. 
b.  A plan for the phasing of the development and the reasonable time of completion of each phase. 
c.  Hydrological, soil, flooding and subsurface studies evaluating the site for development. 
d.  A circulation plan showing the street system and circulation patterns within and adjacent to the proposed development including any special engineering features, such as, but not limited to, median strips, overpasses and underpasses and major pedestrian paths. 
e.  As-built plans will be filed with the building inspector within 30 days after the completion of construction pursuant to a design certificate. 
(i)  Design standards. When considering plans submitted for design review for a planned development, the following factors shall be considered by the department of planning and development: 
(1)  Orientation and views. 
a.  Heights of buildings shall be recommended by the department of planning and development after consultation with the fire department and shall be determined with due regard to maintaining existing view lines. 
b.  Buildings shall be sited to maintain existing view lines, and to relate to one another and adjacent developments to insure adequate light, air and privacy. 
(2)  Public access to the waterfront. 
a.  An area shall be provided at least 14 feet wide adjacent to the mean high tide water edge for the purpose of providing continuous access for pedestrian traffic along the waterfront and for the purpose of providing an easement for underground utilities unless the department of planning and development determines that such an area would be hazardous. It shall be designed to connect with adjacent developments for this purpose. This corridor may not extend over piers, bulkheads, breakwaters or extensions into the creek, where, in the opinion of the department of planning and development the best interests of the public safety would not be served thereby. 
b.  A 30-foot setback from the water edge as defined in subsection (i)(2)a of this section shall be required. In relation to the waterfront pedestrian corridor, the department of planning and development will encourage, but not require, an additional area adjacent to the 30-foot required minimum setback to enhance the corridor by creating plazas, malls or green areas. The applicant will be encouraged to make maximum use of the waterfront and Boston skyline and also to respect these views for other affected developments. 
c.  Adequate privacy, light, air and access will be considered in the development of side, rear and front yard setbacks. 
(3)  Scale. 
a.  Arrangement of new facilities should be compatible with existing developments landward of the district. The building line should be maintained in infill projects. 
b.  In the Waterfront (W) District and the Industrial (I) District, from the shoreline, the silhouette shall follow the general slope of the topography so that on the shore one- or two-story structures are to be desired. 
(4)  Landscaping. There shall be a sufficient amount of landscaping, as determined by the board of zoning appeals upon recommendation by the department of planning and development to ensure protection of and to enhance the quality of the neighborhoods and, where applicable, to enhance the view from Boston and from the water. 
(5)  Parking/loading/service. 
a.  Parking and loading areas shall be designed and landscaped in accordance with the provisions of sections 34-106 to 34-108 unless otherwise recommended by the department of planning and development to accommodate the mix of uses in the planned development. 
b.  Any point of vehicular access for delivery of goods will be encouraged to respect the character of the pedestrian corridor, where it exists. 
c.  In the Waterfront (W) District and the Industrial (I) District, water-oriented commercial facilities requiring the movement of goods across the pedestrian corridor shall provide controlled points of access. Service may be permitted utilizing the pedestrian corridor. However, this service may be restricted to nonpeak pedestrian hours. 
(6)  Signs. All signs shall be reviewed and approved by the department of planning and development. The department shall review signage in relation to size, color, shape, design, number and scale. All signage shall be in scale with the site, buildings and with pedestrians and motorists. Care shall be taken to minimize the number of signs and to locate signs such that they do not block view lines, motorist and pedestrian sight lines, and special natural or manmade features of the development. Signage shall be located so as to avoid safety and maintenance issues. 
(7)  Activity. 
a.  When a planned development has more than one category of use (e.g., residential, business, industrial) the percentage of each use shall be determined by the special permit granting authority based on recommendations from the department of planning and development. If necessary to determine the appropriate mix of uses, or in the case of residential use, the size and type of dwelling units, the department of planning and development may require the applicant to submit supporting data and/or studies. 
b.  In appropriate cases, the special permit granting authority on a recommendation from the department of planning and development may require a set aside of not more than ten percent of the dwellings units, if any, for low and moderate income housing. 
c.  In the Waterfront District and the industrial districts, facilities which make provisions for the periodic outdoor use of waterfront areas by the pedestrian public are desirable. Mixed uses should be encouraged. Activity corridors and linkages with Chelsea Square should be encouraged. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 7.2; Ord. of 9-27-2010(01), § 4;  6- 3-2013(1) ) 
Sec. 34-156. - Inclusionary housing. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is as follows: 
(1)  To ensure that affordable housing is made available to eligible households on a non-discriminatory basis in accordance with the federal Fair Housing Act of 1968 and M.G.L. c. 151, as amended, and any regulations promulgated under federal and state law; 
(2)  To ensure that such housing remains affordable over the long term, and that to the extent allowed by law, preference is given to Chelsea residents; 
(3)  To increase the production of affordable housing units to meet existing and anticipated housing and employment needs within the city; 
(4)  To mitigate the impacts of commercial and residential development on the availability and cost of housing and especially housing affordable to low and moderate income households; 
(5)  To provide a mechanism by which an applicant can contribute in a direct way to increasing the supply of affordable housing through the creation of affordable housing units and fee-in lieu contributions from the application of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Affordable housing restriction (AHR) means a deed rider, covenant, contract, mortgage agreement, and/ or other legal instrument, acceptable in form and substance to the city, that effectively restricts occupancy of an affordable housing unit to a qualified purchaser or renter, and that provides for the administration, monitoring, and/or enforcement of the restriction during the term of affordability. An AHR shall be placed on the land in perpetuity or for the maximum period that is legally permissible by Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.), and entered into as an agreement under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 184, §§ 31 to 33 or other equivalent state law. 
    Affordable housing trust fund (AHTF) means the fund administered by the affordable housing trust fund board (AHTFB). 
    Affordable housing trust fund board (AHTFB) means pursuant to part II, section 18 of the City of Chelsea Code of Ordinances, the AHTFB shall serve as the municipal affordable housing trust fund organized under M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C. The AHTFB advises and assists in the creation of a new affordable housing and the preservation, rehabilitation and maintenance of existing affordable housing in the City of Chelsea. The AHTFB is authorized to receive and accept contributions to the AHTF. The board ensures the monies in the AHTF are used appropriately. 
    Affordable housing unit (AHU) means a residential unit that is restricted by deed in its sale, lease, and/or rental to a qualified income-eligible household at specific price limits not to exceed 30percent of their income that may qualify such residential unit for inclusion in the DHCD subsidized housing inventory (SHI). 
    Area median income (AMI) means the median household income as defined by HUD pursuant to section 3 of the 42 U.S.C. 1437 (the Housing Act of 1937), as amended, adjusted for household size. 
    DHCD means the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development and its successors, as established and currently existing pursuant to M.G.L. c. 23B and c. 6A. 
    HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Inclusionary housing project means any new construction or substantial improvement of an existing structure(s) where the proposed development or redevelopment will result in ten or more dwelling units on one or more contiguous parcels, whether such units are proposed as-of-right, under a special permit process, or proposed pursuant to "the Subdivision Control Law" M.G. L. c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG inclusive, including divisions of land that do not require subdivision approval (ANR plans). 
    Local action unit (LAU) means affordable housing units that are created through local municipal action other than comprehensive permits; for example, through special permits, inclusionary zoning, conveyance of public land, utilization of Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds, etc. 
    Local initiative program (LIP) means state housing initiative administered by DHCD to encourage communities to produce affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households. The program provides technical and other non-financial assistance to cities or towns seeking to increase the supply of housing for households at or below 80 percent of the area median income. LIP-approved units are entered into the subsidized housing inventory (SHI) pursuant to chapter 40B. Low or moderate income housing means any units of housing for which a subsidizing agency provides a subsidy under any program to assist the construction or substantial rehabilitation of low or moderate income housing, as defined in the applicable federal or state statute or regulation, whether built or operated by any public agency or non-profit or limited dividend organization. If the applicable statute or regulation of the subsidizing agency does not define low or moderate income housing, then it shall be defined as units of housing whose occupancy is restricted to a household of one or more persons whose maximum income does not exceed 80 percent of AMI, or as otherwise established by the guidelines for the Subsidized Housing Inventory and 760 CMR 56.00, as amended. 
    Market-rate housing means a residential unit that is not restricted in its sale, lease, and/or rental at specific price limits. 
    Qualified income-eligible household means a household with combined incomes that do not exceed 80 percent AMI. 
    Qualified purchaser means qualified income-eligible household that purchases and occupies an affordable housing unit as its principal residence. 
    Qualified renter or qualified tenant means a qualified income-eligible household that rents and occupies an affordable housing unit as its principal residence. 
    Subsidizing agency means any agency of state or federal government that provides a subsidy for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of low or moderate income housing. If the subsidizing agency is not an agency of state government, the DHCD may appoint a state agency to administer some or all of the responsibilities of the subsidizing agency with respect to 760 CMR 56.00. 
    Subsidy means assistance provided by a subsidizing agency to assist the construction or substantial rehabilitation of low or moderate income housing, including direct financial assistance; indirect financial assistance through insurance, guarantees, tax relief, or other means; and non-financial assistance, including in-kind assistance, technical assistance, and other supportive services. A leased housing, tenant-based rental assistance, or housing allowance program shall not be considered a Subsidy for the purposes of 760 CMR 56.00. 
    Subsidized housing inventory ("SHI") means a list compiled by the DHDC by city or town containing the count of low or moderate income housing units consistent with the provisions of 760 CMR 56.00. 
    SHI eligible housing means solely for the purposes of 760 CMR 56.03, (a) any unit of low or moderate income housing, (b) such other housing units in a project as may be so defined under the DHCD's guidelines, and (c) any other housing unit as may be allowed under the DHCD's guidelines, provided that such housing unit is subject to a use restriction and affirmative fair marketing plan, and regardless of whether or not such unit received a subsidy 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, modernization or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Substantial improvement is not defined as a project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that is solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. The market value of the structure shall be calculated by the applicant, and submitted to the department of planning and development for review and approval. 
(c)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to any new construction or substantial improvement of an existing structure(s) where the proposed development or redevelopment will result in ten or more dwelling units on one or more contiguous parcels, whether such units are proposed as-of-right, under a special permit process, or proposed pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law M.G.L. c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG inclusive, including divisions of land that do not require subdivision approval (ANR plans). The following provisions shall be required for all inclusionary housing projects. 
(1)  In any development subject to this section, at least 15 percent of the dwelling units shall be affordable housing units (AHU). However, for any development subject to this section which provides a mix of the required AHU's for households with income at or below 30 percent of AMI, for households with income at or below 50 percent of AMI, and for households with an income at or below 80 percent, all adjusted for household size, and which is reviewed and recommended by the department of planning and development, at least ten percent of the units shall be AHU's. For inclusionary housing projects that require fractional units please see subsection (e)(4). Nothing in this section shall preclude an applicant from providing more AHUs than the number required. 
(2)  Each AHU created under this section shall be sold or rented to a qualified income-eligible household. 
(3)  No occupancy permit shall be issued for any unit in the development until the director of inspectional services/zoning enforcement officer receives verification that the AHR has been approved the City of Chelsea Department of Planning and Development and has been recorded with the Suffolk County Registry of Deeds. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to the rehabilitation of any building or structure wholly or substantially destroyed or damaged by catastrophe, provided that no rehabilitation or repair shall increase the number of bedroom or dwelling units on the lot as existed prior to the damage or destruction thereof, except in conformance with this section. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvement of an existing structure(s) where the proposed development or redevelopment will result in ten or more dwelling units, and the project includes a subsidy for at least 15 percent of the total units from a subsidy program which is considered by DHCD as eligible for the purposes of M.G.L. c.40B, §§ 20-30, 760 CMR 56.00, as may be modified. Evidence of funding commitments must be provided prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(e)  Mandatory provision of affordable units. The department of planning and development shall require that the applicant comply with the following provisions for inclusionary housing Projects. 
(1)  Siting. Affordable housing units shall be dispersed and sited throughout a development so as not to be in less desirable locations than the development's market-rate units. 
(2)  Design and construction. Affordable housing units shall be comparable to and indistinguishable from market-rate units in interior and exterior building materials and finishes, windows, appliances, and other improvements related to the energy efficiency of the units. 
(3)  Rights and privileges. Owners and tenants of AHUs and market-rate units shall have equal rights and privileges to access and use of the development's amenities and facilities. 
(4)  Fractional units. Where the required number of AHUs results in a fraction the applicant shall round up to the nearest whole number or make a fee in lieu contribution equal to but not less than that fraction multiplied by the fee outlined in [subsection] (f)(2) of this section. 
(5)  Phasing. Affordable housing units shall not be the last units to be built in any development and/or redevelopment covered by this section. 
(6)  Non-avoidance by phasing or segmentation. A development shall not be phased or segmented in a manner to avoid compliance with this section. The zoning board of appeals or planning board shall not approve any application for new construction or substantial improvement to a structure(s) where the development or redevelopment results in ten or more dwelling units if the land or parcels of land were held in common ownership (including ownership by related or jointly controlled persons or entities) and were subdivided or otherwise modified within the previous five years to avoid compliance without complying with this section. This section shall also be enforceable against purchasers of land previously held in common ownership with land that received, after the date of adoption of this section, approvals or permits for development, to the effect that units developed under such previous development shall be counted toward the calculation of number of units under this section. 
(f)  Fees-in-lieu-of affordable housing units. 
(1)  As an alternative to the requirements of subsections (c) and (e) of this section, and at the sole discretion and majority vote of the city council upon a recommendation of the city manager, the developer shall contribute a fee to the city's AHTF in lieu of providing all or a portion of the required AHUs within the proposed development. 
(2)  The fee in lieu of providing one or more AHUs shall be a minimum of $200,000 per required AHU not provided within the development. This fee may be adjusted upward by a majority vote of the city council. 
(3)  Any payment to the AHTF as an in lieu contribution for AHUs shall be made as follows: at least 50 percent of the total owed prior to the issuance of a building permit; and the remaining total owed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(g)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Restrictive documents. To ensure unit affordability, AHUs shall be rented or sold subject to applicable AHR, acceptable to the, or such additional programs as may be adopted by the commonwealth or its agencies, restricting the use and occupancy, rent level, and sales price of such AHUs. 
(2)  Term of affordable housing restriction. An AHR shall ensure that AHUs created under this section shall remain affordable in perpetuity or for the longest period of time as legally permissible. All AHRs, deed riders, and covenants shall be enforceable and renewable by the City pursuant to applicable law. 
(3)  Subsequent resale/lease. An AHU shall be restricted in its initial and any subsequent sale, lease, and/or rental to a qualified income-eligible household at a specific price limit that will qualify such residential unit for inclusion in the DHCD SHI. 
(4)  Selection of eligible tenants and homeowners. The Applicant shall conduct a fair and reasonable procedure in compliance with fair housing laws for the selection of tenants for affordable rental units and for the selection of homeowners for affordable homeownership units. Prior to implementing such procedures, the applicant shall submit an affirmative fair housing marketing plan to be reviewed and approved by the department of planning and development. 
(5)  Income and asset limits. The applicant shall verify and provide evidence to the department of planning and development that the income of prospective qualified income-eligible households, whether purchasers or renters, shall not exceed 80 percent or a mix of 30 percent, 50 percent and 80 percent, pursuant to subsection (c)(2), of AMI based on household size as determined by HUD. A qualified purchaser or qualified renter shall also be required to demonstrate that total household assets, other than income, are not so high that a household has no substantial need of a rental unit with a reduced rent or of an ownership unit with a reduced purchase price. 
(6)  Occupancy. The AHR for AHUs shall require, whether the unit initially is sold or rented, that the occupant of that unit must be a qualified income-eligible household. This provision shall prohibit a unit initially designated as owner-occupied from being leased. 
(h)  Monitoring and enforcement. 
(1)  Monitoring of Rental AHUs. Affordable housing units shall be subject to an AHR that contains limitations on use, occupancy, resale and rents, and provides for periodic monitoring to verify compliance with and enforce said restriction. Developers/owners of rental developments which include rental AHUs must submit to the City of Chelsea Department of Planning and Development and the AHTFB an annual statement of rent level, rental income, and verification of tenant income. 
(2)  Monitoring of for sale AHUs. If the owner shall desire to sell, dispose of, or otherwise convey a unit governed by an AHR, the Owner shall notify the City of Chelsea, c/o the department of planning and development prior to listing the property for-sale to ensure compliance with the AHR's resale provisions. 
(3)  Eviction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit eviction of a qualified purchaser or qualified tenant of an AHU due to a change of a household's income status or size during the time of ownership or term of lease or rental. 
(4)  Transfer of AHU. The restrictions governing an AHU shall remain upon resale, re-rental, and/or renewal of lease of the AHU. For owner-occupied units, the use restriction shall ensure that units may only be resold to qualified income-eligible household who are qualified purchasers consistent with the then applicable income qualifications process and approved by the department of planning and development. 
(5)  All restrictions remain in effect. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any AHR, deed rider, covenant, agreement, and/or other mechanism restricting such items as the use and occupancy, rent level, or resale price of AHUs, and the enforcement thereof to expire prior to any maximum limitations set forth by applicable state law. It is intended that the restrictions required herein shall survive, to the limit allowed by law, including, but not limited to, bankruptcy and foreclosure. 
(6)  Timing of commitments. All AHRs required hereunder and any documents necessary to ensure compliance with this section shall be approved as to content by the City of Chelsea Department of Planning and Development and Chelsea City Solicitor prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(7)  Approval of form and content of legal documents. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing any documentation required by DHCD in order to secure LIP approval of the AHU and ensure their eligibility for the DHCD SHI. Furthermore, the applicant shall prepare all AHR and/or legal instruments required to comply with this section, and such documents shall be in a form satisfactory to the Chelsea city solicitor. The applicant shall reimburse the city for reasonable legal expenses incurred by the Chelsea city solicitor. 
(8)  Recording of restrictions. All AHRs required pursuant to this section shall be recorded at the Suffolk County Registry of Deeds or filed with the registry district of the land court, as applicable, prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(i)  Right of first refusal. The AHTFB reserves the right of first refusal or option to purchase all "affordable" for-sale units at the point of original sale or any subsequent resale. This also applies to any subsequent sale of a rental property or units within a rental property. The purchase price shall be the lesser of the price that a household earning no more than 30 percent, 50 percent or 80 percent of the AMI could afford and pay no more than 30 percent of household income in housing costs, depending on the affordability level assigned to the unit at the time of sale, or 90 percent of the then documented appraised value at sale time. The appraisal shall be performed by the applicant after written review and approval by the department of planning and development. 
(j)  Needs assessment review. The City of Chelsea Department of Planning and Development, in cooperation with appropriate boards and commissions, shall undertake a housing market assessment not less than every fifth calendar year from the date of enactment of this section. The purposes of said assessment shall be to assess the performance of the provisions herein in terms of resultant AHUs, to assess any need for improved rules and regulations regarding implementation, and to ascertain the need for revision of any provisions of this section relative to the provision of AHUs in the city. 
    Provisions subject to review shall include, at minimum: revisions to applicability requirements of this section, revisions to percentage requirements of AHUs in inclusionary housing developments, and revisions to methodologies for monetary payments or other in lieu of means of compliance with provision of on-site units. 
    Upon completing its assessment the City of Chelsea Department of Planning and Development, shall recommend to the city council any amendments to this section deemed necessary to improve the means of providing AHUs in the city. 
( Ord. of 3-13-2017(2) ) 
Secs. 34-157-34-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 34-179. - Waterfront Industrial Overlay District (WIOD). 
(a)  Scope and purposes. This section applies to the Waterfront Industrial Overlay District (WIOD). The purposes of the WIOD are: 
(1)  To promote economic development in the Waterfront (W) and Airport Related Overlay Districts (AROD); 
(2)  To enhance the working waterfront; 
(3)  To preserve adequate areas for deepwater shipping and other water dependent industrial uses consistent with the state policy on designated port areas (DPAs); 
(4)  To allow compatible commercial and general industrial supporting uses in the Waterfront District; 
(5)  To provide for continuous public access along the water's edge, as appropriate, to, from and within the Chelsea Creek DPA; 
(6)  To prevent soil and groundwater pollution and to encourage appropriate interim uses consistent with necessary cleanups; and 
(7)  To allow certain commercial, general industrial and water-dependent industrial uses by special permit to ensure more effective environmental protection. 
(b)  Underlying uses. 
(1)  Uses currently prohibited in the underlying districts shall not be allowed in the WIOD, except for airport related uses within the Airport Related Overlay District in accordance with section 34-180(c) and except as provided below. 
(2)  Uses currently allowed as of right, or by special permit, or uses subject to site plan approval, within the underlying districts, provided that: 
a.  Principal uses which occupy a gross floor area and outside intensive use area totaling 30,000 square feet or more are subject to site plan approval pursuant to section 34-215; and 
b.  Where 10,000 square feet or more of principal use activities are outside the building, such uses shall require a special permit pursuant to section 34-214. 
(c)  Uses permitted as of right. The uses set forth in this subsection are permitted as of right, subject to the following conditions: (i) such principal uses shall occupy a gross floor area and outside intensive use area totaling less than 30,000 square feet; (ii) less than 10,000 square feet of the principal use activities shall be located outside the buildings; and (iii) uses allowed under subsection (e) of this section shall not be allowed within 1,000 linear feet of a public school building. 
(1)  Harbor and marine supplies and services, chandleries, ship supply, not including bunkering of vessels; 
(2)  Boat storage facilities, including rack storage facilities; 
(3)  Marine-related scientific research and development; 
(4)  Maritime-industrial related museum; 
(5)  Marine office, including without limitation, offices of owners of wharves or their agent, naval architects and seafood brokers; 
(6)  Institutional uses, including marine research, education and laboratory facilities, not including overnight accommodations; 
(7)  Landscaped areas; and 
(8)  Accessory uses, customarily incidental and subordinate to the location, function and operation of permitted principal uses, including temporary uses, provided that all such temporary uses on a lot do not exceed a combined total of 30 days per year and that the total floor area utilized for such uses does not exceed ten percent of the total floor area or lot area at any given time. 
(d)  Uses authorized after site plan approval. In addition to those set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the following uses may be authorized after site plan approval, provided that less than 10,000 square feet of the principal use activities are outside the buildings: 
(1)  Uses listed in subsection (c) of this section which occupy a gross floor area and outside intensive use area totaling 30,000 square feet or more; 
(2)  Tugboat, fireboat, pilot boat and similar services related to public safety on the waterfront; 
(3)  Public pedestrian paths, along the water's edge providing marine industrial viewing opportunities and/or points of access to, from and within the Chelsea Creek DPA; 
(4)  Boatbuilding, including facilities for construction, fabrication, maintenance and repair of boats not exceeding a length of 60 feet; 
(5)  Boat and accessory sales, services and rental establishments; 
(6)  Fabrication, storage and repair of fishing equipment; 
(7)  Facilities for marine construction and salvage; 
(8)  Intermodal transportation terminals and facilities, ferries, excursion facilities, telephone electronic equipment enclosures and other similar structures; and 
(9)  Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the location, function and operation of permitted principal uses, including temporary uses, provided that all such temporary uses on a lot do not exceed a combined total of 30 days per year and that the total floor area utilized for such uses does not exceed ten percent of the total floor area or lot area at any given time. 
(e)  Uses authorized by special permit. In addition to those uses set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the following uses may be authorized by special permit: 
(1)  Uses listed in subsections (c) and (d) of this section where 10,000 square feet or more of the principal use activities are outside the building(s); 
(2)  Marine products, wholesaling distribution and retailing; 
(3)  Fabrication of marine related goods, marine industrial welding, marine repair services, marine machine shops and related storage facilities; 
(4)  Boatbuilding and shipbuilding, including facilities for construction, fabrication, maintenance and repair of boats and ships exceeding a length of 60 feet; 
(5)  Bulk storage facilities, provided that the use is fully enclosed, including petroleum products storage, and oil and gas distribution facilities, but specifically excluding junkyard facilities and any other unsightly bulk storage uses; 
(6)  Fishing, commercial and industrial vessel berthing, including docks; 
(7)  Marine-related and supporting light industrial; 
(8)  Enclosed seafood processing, seafood packing and packaging, seafood loading and seafood distribution; 
(9)  Marine-related wholesale business, warehousing and storage; 
(10)  Facilities for marine pollution control, oil spill cleanup and the servicing of marine sanitation devices; 
(11)  Fueling and bunkering of vessels; 
(12)  Container shipping operations, marine cargo handling facilities, including docking, loading and related storage and warehouse; 
(13)  Freight forwarding, including freight forwarding terminals and motor freight terminals; 
(14)  Park and fly, airport related employees parking and the storage of vehicles for hire or return vehicles for hire; 
(15)  Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the location, function and operation of permitted principal uses, including temporary uses, provided that all such temporary uses on a lot do not exceed a combined total of 30 days per year and that the total floor area utilized for such uses does not exceed ten percent of the total floor area or lot area at any given time; 
(16)  Moving company, less than 15,000 square feet gross floor area; and 
(17)  Moving company, 15,000 square feet or more gross floor area. 
(f)  Design standards. All uses shall comply with the design standards set forth in section 34-155(i) as may be applicable. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.1; Ord. of 4-6-2015(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 34-180. - Airport Related Overlay District (AROD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Airport Related Overlay District (AROD). The purpose of the AROD is to provide areas for airport related uses in locations with suitable access to the airport and where such activities can occur without adverse impact upon residential areas. 
(b)  Underlying uses. 
(1)  Uses currently prohibited in the underlying districts shall not be allowed in the AROD, except for airport related uses as defined in section 34-241 and as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Uses currently allowed by right in either of the underlying districts shall continue to be allowed by right in the underlying district within the AROD. 
(3)  Uses currently allowed after site plan approval in either of the underlying districts shall continue to be allowed after site plan approval in that underlying district within the AROD. 
(4)  Uses currently allowed by special permit in either of the underlying districts shall continue to be allowed by special permit in that underlying district within the AROD. 
(c)  Airport related uses. In addition to those uses set forth in subsection (b) of this section, airport related uses may be authorized by special permit issued by the zoning board of appeals. Such airport related uses shall include: 
(1)  Bulk storage of cargo and freight; 
(2)  Storage and/or repair of automobiles, trucks and equipment; 
(3)  Food-handling and preparation facilities; 
(4)  Freight forwarding facilities; 
(5)  Vehicles for hire or return vehicles for hire; 
(6)  Other airport related uses as defined in section 34-241. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.2; Ord. of 10-17-2011; Ord. of 11-21-2016(6) ) 
Sec. 34-181. - Interim Planning Overlay District (IPOD). 
(a)  General regulations. 
(1)  Except as stated, this section applies to the Interim Planning Overlay District (IPOD). An IPOD shall be established through a text and map amendment to this chapter and the zoning map. 
(2)  An IPOD may operate to suspend and/or amend all or a portion of the existing underlying zoning of an area for the period during which the IPOD is in effect. 
(3)  An IPOD shall be adopted for a specified time period, not to exceed two years. 
(4)  An IPOD may be divided into subdistricts and/or study areas. 
(5)  An IPOD may be extended, amended or repealed, at any time prior to the expiration of the specified time period by an amendment to this chapter and the zoning map, as appropriate. Upon expiration of the specified time period, the IPOD shall terminate automatically and the existing underlying zoning, as amended through the expiration date, shall apply. 
(b)  Recommendation for IPOD. The city manager or any other individual or entity charged with the responsibility for planning or the overall governance of the city may recommend the designation of an IPOD. Such recommendation must: 
(1)  Define the physical boundaries of the IPOD; 
(2)  Describe the characteristics of the area which indicate that an IPOD is necessary and appropriate; 
(3)  Set forth a timetable with specified deadlines for conducting the interim planning process and for completing any rezoning of the area; 
(4)  Specify a date, not to exceed two years from the effective date of an amendment establishing the IPOD, for the dissolution of the IPOD; 
(5)  Set forth regulations to control land use in the area during the specified time period, including without limitation, any regulations suspending the existing underlying zoning; and 
(6)  Stipulate which land uses and activities are subject to the provisions of the IPOD, and which land uses and activities, if any, are governed by the existing underlying zoning. 
(c)  Shopping Center Interim Planning Overlay District (SCIPOD). 
(1)  Scope and declaration of need for interim zoning. 
a.  This subsection (c) applies to the Shopping Center Interim Planning Overlay District (SCIPOD). 
b.  Interim zoning is necessary to maintain a proper balance between competing land uses in the Shopping Center District and their environs and is intended to protect the surrounding districts from the negative effects of further intrusion of poorly planned commercial uses to create a more urban, sustainable and integral development plan, in anticipation of additional planning by the city to respond to economic trends, changes in land use patterns and development objectives. This interim zoning is intended to continue to address the following, all are taken into greater account in future land use decisions in the SCIPOD pending further rezoning: 
1.  Recent and dramatic changes in local and regional economic growth pressures and ensure that visual, traffic, transportation and noise impacts on neighborhoods are managed; 
2.  The intent of the city's residents not to be subject to poorly planned large-scale development; 
3.  The intent of the city's residents to have reasonable public transportation and open space resources; 
4.  The need to preserve and protect the city's natural resources; 
5.  The need to encourage an economically sound mix of commercial, residential and light industrial uses; and 
6.  The need to ensure compatibility and consistency with surrounding land uses. 
c.  The existing underlying Shopping Center District zoning has outlived its purpose of stabilizing a declining area, and has led to disinvestment that has the potential to encourage uncontrolled development and land uses incompatible with the adjacent neighborhoods and the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. 
d.  The interim zoning is intended to encourage a broader spectrum of land uses in anticipation of the SCIPOD becoming a thriving area that is essential to the revitalization of the city. 
(2)  Physical boundaries. The SCIPOD shall be comprised of the Shopping Center (SC) District. 
(3)  Applicability. Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this subsection, no permit to use, alter, construct, reconstruct or expand any buildings, structures or land within the Shopping Center (SC) District shall be issued by the building inspector. Proposed projects for which the zoning board of appeals has approved a special permit for planned development prior to the adoption of the SCIPOD shall be exempt from such requirements. The following uses and projects shall also be exempt and instead shall be subject to the underlying zoning, as amended from time to time: 
a.  Any proposed project for which application to the building inspector for a building or use permit has been made prior to the first notice of public hearing for adoption of these amendments and for which no zoning relief is required provided such permit is exercised within six months and construction proceeds continuously to completion; and 
b.  Any proposed project for which application for zoning relief has been made prior to the first notice of public hearing for adoption of this amendment, provided that such zoning relief is granted thereafter pursuant to such application and is exercised within six months and construction proceeds continuously to completion. 
(4)  Zoning regulations in effect; conflict provisions. In the event of a conflict between the SCIPOD and the underlying zoning, the SCIPOD shall govern. Upon expiration of this SCIPOD, the existing underlying zoning, as amended through the expiration date and including such zoning districts as remain in effect, shall be the sole set of zoning regulations for the SCIPOD. 
(5)  Interim use controls, design review guidelines, dimensional regulations. 
a.  Underlying uses. 
1.  Uses currently prohibited in the underlying districts shall not be allowed in the SCIPOD. 
2.  Uses currently allowed by site plan approval or by right within the underlying district shall be allowed only by special permit, and those uses currently allowed by special use permit shall continue to be allowed by special permit and all as part of a planned development in accordance with section 34-155 and special permit in accordance with section 34-214, unless specifically exempted from the planned development requirement upon a determination by the zoning board of appeals that the goals set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section would not be advanced by the planned development requirement. Said determination shall be at the sole discretion of the zoning board of appeals. 
b.  Design review, dimensional regulations, permitted uses. 
1.  All uses, including underlying uses, permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with section 34-215, and/or permitted on a special permit in accordance with section 34-214, and/or change in use in accordance with section 34-51 shall comply with design review guidelines set forth in section 34-155(i), as applicable. 
2.  Intensity regulations for the site of a planned development shall have a minimum of 25 contiguous acres above the high-water line in the SCIPOD, which acreage shall be of a shape deemed reasonable for the purpose of the department of planning and development. 
3.  Permitted uses for the site of a planned development shall encompass a combination of each of the following uses: residential, office, retail, restaurant, hotel and open space in accordance with the provisions of section 34-155. 
(6)  Enforcement. The building inspector shall not issue any building permit or change of use permit for a proposed project subject to this subsection (c), unless the proposed project is in accordance with this subsection (c) and with the performance standards of section 34-110. 
(7)  Subsequent amendments. While in effect, this subsection (or portions of this subsection) may be repealed or superseded by subsequent amendments to either this subsection or to the underlying zoning. 
(d)  Timetables for SCIPOD and related rezoning. A comprehensive rezoning of the SCIPOD shall be completed within the following timetable, unless extended by the city manager: 
(1)  Mapping of existing uses, ownership and zoning, and the identification of uses will be completed within six months of the enactment of an IPOD from the date to enactment. 
(2)  Establishment of rezoning land use objectives, desired densities and uses for an IPOD study will be completed within nine months following enactment of the IPOD. 
(3)  The hearing on any proposed zoning changes will be completed within 18 months from the enactment of an IPOD. 
(e)  Naval Hospital Interim Planning Overlay District (NHIPOD). 
(1)  Scope and declaration of need for interim zoning. 
a.  This subsection (e) applies to the Naval Hospital Interim Planning Overlay District (NHIPOD). 
b.  Interim zoning is necessary to establish guidelines that will maintain a proper balance of open space, commercial development, and residential development within the Naval Hospital Residential (NHR) and Naval Hospital Commercial (NHC) zoning districts. This interim zoning is intended to continue to address the following, all are taken into greater account in future land use decisions in the NHIPOD pending further rezoning: 
1.  Recent and dramatic changes in local and regional economic growth pressures and ensure that visual and traffic impacts on neighborhoods are managed; 
2.  The intent of the city's residents not to be subject to poorly planned large-scale development; 
3.  The intent of the city's residents to have reasonable open space resources; 
4.  The need to preserve and protect the city's natural resources; 
5.  The need to encourage an economically sound mix of commercial and residential uses; and 
6.  The need to ensure compatibility and consistency with surrounding land uses. 
c.  The existing underlying Naval Hospital Residential (NHR) zoning was created for the purpose to redevelop a portion of the former naval hospital site for residential purposes. The existing underlying Naval Hospital Commercial (NHC) zoning was created for the purpose to redevelop a portion of the formal naval hospital site for office uses, recreational uses, and related purposes. 
d.  The NHR and NHC districts have undergone significant large scale development since their inception in an unplanned manner on a significant amount of space is both districts. The purpose of NHIPOD is to develop guidelines that help aide in the siting of future large scale development so as to not encroach on existing development and open space. 
(2)  Physical boundaries. The NHIPOD shall be comprised of the Naval Hospital Residential (NHR) and Naval Hospital Commercial (NHC) zoning districts. 
(3)  Applicability. Unless otherwise exempt pursuant to this subsection, no permit to use, alter, construct, reconstruct or expand any buildings, structures or land within the Naval Hospital Residential (NHR) and Naval Hospital Commercial (NHC) zoning districts shall be issued by the building inspector. Proposed projects for which the zoning board of appeals has granted approval prior to the adoption of the NHIPOD shall be exempt from such requirements. The following uses and projects shall also be exempt and instead shall be subject to the underlying zoning, as amended from time to time: 
a.  Any proposed project for which application to the building inspector for a building or use permit has been made prior to the first notice of public hearing for adoption of these amendments and for which no zoning relief is required provided such permit is exercised within six months and construction proceeds continuously to completion; and 
b.  Any proposed project for which petition for zoning relief has been made prior to the first notice of public hearing for adoption of this amendment, provided that such zoning relief is granted thereafter pursuant to such application and is exercised within six months and construction proceeds continuously to completion. 
(4)  Zoning regulations in effect; conflict provisions. In the event of a conflict between the NHIPOD and the underlying zoning, the NHIPOD shall govern. Upon expiration of this NHIPOD, the existing underlying zoning, as amended through the expiration date and including such zoning districts as remain in effect, shall be the sole set of zoning regulations for the NHIPOD. 
(5)  Interim use controls, design review guidelines, dimensional regulations. 
a.  Underlying uses. 
1.  Article XIII Table of Principle Use Regulations shall remain unchanged for the Naval Hospital Residential (NHR) and Naval Hospital Commercial (NHC) zoning districts. 
b.  Design review, dimensional regulations, permitted uses. 
1.  All uses, including underlying uses, permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with section 34-215, and/or permitted on a special permit in accordance with section 34-214, and/or change in use in accordance with section 34-51 shall comply with design review guidelines set forth in section 34-155(i), as applicable. 
(6)  Enforcement. The building inspector shall not issue any building permit or change of use permit for a proposed project subject to this subsection (e), unless the proposed project is in accordance with this subsection (e) and with the performance standards of section 34-110. 
(7)  Subsequent amendments. While in effect, this subsection (or portions of this subsection) may be repealed or superseded by subsequent amendments to either this subsection or to the underlying zoning. 
(f)  Timetables for NHIPOD and related rezoning. A comprehensive rezoning of the NHIPOD shall be completed within the following timetable, unless extended by the city manager: 
(1)  Mapping of existing uses, ownership and zoning, and the identification of uses will be completed within six months of the enactment of the NHIPOD. 
(2)  Establishment of rezoning land use objectives, desired densities and uses for the NHIPOD study will be completed within nine months following enactment of the NHIPOD. 
(3)  The hearing on any proposed zoning changes will be completed within 18 months from the enactment of the NHIPOD. 
(4)  The NHIPOD shall be automatically dissolved 24 months after the enactment of the NHIPOD. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.3; Ord. of 11-21-2016(10) ) 
Sec. 34-182. - Wireless Communications Facilities Overlay District (WCFOD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Wireless Communications Facilities Overlay District (WCFOD). The purpose of this section is to establish areas in which monopole structures for wireless communication equipment, hereinafter referred to as wireless communications facilities (WCF) may be provided while protecting unique community character. The WCFOD has been created: 
(1)  To provide for safe and appropriate siting of wireless communications facilities consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and 
(2)  To minimize visual impacts from such facilities on residential districts and scenic areas. 
(b)  Location. The WCFOD shall be located in all districts except Residential R1 and Residential R2 Districts. 
(c)  Applicability. The WCFOD shall be construed as an overlay district with regard to said locations. All requirements of the underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein or except as otherwise unavailable options are provided herein. 
(d)  Uses as of right. 
(1)  Equipment facilitating wireless communications, such as antennas, dishes and other devices, that do not exceed five feet above the height of the existing structure or building, and subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (d)(2) of this section, may be attached to an existing building or structure, or to an existing WCF as of right, provided that site plan review is obtained from the inspector of buildings as set forth in subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Equipment may be placed upon or inside existing buildings or structures, including water tanks and towers, church spires, electrical transmission lines and the like. In such cases, the equipment height shall not exceed five feet above the height of the existing structure or building. 
(3)  Equipment facilitating wireless communications equipment allowed under subsection (d)(1) requires minor site plan review by the inspector of buildings, after review and approval of the director of the department of planning and development. Minor site plan review shall not be considered complete, and a building permit shall not be issued, until such written approval is granted by the director of planning and development. Conditions of such written approval shall be conditions of the building permit issued by the inspector of buildings. In all cases, modifications to equipment shall be subject to subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(4)  To the maximum extent feasible, equipment, including, but not limited to, antennas, dishes, cabinets, and other devices, placed upon or inside existing buildings or structures shall minimize adverse visual effects on the environment. The inspector of buildings may impose reasonable conditions to ensure this result, including, but not limited to, screening and/or color, materials and texture of exterior equipment as well as measures to address noise and/or light impacts. 
(e)  Site plan review by the planning board. When any part of a project includes ground-based equipment facilitating wireless communications, including monopole structures and other ground-mounted structures or equipment, site plan review and approval shall be obtained from the planning board. 
(f)  Special permit. WCFs may be erected in the WCFOD upon the issuance of a special permit by the zoning board of appeals upon a finding that the proposed WCF will not cause substantial detriment to the city or the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. The determination shall include consideration of each of the following: 
(1)  Communications needs served by the facility; 
(2)  Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading; 
(3)  Adequacy of utilities and other public services; 
(4)  Impacts on neighborhood character, including aesthetics; 
(5)  Impacts on the natural environment, including visual impacts; and 
(6)  Potential fiscal impacts, including impacts on city services, tax base and employment. 
(g)  Conditions. All WCFs shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  To the extent feasible, service providers shall collocate on a single facility. Monopoles shall be designed to structurally accommodate foreseeable users (within a ten-year period) where technically practicable. 
(2)  New freestanding WCFs shall be limited to monopoles; no lattice towers shall be permitted. Monopole height shall not exceed 100 feet above mean finished ground elevation at the base of the mounting structure; provided, however, that a monopole may be erected higher than 100 feet where collocation is approved or proposed, not to exceed a height of 140 feet above mean finished ground elevation at the base of the mounting structure. 
(3)  New monopoles shall be considered only upon a finding that existing or approved monopoles or WCFs cannot accommodate the equipment planned for the proposed monopole. 
(4)  All structures associated with WCFs shall be removed within one year of cessation of use. The zoning board of appeals and/or planning board may require a performance guarantee to affect this result. 
(5)  The WCF shall minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual effects on the environment. The zoning board of appeals and/or planning board may impose reasonable conditions to ensure this result, including painting, lighting standards, landscaping, and screening. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  Traffic associated with the WCF shall not adversely affect public ways. 
(7)  Fencing may be required to control unauthorized entry to the WCF. 
(8)  The setback of the WCF from the property line shall not be less than 50 feet. 
(h)  Submittal requirements. As part of any application for a special permit, applicants shall submit, at a minimum, the information required for site plan approval, as set forth herein at section 34-215. Applicants shall also describe the capacity of the WCF, including the number and types of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of capacity. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.4;  3- 4-2013 , §§ 1.-4.) 
Sec. 34-183. - Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD). It is the purpose of this section to establish a Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District and to encourage smart growth in accordance with the purpose of M.G.L. c. 40R, and to foster a range of housing opportunities that promotes compact design, preservation of open space, and a variety of transportation options, including enhanced pedestrian access to employment and nearby rail access. Other objectives of this section are to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety and welfare by encouraging diversity of housing opportunities; 
(2)  Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages and sizes in order to meet the goal of preserving municipal character and diversity; 
(3)  Increase the production of a range of housing units to meet existing and anticipated housing needs; 
(4)  Provide a mechanism by which residential development can contribute directly to increasing the supply and diversity of housing; 
(5)  Establish requirements, standards, and guidelines, and ensure predictable, fair and cost-effective development review and permitting; and 
(6)  Establish development standards to allow context-sensitive design and creative site planning. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the definitions set forth in this subsection shall apply. All terms shall be defined in accordance with the definitions established under the enabling laws or this subsection, or as set forth in the rules and regulations of the permit approval authority entitled "Rules and Regulations of the City of Chelsea Permit Approval Authority, Chapter 40R," dated June 27, 2006, and approved by the department of housing and community development on July 13, 2006 (the PAA regulations). To the extent that there is any conflict between the following definitions or the PAA regulations and the enabling laws, the terms of the enabling laws shall govern: 
    Affordable homeownership unit means an affordable housing unit required to be sold to an eligible household. 
    Affordable housing means housing that is affordable to and occupied by eligible households. Affordable housing units created within the SGOD meeting the standards set out in 760 CMR 45.03 shall count on the subsidized housing inventory, subject to the approval of the state department of housing and community development (DHCD). 
    Affordable housing restriction means a deed restriction of affordable housing meeting statutory requirements in M.G.L. c. 184, § 31 and the requirements of subsection (d)(5) of this section. 
    Affordable rental unit means an affordable housing unit required to be rented to an eligible household. 
    Eligible household means an individual or household whose annual income is less than 80 percent of the areawide median income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets. 
    Enabling laws means M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00. 
    Plan approval means standards and procedures which a project in the SGOD must meet under the procedures established herein and in the enabling laws. 
    Plan approval authority means, for the purposes of reviewing project applications and issuing decisions on development projects within the SGOD, the zoning board of appeals, consistent with M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, shall be the plan approval authority (PAA), and is authorized to approve a site plan to implement a project. 
(c)  Overlay district. 
(1)  Establishment. The Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the SGOD, is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 2.83 acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district and is shown on the zoning map as set forth on the map entitled "Gerrish Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District, June 5, 2006, prepared by Crosby, Schlessinger and Smallridge LLC." This map is hereby made a part of this chapter and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Underlying zoning. The SGOD is an overlay district superimposed on all underlying zoning districts. The use regulations governing the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force. 
(3)  Applicability of SGOD. In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, an applicant for a project located within the SGOD may seek plan approval in accordance with the requirements of this section. Such application shall not be subject to any other provisions of this chapter, including limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential uses related to a rate of development or phased growth limitation or to a local moratorium on the issuance of such permits, or to building permit or dwelling use limitations. 
(4)  Permitted uses. Multifamily dwellings with three or more dwelling units are permitted as of right. In addition, nonconforming structures may be extended, altered or changed to allow conversion to residential use subject to design and site plan review. 
(5)  Project phasing. The PAA, as a condition of any plan approval, may require a project to be phased to mitigate any extraordinary adverse project impacts on nearby properties. For projects that are approved and developed in phases, the proportion of affordable units and the proportion of market rate units shall be consistent across all phases. 
(d)  Housing and housing affordability. 
(1)  Marketing plan. Prior to granting plan approval for housing within the SGOD, an applicant for such approval must submit a narrative document and marketing plan that establishes that the proposed development of housing is appropriate for diverse populations, including households with children, other households, individuals, households including individuals with disabilities, and the elderly. No less than ten percent of the residential units within a project shall be three-bedroom units and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, this requirement shall not be reduced. These documents in combination, to be submitted with a site plan application shall include details about construction related to the provision, within the development, of units that are accessible to the disabled. 
(2)  Number of affordable housing units. For all projects, no less than 20 percent of housing units constructed shall be affordable housing. For purposes of calculating the number of units of affordable housing required within a project, any fractional unit of one-half or greater shall be deemed to constitute a whole unit. 
(3)  Requirements. Affordable housing shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  For an affordable rental unit, the monthly rent payment, including utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless other affordable program rent limits approved by the DHCD shall apply. 
b.  For an affordable homeownership unit, the monthly housing payment, including mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes, condominium and/or homeowner's association fees, insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one. 
c.  Affordable housing required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented or sold to and occupied only be eligible households. 
(4)  Design and construction. Units of affordable housing shall be finished housing units. Units of affordable housing shall be dispersed throughout the project of which they are part and have exteriors that are equivalent in design and materials to the exteriors of other housing units in the project. The total number of bedrooms in the affordable housing shall be proportionate to the total number of bedrooms in all the units in the project of which the affordable housing is part, provided that at least ten percent of the three-bedroom units within the project shall be affordable housing. 
(5)  Affordable housing restriction. Each unit of affordable housing shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction which is recorded with the appropriate registry of deeds or district registry of the land court and which contains the following: 
a.  Specification of the term of the affordable housing restriction which shall be no less than 30 years; 
b.  The name and address of an administering agency with a designation of its power to monitor and enforce the affordable housing restriction; 
c.  A description of the unit of affordable housing by address and number of bedrooms; 
d.  Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection plan, to which the affordable housing is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program, including public notice and a fair resident selection process. The housing marketing and selection plan may provide for preferences in resident selection to the extent consistent with applicable law; the plan shall designate the household size appropriate for a unit with respect to bedroom size and provide that the preference for such unit shall be given to a household of the appropriate size; 
e.  A requirement that residents will be selected at the initial sale or rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of eligible households compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and selection plan; 
f.  Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit will be set; 
g.  Designation of the priority of the affordable housing restriction over other mortgages and restrictions, provided that a first mortgage of a homeownership housing unit to a commercial lender in an amount less than maximum resale price may have priority over the affordable housing restriction if required by then current practice of commercial mortgage lenders; 
h.  A requirement that only an eligible household may reside in affordable housing and that notice of any lease or sublease of any unit of affordable housing shall be given to the administering agency; 
i.  Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions of the affordable housing restriction by the administering agency; 
j.  Provision that the restriction on an affordable homeownership unit shall run in favor of the administering agency and the municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit initial sale and resale to and occupancy by an eligible household; 
k.  Provision that the restriction on an affordable rental unit shall run in favor of the administering agency and the municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit rental and occupancy to an eligible household; 
l.  Provision that the owners or managers of affordable rental units shall file an annual report to the administering agency, in a form specified by that agency, certifying compliance with the affordability provisions of this chapter and containing such other information as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure affordability; and 
m.  A requirement that residents in affordable housing provide such information as the administering agency may reasonably request in order to ensure affordability. 
(6)  Administering agency. An administering agency which may be the local housing authority, a regional nonprofit housing agency, or other qualified housing entity shall be designated by the PAA. In a case where the administering agency cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties, such duties shall devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the PAA or, in the absence of such timely designation, by an entity designated by the DHCD. In any event, such agency shall ensure the following: 
a.  Prices of affordable homeownership units are properly computed; 
b.  Rental amounts of affordable rental units are properly computed; 
c.  Income eligibility of households applying for affordable housing is properly and reliably determined; 
d.  The housing marketing and resident selection plan conforms to all requirements and is properly administered; 
e.  Sales and rentals are made to eligible households chosen in accordance with the housing marketing and resident selection plan with appropriate unit size for each household being properly determined and proper preference being given; and 
f.  Affordable housing restrictions meeting the requirements of this section are recorded with the proper registry of deeds. 
(7)  Housing marketing and selection plan. The housing marketing and selection plan may make provision for payment by the project applicant or owner of reasonable costs to the administering agency to develop, advertise and maintain the list of eligible households and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability requirements. Such payment shall not exceed one-half percent of the amount of rents of affordable rental units (payable annually) or one percent of the sale or resale prices of affordable homeownership units (payable upon each such sale or resale), as applicable. 
(8)  Age restrictions. The development of specific projects within the district may be exclusively for the elderly, persons with disabilities or for assisted living, provided that any such project shall be in compliance with all applicable fair housing laws and not less than 25 percent of the housing units in such a restricted project shall be restricted as affordable units. Any project which includes age-restricted residential units shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws and regulations. 
(9)  Phasing. For housing that is approved and developed in phases, which an applicant may voluntarily elect to do, the proportion of affordable housing units, and the proportion of existing zoned units to bonus units as described in 760 CMR 59.04(1)(h), shall be consistent across all phases. 
(10)  Computation. Prior to granting of any building permit for the housing component of a project, the applicant for such building permit must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the PAA, that the method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are computed shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability applicable to the city. 
(11)  No waiver. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the affordability provisions in this subsection (d) shall not be waived. 
(e)  Dimensional and density requirement. 
(1)  All projects are subject to site plan/design review as detailed in subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  The dimensional requirements applicable in the SGOD subdistrict 1 are as follows: 
Minimum lot area (to be calculated over the total acreage of all of the parcels within a project)  Per dwelling unit 1,350 square feet  But not less than 5,000 square feet  Minimum density 20 units per acre Minimum frontage 40 feet Maximum floor area ratio (to be calculated over the total acreage of all of the parcels within a project) 1 Maximum height 40 feet Maximum number of stories Four Required yards  Front yard Five feet or equal to the setbacks of adjacent buildings (subject to design review)  Side yard 1/4 the height of the building  Rear yard 20 feet Maximum percent of lot covered 50 percent Minimum usable open space per unit 150 square feet (a minimum of 50 percent of open space must be at grade; private balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can account for a maximum of 25 percent of the required open space; common balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can be used to satisfy the remaining requirement) Principal structures per lot Two  
(3)  The dimensional requirements applicable in the SGOD subdistrict 2 are as follows: 
Minimum lot area  Per dwelling unit 850 square feet  But not less than 6,000 square feet for an individual parcel Minimum density 20 units/acre Minimum frontage 40 feet Corner clearance 20 feet Maximum floor area ratio  Standard 1.5  Bonus 2.0; provided that at least 50 percent of the required parking is enclosed underground, and/or within the principal building, and/or in a structure. As described in the design guidelines, all underbuilding parking should be concealed from view from the street and the elevation should not be visible in the main facade of the building. Maximum height 45 feet Maximum number of stories Four Required yards  Front yard Five feet or equal to the setbacks of adjacent buildings (subject to design review)  Side yard 1/4 of the height of the building  Rear yard 20 feet Maximum percent of lot covered 50 percent Minimum usable open space per unit 150 square feet (a minimum of 50 percent of open space must be at-grade; private balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can account for a maximum of 25 percent of the required open space; common balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can be used to satisfy the remaining requirement) Principal structures per lot Two  
(f)  Parking requirements. The off-street parking requirements for the SGOD are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum spaces. A minimum of 1.25 spaces per unit and maximum of two spaces per unit. 
(2)  Layout. The minimums are as follows: 
a.  Setback requirement is five feet; 
b.  Aisle width is 21 feet; 
c.  Individual space dimensions are 8.5 feet by 18 feet. 
Subcompact spaces may be provided, but cannot be used to meet the minimum number of spaces required. 
(3)  Interpretation of parking table. 
a.  Unless otherwise approved by the PAA, a minimum of 1.25 and a maximum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each residential unit, inclusive of parking spaces within garages. The PAA may allow for additional visitor parking spaces beyond the two maximum spaces per unit if deemed appropriate given the design, layout and density of the proposed residential or other development. The PAA may allow for a decrease in the required parking as provided in subsection (f)(3)c of this section. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the use of shared parking to fulfill parking demands noted in subsection (f)(1) of this section that occur at different times of day is strongly encouraged. Minimum parking requirements in subsection (f)(1) of this section may be reduced by the PAA if the applicant can demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by using accepted methodologies (e.g., the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report, ITE shared parking guidelines, or other approved studies). 
c.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any minimum required amount of parking may be reduced upon a demonstration to the reasonable satisfaction of the PAA that the lesser amount of parking will not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that lesser amount of parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits, taking into consideration: 
1.  The availability of surplus off-street parking in the vicinity of the use being served and/or the proximity of a bus or an MBTA transit station; 
2.  The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of the use being served; 
3.  Shared use of off-street parking spaces serving other uses having peak user demands at different times; 
4.  Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result in a lower level of auto usage; 
5.  Impact of the parking requirement on the physical environment of the affected lot or the adjacent lots including reduction in green space, destruction of significant existing trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling units, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways; and 
6.  Such other factors as may be considered by the PAA. 
(g)  Design standards. 
(1)  Site design and building orientation. 
a.  Buildings and landscape elements should be sited to reinforce the street edge by aligning building faces and taller vertical landscape elements along the setback line. The setback should be generous enough to allow for tree plantings but shallow enough that the buildings help create a coherent street wall that will inform future patterns of development. 
b.  Required open space should be sited such that it is visually accessible from the street, thereby creating a visual amenity for the community, where possible. 
c.  In order to strengthen and define street form, corner buildings should align to both street frontages. This is especially important at the corner of Highland and Library Streets, where the lack of development on corner parcels creates a particularly undefined intersection. 
d.  Parking areas should be sited behind buildings. Driveways should be located on side streets where possible, and garage entries should be located behind buildings or on side streets where possible. Garage entries facing streets should have doors designed to be compatible with a pedestrian scale and aesthetic, characterized by windows, panels or other articulations. 
e.  All curb cuts should be designed so that driveways slope up from the street to the level of the sidewalk. Curb cuts should not be designed so that the drive is set at the street elevation. Sidewalks are meant for safe passage of pedestrians. Curb cuts set at the street elevation not only require pedestrians to step down at every cut, but also promote vehicles entering and exiting the drive at faster speeds than those that would be used if the sidewalk were designed so that the pedestrian had the right-of-way. 
(2)  Building character and design. 
a.  Buildings should have the primary entrance oriented to the street on which the building fronts. 
b.  In order to enhance security, interior living spaces should be oriented so that windows give visual access to either the street or any on-site open spaces. 
c.  To improve the pedestrian scale of the district, and reflect the pattern and character of surrounding buildings, buildings should include articulations, such as cornices, bay windows, dormers, peaked corner turrets, or other vertical articulations that add interest and dimension to the building facades. Larger articulations can be used to create visually accessible open spaces that can be used to satisfy the open space requirements (for example, a U-shaped building with the open part of the U-shape landscaped and facing the street). Long building facades should be broken up with multiple entrances, creating the feel of a row of individual buildings. 
d.  Windows should be individual openings in the facade, with well-defined lintels and sills, rather than band windows. 
e.  Building material should be clapboard, painted in light colors. Larger buildings may be masonry, to fit in with older industrial buildings. 
f.  Building tops should be shaped with attention to their view against the sky and to adjacent structures. Buildings with flat roofs should have a cornice. Mechanical penthouses and other projections or roof elements that are visible from the street should be architecturally integrated with the overall building design. 
g.  Attention should be paid to the design of front doors, with covered front entries or other details to provide interest. 
(3)  Landscape and screening elements. 
a.  Where space allows, sidewalks should be ten feet from curb to back of sidewalk, with street trees planted in a continuous four-foot tree lawn or individual four-foot tree pits. Sidewalk width should match adjacent parcels, or for full-block parcels, adjacent blocks, but never less than a minimum width of five feet. 
b.  Where sidewalks are less than eight feet, street trees or other landscaping should be planted in the front setback to create a greener street edge and help mitigate the lack of open space in the neighborhood. Landscaping should be planted at a sufficient density to make an immediate impact on the pedestrian environment. 
c.  In order to visually screen surface parking from the street without reducing visual access and security: 
1.  Except to allow egress to the property at driveways and walkways, where possible, surface parking areas should be screened from the street by continuous planting strips a minimum of five feet deep and planted at a density sufficient to create a continuous screen, with plantings at least 18 inches, but no more than four feet tall. 
2.  In addition to planted screens, continuous fencing should be installed on the street side of the planting strip. Fencing should have black metal pickets at least 18 inches but no more than four feet tall, aligning with architectural elements of the adjacent building facade. 
3.  Trees may be planted within planting strips provided they do not disrupt the continuity of the required screening, and that limbs are removed below a height of 12 feet. 
d.  In order to promote a sustainable and natural landscape environment, plant materials should be restricted to native and noninvasive species. 
(h)  Application for plan approval. 
(1)  Preapplication. Prior to the submittal of a site plan application, a concept plan may be submitted to help guide the development of the definitive site plan for project buildout and individual elements thereof. Such concept plan should reflect the following: 
a.  Overall building envelope areas; 
b.  Open space and natural resource areas; 
c.  General site improvements, groupings of buildings, and proposed land uses. 
The concept plan is intended to be used as a tool for both the applicant and the PAA to ensure that the proposed project design will be consistent with the design standards and other requirements of the SGOD. 
(2)  Full buildout required. A site plan application for plan approval shall be submitted to the PAA on the form provided by the PAA, along with application fees which shall be as set forth in the PAA regulations. An application shall show the proposed buildout of a project, whether the project will be phased or not. 
(3)  Required submittals. The site plan application for plan approval shall be accompanied by such plans and documents as may be required and set forth in the PAA regulations. All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer registered in the state. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the state. All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect registered in the state. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet or larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the PAA. 
(i)  Submission contents. A site plan application for plan approval shall show each of the following for the entire site, whether or not development is to be phased, unless items are waived, in writing, by the director of planning and development: 
(1)  Location map at 600 feet per each. 
(2)  Survey of lot indicating property boundaries, metes and bounds, existing structures, locations of all easements, rights-of-way, grades at intervals of three feet, utilities, the owners of the property and adjacent lot owners. 
(3)  Photographs eight inches by ten inches of sufficient quality and detail to indicate the environmental features of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, views of the Boston skyline, adjacent or nearby open space and adjacent structures and/or uses of land. 
(4)  Schematic design plans including: 
a.  A site plan which accurately locates all existing and proposed buildings and structures with their proposed uses, as well as gross and usable floor areas, parking areas, driveways, driveway openings, service areas, usable open space, landscaped areas and the proposed treatment thereof (including fences, walls, planting areas and walks), all facilities for storm drainage, sewerage, refuse, other waste disposal and other utility systems. 
b.  A ground floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses of interior areas in appropriate scale, access points for pedestrian and service areas. 
c.  Typical floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses and vertical circulation for upper level floors. 
d.  All data required to enable the PAA to determine the amount and frequency of traffic volumes generated and the extent of compliance with off-street parking and loading requirements. 
e.  A sign plan indicating location, size, illumination and design of all signs on the site. 
f.  Elevations defining heights, proposed entrances, fenestration, signage, all materials, finishes, colors and features of the entire project. 
(5)  Documentation of the project's compliance with the requirement that 20 percent of the units in the project are affordable. 
(6)  Documentation of the project's ability to accommodate a range of ages and family sizes. 
(7)  A plan for the phasing of the development and the reasonable time of completion of each phase. 
(8)  A circulation plan showing the street system and circulation patterns within and adjacent to the proposed development including any special engineering features, such as, but not limited to, median strips, overpasses and underpasses and major pedestrian paths. 
(9)  At the discretion of the PAA, the submittal of a development impact statement (DIS) may be required. The DIS shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team including a registered landscape architect or architect, a registered professional or civil engineer, and a registered surveyor and shall include: 
a.  Physical environment. 
1.  Describe the general physical conditions of the site, including amounts and varieties of vegetation, general topography, unusual geological, archaeological, scenic and historical features or structures, location of significant viewpoint, stone walls, trees over 16 inches in diameter, trails and open space links, and indigenous wildlife. 
2.  Describe how the project will affect these conditions, providing a complete physical description of the project and its relationship to the immediate surrounding area. 
b.  Surface water and subsurface conditions. 
1.  Describe the location, extent and type of existing water and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both within and adjacent to the site. 
2.  Describe any proposed alterations of shorelines, marshes or seasonal wet areas. 
3.  Describe any limitations imposed on the project by the site's soil and water conditions. 
4.  Describe the impact upon groundwater and surface water quality and recharge, including estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer and other activities within the site. 
c.  Circulation systems. Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the site per average day and peak hour and state the number of motor vehicles to use streets adjacent to the site per average day and peak hour. Such data shall be sufficient to enable the PAA to evaluate: 
1.  Existing traffic on streets adjacent to or approaching the site; 
2.  Traffic generated or resulting from the site; and 
3.  The impact of such additional traffic on all ways within and providing access to the site. Actual study results, a description of the study methodology, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for implementing the study, shall be attached to the DIS. 
d.  Support systems. 
1.  Water distribution. Discuss the types of wells or water system proposed for the site, means of providing water for firefighting and any problems unique to the site. 
2.  Sewage disposal. Discuss the type of on-site or sewer system to be used, suitability of soils, procedures and results of percolation tests and evaluate impact of disposal methods on surface water and groundwater. 
3.  Refuse disposal. Discuss the location and type of facilities, the impact on existing city refuse disposal capacity, hazardous materials requiring special precautions. 
4.  Fire protection. Discuss the type, location, and capacity of fuel storage facilities or other flammables, distance to fire station, and adequacy of existing firefighting equipment to confront potential fires on the proposed site. 
5.  Recreation. Discuss the distance to and type of public facilities to be used by residents of the proposed site and the type of private recreation facilities to be provided on the site. 
6.  Schools. Project the increase to the student population for nursery, elementary, junior high school, and high school levels, also indicating present enrollment in the nearest public schools. 
e.  Phasing. Describe the following: 
1.  Methods to be used during construction to control erosion and sedimentation through use of sediment basins, mulching, matting, temporary vegetation or covering of stockpiles. 
2.  Approximate size and location of portion of the parcel to be cleared at any given time and length of time of exposure. 
3.  Phased construction, if any, of any required public improvements, and how such improvements are to be integrated into site development. 
(j)  Procedures. 
(1)  PAA regulations. The permit approval authority has adopted rules and regulations entitled "Rules and Regulations of the Chelsea Permit Approval Authority, Chapter 40R," dated June 27, 2006, and approved by the department of housing and community development on (date) (PAA regulations). Such rules and regulations are hereby made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Filing. An applicant for plan approval shall file the required number of copies of the application form and the other required submittals as set forth in the PAA regulations with the city clerk and a copy of the application including the date of filing certified by the city clerk shall be filed forthwith with the PAA. 
(3)  Circulation to other boards. Upon receipt of the application, the PAA shall immediately provide a copy of the application materials and the expected date of the public hearing for the application to the city council, board of health, building inspector, conservation commission, department of public works, fire department, planning board, and police department. A reviewing board may provide written comments to the PAA prior to the close of the public hearing. Upon written request to the PAA, the reviewing board or department may receive an automatic extension for return of comments, up to a total of 30 days of the date of the receipt of the plan and application for review and comment." 
(4)  Hearing. The PAA shall hold a public hearing for which notice has been given as provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 11. The decision of the PAA shall be made, and a written notice of the decision filed with the city clerk, within 120 days of the receipt of the application by the city clerk. The required time limits for such action may be extended by written agreement between the applicant and the PAA, with a copy of such agreement being filed in the office of the city clerk. Failure of the PAA to take action within said 120 days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of the application and site plan. 
(5)  Peer review. The applicant shall be required to pay for reasonable consulting fees to provide peer review of the plan approval application, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40R, § 11(a). Such fees shall be held by the city in a separate account and used only for expenses associated with the review of the application by outside consultants, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, urban designers, housing consultants, planners, and others. Any surplus remaining after the completion of such review, including any interest accrued, shall be returned to the applicant forthwith. 
(k)  Decision. 
(1)  Waivers. Upon the request of the applicant, the plan approval authority may waive dimensional and other requirements of this section, including the design standards of subsection (g) of this section, in the interests of design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the SGOD, or if it finds that such waiver will allow the project to achieve the density, affordability, mix of uses, and/or physical character allowable under this section. 
(2)  Plan review. An application for plan approval shall be reviewed for consistency with the purpose and intent of this section, and such plan review shall be construed as an as-of-right review and approval process as required by and in accordance with the enabling laws. 
(3)  Plan approval. Plan approval shall be granted where the PAA finds that: 
a.  The applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in the regulations; 
b.  The project and site plan meet the requirements and standards set forth in this section, or a waiver has been granted therefrom; and 
c.  Extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the project on nearby properties have been adequately mitigated. 
(4)  Plan disapproval. A site plan may be disapproved only where the PAA finds that: 
a.  The applicant has not submitted the required fees and information as set forth in the regulations; 
b.  The project and site plan do not meet the requirements and standards as set forth in this section, and a waiver has not been granted therefrom; or 
c.  It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse project impacts on nearby properties by means of suitable conditions. 
(5)  Form of decision. The PAA shall issue to the applicant a copy of its decision containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, and the plans that were the subject of the decision, and certifying that a copy of the decision has been filed with the city clerk and that all plans referred to in the decision are on file with the PAA. If 20 days have elapsed, after the decision has been filed in the office of the city clerk without an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having been filed, is dismissed or denied, the city clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. If a plan is approved by reason of the PAA failing to timely act, the city clerk shall make such certification on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision or application bearing such certification shall be recorded in the registry of deeds for the county and district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the applicant. 
(l)  Change in plans after approval by PAA. 
(1)  Minor change. After plan approval, an applicant may apply to make minor changes involving minor utility orientation adjustments, or minor adjustments to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall buildout or building envelope of the site, or provision of open space, number of housing units, or housing need or affordability features. Such minor changes must be submitted to the PAA on redlined prints of the approved plan, reflecting the proposed change, and on application forms provided by the PAA. The PAA may authorize such changes at a scheduled meeting without the need to hold a public hearing. The PAA shall set forth any decision to approve or deny such minor change in writing and provide a copy to the applicant for filing with the city clerk. 
(2)  Major change. Those changes deemed by the PAA to constitute a major change because of the nature of the change in relation to the prior approved plan, or because such change cannot be appropriately characterized as a minor change as described in subsection (l)(1) of this section, shall be processed by the PAA as a new application for plan approval pursuant to this section. 
(m)  As-built plans. 
(1)  Filing. As-built plans will be filed with the building inspector within 30 days after completion of construction pursuant to a design certificate. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.5) 
Sec. 34-184. - Floodplain Overlay District (FOD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Floodplain Overlay District (FOD). The purposes of the FOD are to ensure public safety through reducing the threats of life and personal injury; eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials; prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding; avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of flooding; eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of flooding conditions; and reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding waters. 
(b)  Floodplain district boundaries and base flood elevation and floodway data. The floodplain district is herein established as an overlay district. The floodplain district includes all special flood hazard areas within the city designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO A99, V, or VE on the county flood insurance rate map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the county FIRM that are wholly or partially within the city are panel numbers 25025C0017J, 25025C0018J, and 25025C0019J dated March 16, 2016. The exact boundaries of the floodplain district may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the county flood insurance study (FIS) report dated March 16, 2016. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the city clerk, planning board, building official and conservation commission. 
(c)  Base flood elevation and floodway data. 
(1)  Floodway data. In zones A, A1-30 and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other development greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, within unnumbered A zones. 
(d)  Notification of watercourse alteration. In a riverine situation, the zoning enforcement officer shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Adjacent communities. 
(2)  National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) state coordinator 
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation 
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700 
Boston, MA 02114-2104. 
(3)  NFIP program specialist 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region 1 
99 High Street, 6th Floor 
Boston, MA 02110. 
(e)  Conformance. The Floodplain Overlay District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All development in the district, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit, must be in compliance with M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 and with the following: 
(1)  Sections of the state building code (780 CMR) which address floodplain and coastal high hazard areas; 
(2)  Wetlands protection regulations, department of environmental protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00); 
(3)  Inland wetlands restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00); 
(4)  Coastal wetlands restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 12.00); 
(5)  Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15.000). 
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the state regulations referenced in this subsection may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state regulations. 
(f)  Permitted uses. The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood flows are encouraged provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials or equipment: 
(1)  Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc.; 
(2)  Forestry and nursery uses; 
(3)  Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.; 
(4)  Conservation of water, plants, wildlife; 
(5)  Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths; 
(6)  Temporary nonresidential structures used in connection with fishing, growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises; and 
(7)  Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions. 
(g)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
(1)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(2)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(3)  The placement of mobile homes and mobile home parks and subdivisions is prohibited. 
(h)  Specific standards for subdivision proposals. All subdivision proposal shall be reviewed by the planning board prior to granting a sewage disposal construction permit to insure that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is lesser). 
(i)  Specific standards for floodways. In the floodway, designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction, and substantial improvements to existing structures, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood. 
(2)  Any encroachment meeting the above standard shall comply with all other floodplain requirements including but not limited to those within the state building code. 
(3)  In Zones A1-30 and A3, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the Chelsea FIRM or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map 25025C0019J 17, 25025C0019J 18 and 25025C0019J 19, dated March 16, 2016 encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must be included on the plan proposal. 
(j)  Specific standards for Zone A. Within Zone A, where the base flood elevation is not provided on the FIRM, the applicant shall obtain any existing base flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed by the board of health and the department of health and the building inspector for its reasonable utilization toward meeting the elevation or flood-proofing requirements, as appropriate, of the state building code. 
(k)  Review procedure. Applicants shall file 15 copies of the application and plans with the city clerk. Whenever an application is so filed, the applicant shall also file, within five working days of the filing of the completed application, copies of the application and plans with the board of health, conservation commission, building inspector, department of public works, emergency management, fire, police and planning board for their consideration. Said boards, commissions and departments shall report to the building inspector in accordance with section 34-215(b), or in the case of major site plans to the planning board in accordance with section 34-215(c). 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.6; Ord. of 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 34-185. - Residential Planned Overlay District (RPOD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Residential Planned Overlay District (RPOD). It is the purpose of this section to establish an RPOD to foster a range of housing opportunities and promote compact development of a high quality design, preservation of open space and enhanced pedestrian access to employment and public transportation. Within the RPOD, there shall be established three sub-districts referred to as RPOD-1, RPOD-2, and RPOD-3. Other objectives include: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety and welfare by encouraging diversity of housing opportunities; 
(2)  Provide for a production of a range of housing choices to meet housing needs; 
(3)  Provide for a mechanism by which residential development can increase the supply and diversity of housing; and 
(4)  Established standards to allow for creative site planning and design, compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Applicability. The RPOD provisions shall apply only to buildings, structures, parcels and uses within an approved Residential Planned Development (RPD). All other buildings, structures, lots and uses located within an RPOD, but not the subject of an approved RPD, shall be governed by the applicable regulations of the underlying zoning district. Where provisions of this section conflict or are inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall govern. 
(c)  Special permit. In any RPOD, the zoning board of appeals may grant a special permit in accordance with the procedures provided in section 34-214, and the planning board may issue a site plan approval in accordance with the procedures of section 34-215, subject to the provisions applicable to an RPD set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Procedures and filing requirements for RPDs. In addition to the provisions of this section, applicants for a grant of special permit for an RPD shall follow the procedures set forth for in section 34-155(g) applicable to planned developments under section 34-155. 
(e)  Special permit criteria and standards for RPDs. A special permit may be granted by the zoning board of appeals for an RPD, subject to the provisions set forth in this subsection and in addition to those criteria set forth in section 34-214, special permits. In addition, an RPD shall be subject to site plan review by the planning board, pursuant to section 34-215, site plan review. In order to be eligible for any approval under this section, an RPD must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Applicability. The RPD parcel shall be located in an RPOD. The requirements of the RPOD shall be applied only to an RPD parcel, which, as defined in section 34-241 is any parcel or assemblage of parcels that are the subject of an RPD special permit. 
(2)  Dimensional requirements. The RPD shall comply with the applicable dimensional controls set out in table A in this subsection. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the bulk and dimensional requirements for an RPD shall be determined by the zoning board of appeals in the special permit process and the zoning board of appeals may grant relief in an RPD special permit from requirements otherwise applicable under the following table A, after a recommendation from the department of planning and development in accordance with the provisions of section 34-155(e): 
TABLE A 
RPOD-1 RPOD-2 RPOD-3 Area, frontage and bulk 1   Minimum lot area 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet   Minimum lot frontage 50 feet 50 feet 150 feet   Maximum total floor area ratio 1.5 1.5 2.20   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 1,250 square feet 950 square feet 573 square feet   Maximum lot coverage (percent) 50 percent 50 percent 50 percent   Maximum density 35 units/acre 45 units/acre 76 units/acre   Minimum useable open space per dwelling unit 150 square feet 150 square feet 60 square feet Height and setbacks   Height (feet) 2 40 feet 40 feet 60 feet   Height (stories) 2 Four stories Four stories Five stories   Front setback Five feet Five feet Five feet   Side setback Five feet Five feet Five feet   Rear setback 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet  
Notes: 
1. Off-street parking requirements shall be determined in compliance with section 34-106. 
2. For any building with a residential component, the zoning board of appeals may grant a special permit to allow the height of said building to be increased up to a maximum of 45 feet (four stories) in the RPOD-1 and a maximum of 50 feet (five stories) in the RPOD-2, excluding customary rooftop elements. In the consideration for granting relief in an RPD special permit from requirements otherwise applicable under table A, the Board may consider the site topography and the contextual height (excluding spires, steeples, belfries, and customary rooftop elements) of the tallest existing street side building within 300 feet of the RPD parcel. 
_____ 
(3)  Compatibility with surroundings. The RPD is of a scale, layout and design that is compatible with the character in the surrounding area and that enhances the visual and civic quality of the site and the overall experience for residents and neighbors of the RPD. The RPD is appropriately integrated with the neighborhood in terms of building height, streetscape character, and overall design. 
(4)  Housing and open space improvements. The RPD offers well designed housing and open space. Appropriate setbacks as well as buffering and screening are provided; the quality of open space is appropriate for the number of residents. 
(5)  Consistency with applicable plans. The RPD is generally consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and applicable neighborhood plans in effect at the time of filing an application for an RPD. 
(6)  Pedestrian scale and open space. 
a.  The RPD provides building footprints and articulations appropriately scaled to encourage outdoor pedestrian circulation; 
b.  The RPD features buildings with appropriately spaced street-level windows, entrances and amenities (e.g., landscaping, benches, pathways); 
c.  The RPD allows pedestrian access, appropriately placed, to encourage walking to promote a vibrant street life making connections to the surrounding neighborhood; and 
d.  The RPOD utilizes infiltration practices to reduce runoff volume increases. 
(f)  Affordable units. In appropriate cases, the special permit granting authority on a recommendation from the department of planning and development may require a set aside of not more than ten percent of the dwelling units for low and moderate income housing. 
(g)  Open space. In appropriate cases, the special permit granting authority on a recommendation from the department of planning and development may require the site plan to show parks, suitably located for playground or recreation purposes. Parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being developed and to the prospective use of such land. 
(h)  Design review and design standards. In addition to the provisions of this section, applicants for a grant of special permit for an RPD shall follow the design review procedures set forth in section 34-155(h) and the design review standards set forth in section 34-155(i), which are applicable to planned developments under section 34-155. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 8.7; Ord. of 6-18-2012, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-4-2015(1) , §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note- This section was § 8.6 of the uncodified zoning ordinance before it was renumbered as § 8.7 in the uncodified zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 34-186. - Central Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD). 
(a)  Scope and purpose. This section applies to the Central Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD). It is the purpose of this section to establish a Central Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District and to encourage smart growth in accordance with the purpose of M.G.L. c. 40R, and to foster a range of housing opportunities that promotes compact design, preservation of open space, and a variety of transportation options, including enhanced pedestrian access to employment and nearby rail access. Other objectives of this section are to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety and welfare by encouraging diversity of housing opportunities; 
(2)  Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages and sizes in order to meet the goal of preserving municipal character and diversity; 
(3)  Increase the production of a range of housing units to meet existing and anticipated housing needs; 
(4)  Provide a mechanism by which residential development can contribute directly to increasing the supply and diversity of housing; 
(5)  Establish requirements, standards, and guidelines, and ensure predictable, fair and cost-effective development review and permitting; and 
(6)  Establish development standards to allow context-sensitive design and creative site planning. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section 34-186, the following definitions shall apply. All capitalized terms shall be defined in accordance with the definitions established under the governing laws or this section 34-186(b), or as set forth in the PAA regulations. To the extent that there is any conflict between the definitions set forth in this section 34-186(b), or the PAA regulations and the governing laws, the terms of the governing laws shall govern. 
    Affordable homeownership unit means an affordable housing unit required to be sold to an eligible household. 
    Affordable housing means housing that is affordable to and occupied by eligible households. Affordable housing units created within the SGOD meeting the standards set out in 760 CMR 45.03 shall count on the subsidized housing inventory, subject to the approval of the state department of housing and community development (DHCD). 
    Affordable housing restriction (AHR) means a deed restriction of Affordable Housing meeting statutory requirements in M.G.L. c. 184, § 31 and the requirements of section 34-186(g)(6) of this section. 
    Affordable rental unit means an affordable housing unit required to be rented to an eligible household. 
    Applicant means the individual or entity that submits a project for plan approval. 
    As-of-right means a use allowed under section 34-186(e) without recourse to a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A project that requires Plan Approval by the PAA pursuant to sections 34-186(j) through 34-186(n) shall be considered an as-of-right project, subject to review and approval by DHCD of any Municipal 40R regulations, guidelines, application forms, or other requirements applicable to review of projects by the plan approval authority under the 40R Zoning and 760 CMR 59.00. 
    Department or DHCD means the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, or any successor agency. 
    Design standards means provisions of section 34-186(n) made applicable to projects within the SGOD that are subject to the Plan Approval process. 
    Designating official means the department of planning and development. 
    Eligible household means an individual or household whose annual income is less than or equal to 80 percent of the area-wide median income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets. 
    Governing laws M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00. 
    Mixed-use development project means a project containing a mix of residential uses and nonresidential uses, as allowed in section 34-186(e)(2), and subject to all applicable provisions of this section 34-186. 
    Monitoring agent or administering agent means the local housing authority or other qualified housing entity designated by the municipality, pursuant to section 34-186(f)(2), to review and implement the affordable housing requirements affecting projects under section 34-186(f). 
    Multifamily or multifamily dwelling means a dwelling designed to accommodate four or more dwelling units. 
    PAA regulations means the rules and regulations of the PAA adopted pursuant to section 34-186(j)(3). 
    Plan approval means standards and procedures which projects in the SGOD must meet pursuant to sections 34-186(j) through 34-186(n) and the governing laws. 
    Plan approval authority (PAA) means the local approval authority authorized under section 34-186(j)(2) to conduct the plan approval process for purposes of reviewing project applications and issuing plan approval decisions within the SGOD. 
    Project or development project means a residential project or mixed-use development project undertaken within the SGOD in accordance with the requirements of this section 34-186. 
    Residential project means a project that consists solely of residential, parking, and accessory uses, as further defined in section 34-186(e)(1). 
    SGOD means the Smart Growth Overlay District established in accordance with this section 34-186. 
    Zoning Ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the City of Chelsea. 
(c)  Establishment. The Central Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the SGOD, is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 2.83 acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district and is shown on the zoning map as set forth on the map entitled "Central Avenue Smart Growth Overlay District, April 18, 2017, prepared by VHB." This map is hereby made a part of this chapter and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Applicability of SGODs-Scope and authority. 
(1)  Applicability of SGODs. An applicant may seek development of a project located within the SGOD in accordance with the provisions of the Governing Laws and this section 34-186, including a request for Plan Approval by the PAA, if necessary. In such case, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Zoning Ordinance, such application shall not be subject to any other provisions of the zoning ordinance, including limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential uses related to a rate of development or phased growth limitation or to a local moratorium on the issuance of such permits, or to other building permit or dwelling unit limitations. 
(2)  Underlying zoning. The SGOD is an overlay district superimposed on all underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the zoning ordinance governing the underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force except for those projects undergoing development pursuant to this section 34-186. 
Within the boundaries of the SGOD, a developer may elect either to develop a project in accordance with the requirements of the smart growth zoning, or to develop a project in accordance with requirements of the regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the zoning ordinance governing the underlying zoning district(s). 
(3)  Administration, enforcement, and appeals. The provisions of this section 34-186 shall be administered by the building commissioner, except as otherwise provided herein. Any legal appeal arising out of a Plan Approval decision by the PAA under sections 34-186(j) through 34-186(n) shall be governed by the applicable provisions of M.G. L. c. 40R. Any other request for enforcement or appeal arising under this section 34-186 shall be governed by the applicable provisions of M.G. L. c. 40A. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as-of-right for projects within the SGOD. 
(1)  Residential projects. A residential project within the SGOD may include: 
a.  Multi-family residential use(s); 
b.  Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses, including surface, garage-under, and structured parking (e.g., parking garages); and 
c.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
(2)  Mixed-use development projects. A mixed-use development project within the SGOD shall include: 
a.  Multi-family residential use(s), provided that the minimum allowable as-of-right density requirements for residential use specified in section 34-186(h) shall apply to the residential portion of any mixed-use development project; 
b.  Any of the following nonresidential uses: Bakery, delicatessen, candy, fish including accessory food service; book, stationary, gift, clothing, dry goods, hardware, jewelry, or variety store; convenience store with hours of operation not to exceed 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; restaurant, including service of alcoholic beverages; professional, business and governmental offices; bank, financial agency; personal service establishment. 
c.  Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses, including surface, garage-under, and structured parking (e.g., parking garages); and 
d.  Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
e.  The total gross floor area devoted to nonresidential uses within a mixed-use development project shall not exceed 15 percent of the total gross floor area of the project. 
(f)  Housing and housing affordability. 
(1)  Number of affordable housing units. For all projects containing at least ten residential units, not less than 20 percent of housing units constructed shall be affordable housing. The PAA may approve individual projects of fewer than ten units within the SGOD which have less than 20 percent affordable housing units, provided that the total number of affordable housing units in the SGOD shall not be less than 20 percent of the total number of approved housing units in the SGOD. For purposes of calculating the number of units of affordable housing required within a project, any fractional unit shall be deemed to constitute a whole unit. A project shall not be segmented to evade the affordability threshold set forth above. 
(2)  Monitoring agent. A monitoring agent which may be the local housing authority or other qualified housing entity shall be designated by the department of planning and development (the "designating official"). In a case where the monitoring agent cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties, upon certification of this fact by the designating official or by DHCD such duties shall devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the designating official. In any event, such monitoring agent shall ensure the following, both prior to issuance of a building permit for a project within the SGOD, and on a continuing basis thereafter, as the case may be: 
a.  Prices of affordable homeownership units are properly computed; rental amounts of affordable rental units are properly computed; 
b.  Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Housing is properly and reliably determined; 
c.  The housing marketing and resident selection plan conform to all requirements, have been approved by DHCD specifically with regard to conformance with M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, and are properly administered 
d.  Marketing plan. Prior to granting plan approval for housing within the SGOD, an applicant for such approval must submit a narrative document and marketing plan that establishes that the proposed development of housing is appropriate for diverse populations, including households with children, other households, individuals, households including individuals with disabilities, and the elderly. No less than ten percent of the residential units within a project shall be three bedroom units and notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, this requirement shall not be reduced. These documents in combination, to be submitted with a site plan application shall include details about construction related to the provision, within the development, of units that are accessible to the disabled. Such housing marketing and resident selection plan is subject to DHCD approval. 
e.  sales and rentals are made to eligible households chosen in accordance with the housing marketing and resident selection plan with appropriate unit size for each household being properly determined and proper preference being given; and 
f.  Affordable housing restrictions meeting the requirements of this section are approved by DHCD specifically with regard to conformance with M.G.L. c.40R and 760 CMR. 59.00, recorded with the proper registry of deeds. 
(3)  Submission requirements. As part of any application for plan approval for a project within the SGOD submitted under sections 34-186(j) through (n), the applicant must submit the following documents to the PAA and the monitoring agent: 
a.  Evidence that the project complies with the cost and eligibility requirements of section 34-186(g): 
b.  Project plans that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of section 34-186(f); and 
c.  A form of affordable housing restriction that satisfies the requirements of section 34-186(g)(6). 
(4)  Submission contents. A site plan application for plan approval shall show each of the following for the entire site, whether or not the development project is to be phased, unless items are waived, in writing, by the director of planning and development: 
a.  Location map at 600 feet per inch. 
b.  Survey of lot indicating property boundaries, metes and bounds, existing structures, locations of all easements, rights-of-way, grades at intervals of three feet, utilities, the owners of the property and adjacent lot owners. 
c.  Photographs eight inches by ten inches of sufficient quality and detail to indicate the environmental features of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, views of the Boston skyline, adjacent or nearby open space and adjacent structures and/or uses of land. 
d.  Schematic design plans including: 
1.  A site plan which accurately locates all existing and proposed buildings and structures with their proposed uses, as well as gross and usable floor areas, parking areas, driveways, driveway openings, service areas, usable open space, landscaped areas and the proposed treatment thereof (including fences, walls, planting areas and walks), all facilities for storm drainage, sewerage, refuse, other waste disposal and other utility systems. 
2.  A ground floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses of interior areas in appropriate scale, access points for pedestrian and service areas. 
3.  Typical floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses and vertical circulation for upper level floors. 
4.  All data required to enable the PAA to determine the amount and frequency of traffic volumes generated and the extent of compliance with off-street parking and loading requirements. 
5.  A sign plan indicating location, size, illumination and design of all signs on the site. 
6.  Elevations defining heights, proposed entrances, fenestration, signage, all materials, finishes, colors and features of the entire project. 
7.  Documentation of the project's compliance with the requirement that 20 percent of the units in the project are affordable. 
8.  Documentation of the project's ability to accommodate a range of ages and family sizes. 
9.  A plan for thesing of the development project and the reasonable time of completion of each phase. 
10.  A circulation plan showing the street system and circulation patterns within and adjacent to the proposed development project including any special engineering features, such as, but not limited to, median strips, overpasses and underpasses and major pedestrian paths. 
11.  At the discretion of the PAA, the submittal of a development impact statement (DIS) may be required. The DIS shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team including a registered landscape architect or architect, a registered professional or civil engineer, and a registered surveyor and shall include: 
e.  Physical environment. 
1.  Describe the general physical conditions of the site, including amounts and varieties of vegetation, general topography, unusual geological, archaeological, scenic and historical features or structures, location of significant viewpoint, stone walls, trees over 16 inches in diameter, trails and open space links, and indigenous wildlife. 
2.  Describe how the project will affect these conditions, providing a complete physical description of the project and its relationship to the immediate surrounding area. 
f.  Surface water and subsurface conditions. 
1.  Describe the location, extent and type of existing water and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both within and adjacent to the site. 
2.  Describe any proposed alterations of shorelines, marshes or seasonal wet areas. 
3.  Describe any limitations imposed on the project by the site's soil and water conditions. 
4.  Describe the impact upon groundwater and surface water quality and recharge, including estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer and other activities within the site. 
g.  Circulation systems. Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the site per average day and peak hour and state the number of motor vehicles to use streets adjacent to the site per average day and peak hour. Such data shall be sufficient to enable the PAA to evaluate: 
1.  Existing traffic on streets adjacent to or approaching the site; 
2.  Traffic generated or resulting from the site; and 
3.  The impact of such additional traffic on all ways within and providing access to the site, as determined in accordance with standard traffic and transportation planning methodologies. Actual study results, a description of the study methodology, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for implementing the study, shall be attached to the DIS. 
h.  Support systems. 
1.  Water distribution. Discuss the types of wells or water system proposed for the site, means of providing water for firefighting and any problems unique to the site. 
2.  Sewage disposal. Discuss the type of on-site or sewer system to be used, suitability of soils, procedures and results of percolation tests and evaluate impact of disposal methods on surface water and groundwater. 
3.  Refuse disposal. Discuss the location and type of facilities, the impact on existing city refuse disposal capacity, hazardous materials requiring special precautions. 
4.  Fire protection. Discuss the type, location, and capacity of fuel storage facilities or other flammables, distance to fire station, and adequacy of existing firefighting equipment to confront potential fires on the proposed site. 
5.  Recreation. Discuss the distance to and type of public facilities to be used by residents of the proposed site and the type of private recreation facilities to be provided on the site. 
i.  Phasing. Describe the following: 
1.  Methods to be used during construction to control erosion and sedimentation through use of sediment basins, mulching, matting, temporary vegetation or covering of stockpiles. 
2.  Approximate size and location of portion of the parcel to be cleared at any given time and length of time of exposure. 
3.  Phased construction, if any, of any required public improvements, and how such improvements are to be integrated into site development. 
(g)  Cost and eligibility requirements. Affordable housing shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Affordable housing required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by eligible households. 
(2)  For an affordable rental unit, the monthly rent payment, including utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless other affordable program rent limits approved by the DHCD shall apply. 
(3)  For an affordable homeownership unit the monthly housing payment, including mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes, condominium and/or homeowner's association fees, insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one. 
(4)  Prior to the granting of any building permit for a project, the applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the monitoring agent, that the method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are computed shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability applicable to the City of Chelsea. 
(5)  Design and construction. Units of affordable housing shall be finished housing units. With respect to the minimum required number for a given project, units of affordable housing shall be equitably integrated and proportionately dispersed throughout the residential portion of the project of which they are part, across all residential buildings, floors and unit types in accordance with the affordable housing restriction and marketing and tenant selection plan approved by DHCD and be comparable in initial construction quality, size and exterior design to the other housing units in the project. Unless expressly required otherwise under one or more applicable state or federal housing subsidy programs, the bedroom-per-unit average for the Affordable Housing must be equal to or greater than the bedroom-per-unit average for the unrestricted/market-rate units. The total number of bedrooms in the Affordable Housing shall be at least proportionate to the total number of bedrooms in all the units in the project of which the Affordable housing is part, provided that at least ten percent of the three-bedroom units within the project shall be affordable housing 
(6)  Affordable housing restriction. Each project shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction which is recorded with the appropriate registry of deeds or district registry of the land court and which contains the following: 
a.  Specification of the term of the affordable housing restriction which shall be no less than 30 years; 
b.  The name and address of the monitoring agent with a designation of its power to monitor and enforce the affordable housing restriction; 
c.  A description of the affordable homeownership unit, if any, by address and number of bedrooms; and a description of the overall quantity, initial unit designations and number of bedrooms and number of bedroom types of affordable rental units in a project or portion of a project which are rental. Such restriction shall apply individually to the specifically identified affordable homeownership unit and shall apply to a percentage of rental units of a rental project or the rental portion of a project with the initially designated affordable rental units identified in, and able to float subject to specific approval by DHCD in accordance with, the corresponding Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan (AFHMP) and DHCD's AFHMP guidelines 
d.  Reference to an affirmative fair housing marketing and resident selection plan, to which the affordable housing is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program, including public notice and a fair resident selection process. Such plan shall be consistent with DHCD guidance and approved by DHCD. Consistent with DHCD guidance, such plan shall include a preference based on need for the number of bedrooms in a unit and a preference based on need for the accessibility features of a unit where applicable, and may only provide for additional preferences in resident selection to the extent such preferences are also consistent with applicable law and approved by DHCD. 
e.  A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of eligible households compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and selection plan; 
f.  Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of an affordable rental unit or the maximum resale price of an affordable homeownership unit will be set; 
g.  A requirement that only an eligible household may reside in affordable housing and that notice of any lease of any affordable rental unit shall be given to the monitoring agent; 
h.  Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions of the affordable housing restriction by the monitoring agent; 
i.  Provision that the AHR on an affordable homeownership unit shall run in favor of the monitoring agent and/or the municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit initial sale and re-sale to and occupancy by an eligible household; 
j.  Provision that the AHR on affordable rental units in a rental project or rental portion of a project shall run with the rental project or rental portion of a project and shall run in favor of the monitoring agent and/or the municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit rental and occupancy to an eligible household; 
k.  Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of affordable rental unit(s) shall file an annual report to the monitoring agent, in a form specified by that agent certifying compliance with the affordability provisions of this section and containing such other information as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure affordability; and 
l.  A requirement that residents in affordable housing provide such information as the monitoring agent may reasonably request in order to ensure affordability. 
(7)  Costs of housing marketing and selection plan. The housing marketing and selection plan may make provision for payment by the project applicant or owner of reasonable costs to the monitoring agent to develop, advertise, and maintain the list of eligible households and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability requirements. Such payment shall not exceed one-half percent of the amount of rents of affordable rental units (payable annually) or one percent of the sale or resale prices of affordable homeownership units (payable upon each such sale or resale), as applicable 
(8)  Age restrictions. Nothing in this section 34-186 shall permit the imposition of restrictions on age upon projects unless proposed or agreed to voluntarily by the applicant. However, the PAA may, in its review of a submission under section 34-186(f)(3), allow a specific project within the SGOD designated exclusively for the elderly, persons with disabilities, or for assisted living, provided that any such project shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws and regulations and not less than 25 percent of the housing units in such a restricted project shall be restricted as affordable units. 
(9)  Phasing. For any project that is approved and developed in phases in accordance with section 34-186(l)(4), the percentage of affordable units in each phase shall be at least equal to the minimum percentage of affordable housing required under section 34-186(f)(1). Where the PAA and DHCD have expressly granted written approval for the percentage of affordable housing to be other than uniform across all phases, the unit dispersal and bedroom proportionality requirements under section 34-186(g)(5) shall be applied proportionate to the affordable housing provided for in each respective phase 
(10)  No waiver. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Affordability provisions in this section 34-186(g) shall not be waived unless expressly approved in writing by DHCD. 
(h)  Dimensional and density requirements. 
(1)  Table of requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this zoning ordinance, the dimensional requirements applicable in the SGOD are as follows: 
(2)  Dimensional and density requirement. 
a.  All projects are subject to site plan/design review as detailed in subsection (h) of this section. 
b.  The dimensional requirements applicable in the SGOD are as follows: 
Minimum lot area (to be calculated over the total acreage of all of the parcels within a project) Per dwelling unit 350 square feet minimum But not less than 5,000 square feet Minimum density 20 units per acre Minimum frontage 40 feet Maximum floor area ratio (to be calculated over the total acreage of all of the parcels within a project) 2.75 Maximum height 75 feet Maximum number of stories Six Required yards Front yard 10'-0" minimum Side yard 10'-0" minimum Rear yard 10'-0" minimum Maximum percent of lot covered 75 percent Minimum usable open space per unit 135 square feet (a minimum of 50 percent of open space must be at grade; private balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can account for a maximum of 25 percent of the required open space; common balconies, decks and rooftop spaces can be used to satisfy the remaining requirement) Principal structures per lot Two  
(i)  Parking requirements. The parking requirements applicable for projects within the SGOD are as follows. 
(1)  Number of parking spaces. Unless otherwise approved by the PAA, 
a.  A minimum of 0.50 and a maximum of 0.75 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each residential unit, inclusive of the parking spaces within any garages. 
b.  For nonresidential uses, off-street parking shall be in conformance with section 34-283 of the Chelsea zoning ordinances. 
(2)  Layout. The minimums are as follows: 
a.  Setback requirement from all property lines is five feet; 
b.  Aisle width is 21 feet; 
c.  Individual space dimensions are 8.5 feet by 18 feet. 
d.  Subcompact spaces may be provided, but cannot be used to meet the minimum number of spaces required. 
(3)  Interpretation of parking table. 
a.  Unless otherwise approved by the PAA, a minimum of 0.50 and a maximum of 0.75 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each residential unit, inclusive of parking spaces within garages. The PAA may allow for additional visitor parking spaces beyond the 0.75 maximum spaces per unit if deemed appropriate given the design, layout and density of the proposed residential or other development. The PAA may allow for a decrease in the required parking as provided in 34-186(i)(3)c. of this section. 
b.  Shared Parking. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the use of shared parking to fulfill parking demands noted in 34-186(i)(1) of this section, above that occur at different times of day is strongly encouraged. Minimum parking requirements above, in 34-186(i)(1) of this section, may be reduced by the PAA through the plan approval process, if the applicant can demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by using accepted methodologies (e.g. the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report, ITE Shared Parking Guidelines, or other approved studies). 
c.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any minimum required amount of parking may be reduced upon a demonstration to the reasonable satisfaction of the PAA that the lesser amount of parking will not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that lesser amount of parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits, taking into consideration: 
1.  The availability of surplus off-street parking in the vicinity of the use being served and/or the proximity of a bus or an MBTA transit station; 
2.  The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of the use being served; 
3.  Shared use of off-street parking spaces serving other uses having peak user demands at different times; 
4.  Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result in a lower level of auto usage; 
5.  Impact of the parking requirement on the physical environment of the affected lot or the adjacent lots including reduction in green space, destruction of significant existing trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling units, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways; and 
6.  Such other factors as may be considered by the PAA. 
d.  The PAA may allow for additional visitor parking spaces beyond the 0.75 maximum spaces per unit if deemed appropriate given the design, layout and density of the proposed residential or other development. The PAA may allow for a decrease in the required parking as provided in sections 34-186(i)(4) below. 
(4)  Reduction in parking requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any minimum required amount of parking may be reduced by the PAA through the Plan Approval process, if the applicant can demonstrate that the lesser amount of parking will not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that lesser amount of parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits, taking into consideration: 
a.  The availability of surplus off -street parking in the vicinity of the use being served and/or the proximity of a bus stop or transit station; 
b.  The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of the use being served; 
c.  Shared use of off-street parking spaces serving other uses having peak user demands at different times; 
d.  Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result in a lower level of auto usage; 
e.  Impact of the parking requirement on the physical environment of the affected lot or the adjacent lots including reduction in green space, destruction of significant existing trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling units, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways; and 
f.  Such other factors as may be considered by the PAA. 
(5)  Location of parking. Any surface parking lot shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be located at the rear or side of a building, relative to any principal street, public open space, or pedestrian way. 
(j)  Plan approval of projects: general provisions. 
(1)  An application for plan approval shall be reviewed by the PAA for consistency with the purpose and intent of sections 34-186(g) through (n). Such plan approval process shall be construed as an as-of-right review and approval process as required by and in accordance with the governing laws. The following categories of projects shall be subject to the plan approval process: 
a.  Any residential project; 
b.  Any mixed-use development project; 
(2)  Plan approval authority (PAA). The Zoning Board of Appeals, consistent with M.G.L. c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, shall be the plan approval authority (the "PAA"), and it is authorized to conduct the plan approval process for purposes of reviewing project applications and issuing plan approval decisions for projects proposed within the SGOD. 
(3)  PAA regulations. The plan approval authority may adopt administrative rules and regulations relative to plan approval. Such rules and regulations and any amendments thereof must be approved by the department of housing and community development. 
(4)  Project phasing. An applicant may propose, in a plan approval submission, that a project be developed in phases, provided that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase, and subject to the approval of the PAA. Any phased project shall comply with the provisions of section 34-186(l)(4). 
(k)  Plan approval procedure. 
(1)  Preapplication. Prior to the submittal of a plan approval submission, a "concept plan" may be submitted to help guide the development of the definitive site plan project buildout and individual elements thereof. Such concept plan should reflect the following: 
a.  Overall building envelope areas; 
b.  Open space and natural resource areas; and 
c.  General site improvements, groupings of buildings, and proposed land uses. 
The concept plan is intended to be used as a tool for both the applicant and the PAA to ensure that the proposed project design will be consistent with the design standards and other requirements of the SGOD. 
(2)  Required submittals. An application for plan approval shall be submitted to the PAA on the form provided by the PAA and approved by DHCD, along with application fee(s) which shall be as set forth in the PAA Regulations. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and documents as may be required and set forth in the PAA Regulations. For any project that is subject to the affordability requirements of section 34-186(f), the application shall be accompanied by all materials required under section 34-186(f)(3) and (f)(4). All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the PAA. 
(3)  Filing. An applicant for plan approval shall file the required number of copies of the application form and the other required submittals as set forth in the PAA Regulations with the city clerk and a copy of the application including the date of filing certified by the city clerk shall be filed forthwith with the PAA. 
(4)  Circulation to other boards. Upon receipt of the application, the PAA shall immediately provide a copy of the application materials and the expected date of the public hearing for the application to the city council, board of appeals, board of health, conservation commission, fire department, police department, building commissioner, department of public works, the monitoring agent (for any project subject to the affordability requirements of section 34-186(f), and other municipal officers, agencies or boards for comment, and any such board, agency or officer shall provide any written comments within 30 days of its receipt of a copy of the plan and application for approval. A reviewing board may provide written comments to the PAA prior to the close of the public hearing. 
(5)  Hearing. The PAA shall hold a public hearing for which notice has been given as provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 11. The decision of the PAA shall be made, and a written notice of the decision filed with the city clerk, within 120 days of the receipt of the application by the city clerk. The required time limits for such action may be extended by written agreement between the applicant and the PAA, with a copy of such agreement being filed in the office of the city clerk. Failure of the PAA to take action within said 120 days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of the plan approval application and the site plan. 
(6)  Peer review. The applicant shall be required to pay for reasonable consulting fees to provide peer review of the plan approval application, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40R, § 11(a). Such fees shall be held by the city in a separate account and used only for expenses associated with the review of the application by outside consultants, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, urban designers, housing consultants, planners, and others. Any surplus remaining after the completion of such review, including any interest accrued, shall be returned to the applicant forthwith. 
(l)  Plan approval decisions. 
(1)  Plan approval. Plan approval shall be granted where the PAA finds that: 
a.  The applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in the PAA Regulations; and 
b.  The project and site plan as described in the application meets all of the requirements and standards set forth in this section 34-186 and the PAA Regulations, or a waiver has been granted therefrom; and 
c.  Any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the project on nearby properties have been adequately mitigated. 
For a project subject to the affordability requirements of section 134-186(f), compliance with condition section 34-186(l)(1)(b) above shall include written confirmation by the monitoring agent that all requirements of that section have been satisfied. The PAA may attach conditions to the plan approval decision that are necessary to ensure substantial compliance with this section 34-186, or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the project on nearby properties. 
(2)  Plan disapproval. A plan approval application may be disapproved only where the PAA finds that: 
a.  The applicant has not submitted the required fees and information as set forth in the regulations; or 
b.  The project as described in the application does not meet all of the requirements and standards set forth in this section 34-186 and the PAA regulations, or that a requested waiver therefrom has not been granted; or 
c.  it is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse project impacts on nearby properties by means of suitable conditions. 
(3)  Waivers. Upon the request of the applicant and subject to compliance with M.G.L. c. 40R, 760 CMR 59.00 and section 34-186(g)(10), the Plan Approval Authority or its designee may waive dimensional and other requirements of section 34-186, including the Design Standards, in the interests of design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the SGOD, or if it finds that such waiver will allow the project to achieve the density, affordability, mix of uses, and/or physical character allowable under this section 34-186. 
(4)  Project phasing. The PAA, as a condition of any plan approval, may allow a project to be phased at the request of the applicant, or it may require a project to be phased for the purpose of coordinating its development with the construction of planned infrastructure improvements (as that term is defined under 760 CMR 59.00), or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse project impacts on nearby properties. For projects that are approved and developed in phases, unless otherwise explicitly approved in writing by the department in relation to the specific project, the proportion of affordable units in each phase shall be at least equal to the minimum percentage of affordable housing required under section 34-186(f)(1). 
(5)  Form of decision. The PAA shall issue to the applicant a copy of its decision containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, and the plans that were the subject of the decision, and certifying that a copy of the decision has been filed with the city clerk and that all plans referred to in the decision are on file with the PAA. If 20 days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in the office of the city clerk without an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having been filed, is dismissed or denied, the city clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. If a plan is approved by reason of the failure of the PAA to timely act, the city clerk shall make such certification on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision or application bearing such certification shall be recorded in the registry of deeds for the county and district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the applicant. 
(6)  Validity of decision. A plan approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely, provided that construction has commenced within two years after the decision is issued, which time shall be extended by the time required to adjudicate any appeal from such approval and which time shall also be extended if the project proponent is actively pursuing other required permits for the project or there is other good cause for the failure to commence construction, or as may be provided in a plan approval for a multi-phase project. 
(m)  Change in plans after approval by PAA. 
(1)  Minor change. After plan approval, an applicant may apply to make minor changes in a project involving minor utility or building orientation adjustments, or minor adjustments to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall buildout or building envelope of the site, or provision of open space, number of housing units, or housing need or affordability features. Such minor changes must be submitted to the PAA on redlined prints of the approved plan, reflecting the proposed change, and on application forms provided by the PAA. The PAA may authorize such changes at any regularly scheduled meeting, without the need to hold a public hearing. The PAA shall set forth any decision to approve or deny such minor change by motion and written decision, and provide a copy to the applicant for filing with the city clerk. 
(2)  Major change. Those changes deemed by the PAA to constitute a major change in a project because of the nature of the change in relation to the prior approved plan, or because such change cannot be appropriately characterized as a minor change as described above, shall be processed by the PAA as a new or amended application for plan approval pursuant to sections 34-186(j) through (n). 
(n)  Design standards-General. 
(1)  Adoption of design standards. Any project undergoing the plan approval process shall be subject to design standards as set forth below in this section 34-186(n) ("Design standards"). 
(2)  Purpose. The design standards are adopted to ensure that the physical character of projects within the SGOD: 
a.  Will be complementary to nearby buildings and structures; 
b.  Will be consistent with the comprehensive housing plan, an applicable master plan, an area specific plan, or any other plan document adopted by the city; and 
c.  Will provide for high-density quality development consistent with the character of building types, streetscapes, and other community features traditionally found in densely settled areas of the city or in the region of the city. 
(3)  Design standards. 
a.  Site design and building orientation. 
1.  Buildings and landscape elements should be sited to reinforce the street edge by aligning building faces and taller vertical landscape elements along the setback line. The setback should be generous enough to allow for tree plantings but shallow enough that the buildings help create a coherent street wall that will inform future patterns of development. 
2.  Required open space should be sited such that it is visually accessible from the street, thereby creating a visual amenity for the community, where possible. 
3.  In order to strengthen and define street form, corner buildings should align to both street frontages. 
4.  Parking areas should be located within buildings to the extent possible. Any surface parking should be located behind or to the side of buildings and should be screened from the sidewalk and street by decorative fencing or landscaping. 
Garage entries facing streets should have doors designed to be compatible with a pedestrian scale and aesthetic, characterized by windows, panels or other articulations. 
5.  All curb cuts should be designed so that driveways slope up from the street to the level of the sidewalk to promote a safer pedestrian environment. Curb cuts should not be designed so that the drive is set at the street elevation. Sidewalks are meant for safe passage of pedestrians. Curb cuts set at the street elevation not only require pedestrians to step down at every cut, but also promote vehicles entering and exiting the drive at faster speeds than those that would be used if the sidewalk were designed so that the pedestrian had the right-of-way. 
b.  Building character and architectural design. 
1.  Building heights should be tallest east of Willow Street, and should step down in building height from Willow Street west toward Highland Street. 
2.  To support the pedestrian scale of the district and reflect the pattern and character of the surrounding neighborhood, new buildings should include articulations such as cornices, bay windows, shadow lines, or other design elements that add interest and dimension to the building facades. Vertical and horizontal articulation of building facades should be used to reflect the neighborhood scale, minimize the apparent mass of buildings by reducing the perception of distance/length, provide structure to the arrangement of fenestration, enhance pedestrian orientation, and add visual interest to the public realm. 
3.  Buildings should have the primary entrance oriented to the street on which the building fronts. 
4.  Windows should be individual punched openings in the facade, rather than band windows. 
5.  Materials: 
i.  The palette of wall materials and colors used for a building should be kept to a minimum, preferably three. Similar wall materials as found on adjacent or nearby buildings should be used to strengthen district character and provide continuity and unity between buildings of divergent size, scale, and architectural styles. 
ii.  Acceptable wall materials include horizontal or vertical board siding (composite materials, wood,), brick, and heavy gage metal panel. High quality, durable, low maintenance wall materials should be used where pedestrians closely encounter and interact with buildings. 
6.  Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) should never be used. 
i.  Wall materials appearing visually heavier in weight should be used below wall materials appearing visually lighter in weight. 
ii.  If a building's massing and pattern of fenestration is complex, simple or flat wall materials should be used. If a building's massing and pattern of fenestration is simple, walls should include additional texture and surface relief. 
iii.  Side and rear building elevations that are visible from the public realm should have a level of trim and finish that is compatible with the primary facade of the building. 
iv.  Balconies should have metal railing guardrail systems. 
7.  Building tops should be shaped with attention to their view against the sky and to adjacent structures. Mechanical penthouses and other projections or roof elements that are visible from the street should be architecturally integrated with the overall building design. 
8.  In order to enhance security, interior living spaces, wherever possible, should be oriented so that windows give visual access to either the street or any on-site open spaces. 
c.  Streetscape and landscape design. 
1.  Where space allows, sidewalks should be ten feet from curb to back of sidewalk. Sidewalk width should transition to match adjacent parcels, but never less than a minimum width of five feet. 
2.  Street trees should be planted curbside in a continuous four-foot tree lawn or individual four-foot tree pits in the sidewalk. These should be at least three feet deep and provide adequate uncompacted soil for healthy root growth. Where sidewalks are less than eight feet, street trees or other landscaping should be planted in the front setback to create a greener street edge. 
3.  Landscaping should be planted at a sufficient density to make an immediate impact on the pedestrian environment. Trees should be at least three inches in caliper when planted and should be pruned or "limbed up" to a height of at least eight feet. 
4.  In order to promote a sustainable and natural landscape environment, plant materials should be limited to native and noninvasive species. 
5.  Ground level open spaces created in the district should be physically and visually accessible from the sidewalk. Open space design should incorporate crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) techniques to enhance safety and universal design to accommodate all users. 
6.  In order to visually screen any surface parking, trash collection areas, outdoor storage areas, and utility equipment from the street without reducing visual access and security: 
i.  Except to allow egress to the property at driveways and walkways, where possible, these areas should be screened from the street by continuous planting strips a minimum of five feet deep and planted at a density sufficient to create a continuous screen, with plantings at least 30 inches but no more than four feet tall. 
ii.  As an alternative to planted screens or in addition to them, continuous fencing may be installed on the street side of the planting strip. Fencing should be a good quality opaque material fence to adequately screen the area aligning with architectural elements of the adjacent building facade. 
iii.  Trees may be planted within planting strips provided they do not disrupt the continuity of the required screening, and that limbs are removed below a height of eight feet. 
(o)  Severability. 
(1)  If any provision of this section 34-186 is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of section 34-186 shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision of this section 34-186 shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the city's zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 3-11-2019(11) ) 
Secs. 34-187-34-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-209. - Permits. 
(a)  Generally. This chapter shall be administered by the building inspector. Pursuant to the state building code, the building inspector may require such plans and specifications as may be necessary to determine compliance with all pertinent laws of the state and may request advisory reviews by other municipal boards and officials. Buildings, structures or signs may not be erected, substantially altered, moved, or changed in use and land may not be substantially altered or changed with regard to size or shape or principal use unless in compliance with then-applicable zoning, and after all necessary permits have been received under federal, state, or local law. Issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy, where required under the state building code, may serve as certification of such compliance. 
(b)  Occupancy permit. 
(1)  Required; exemption. No premises, building, structure or land shall be occupied, used or changed in use, or used in the conduct of any business, without an occupancy permit in the name of said business, if applicable, signed by the building inspector, which permit shall not be issued until the buildings, structure, or premises and its uses comply in all respects with this chapter. This provision shall not apply to businesses using or occupying premises at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Temporary permit. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued in appropriate cases. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, §§ 9.1.1, 9.1.2) 
Sec. 34-210. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector shall institute and take any and all such action as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with any and all of the provisions of this chapter and of permits, special permits, variances and site plan approval issued thereunder, including notification of noncompliance and legal action through and in conjunction with the office of the city solicitor. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.1.3) 
Sec. 34-211. - Penalties. 
    The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter, of any of the conditions under which a permit is issued, or of any decision rendered by the zoning board of appeals, any special permit granting authority, or the site plan approval board shall be $300.00 for each offense. Each day that each violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.1.4) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violations, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 7. 
Sec. 34-212. - Noncriminal disposition. 
    Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, the building inspector may enforce this chapter by the noncriminal disposition of the matter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.1.5) 
Sec. 34-213. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  Position established. The zoning board of appeals is established consistent with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, § 12 and in accordance with chapter 103 of the Acts of 1994, and the provisions of the administrative code (see appendix A to this Code). The appointment of associate members, as provided by statute, shall be permitted. 
(b)  Powers. The zoning board of appeals shall have and exercise all the powers granted to it by M.G.L. c. 40A, 40B, and 41 and by this chapter. The zoning board of appeals' powers are as follows: 
(1)  To hear and decide applications for special permits. Unless otherwise specified herein, the zoning board of appeals shall serve as the special permit granting authority, to act in all matters in accordance with the provisions of section 34-214, or as otherwise specified. 
(2)  To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this chapter, with respect to particular land or structures, where owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and where desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this chapter, all as set forth in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 10. The zoning board of appeals shall not grant use variances. 
(3)  To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, §§ 7, 8 and 15. 
(4)  To hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of low or moderate income housing by a public agency or limited dividend or nonprofit corporation, as set forth in M.G.L. c. 40B, §§ 20-23. 
(c)  Variances. Each petition or appeal for a variance from the specific terms of a zoning regulation shall include a written statement justifying the petition or appeal on the basis that all of the following conditions are met, as required by M.G.L. c. 40A, § 10: 
(1)  The variance is sought because of soil conditions, shape or topography of such land or structure and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located; 
(2)  A literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant. 
(3)  Desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good, and 
(4)  Desirable relief may be granted without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  Conditions. Variances or special permits may be granted by the zoning board of appeals with such reasonable conditions, safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the zoning board of appeals may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: private disposal of waste; deadline to commence construction; signage; alarm system; limits on vehicles, number of students, gender of residents, noise and possession of substances; maintenance requirements; landscaping; parking spaces; dust control; term for years with or without automatic renewals; sewer connection; and bond. 
(e)  Regulations. The zoning board of appeals may adopt rules and regulations for the administration of its powers. 
(f)  Fees. The zoning board of appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for petitions for variances, administrative appeals and applications for comprehensive permits. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.2) 
State Law reference- Zoning board of appeals, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 12 et seq.; variances, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 10. 
Sec. 34-214. - Special permits. 
(a)  Special permit granting authority. Unless specifically designated otherwise, the zoning board of appeals shall act as the special permit granting authority. 
(b)  Criteria. Special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority, unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the benefit to the city and the neighborhood outweigh the adverse effects of the proposed use, taking into account the characteristics of the site and of the proposal in relation to that site. In addition to any specific factors that may be set forth in this chapter, the determination shall include consideration of each of the following: 
(1)  Social, economic or community needs which are served by the proposal; 
(2)  Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading; 
(3)  Adequacy of utilities and other public services; 
(4)  Neighborhood character and social structures; 
(5)  Impacts on the natural environment, including drainage; and 
(6)  Potential fiscal impact, including impacts on city services, tax base and employment. 
(c)  Procedures. Applicants shall file 15 copies of the special permit application and plans with the city clerk. Whenever an application for a special permit is so filed, the applicant shall also file, within five working days of the filing of the completed application, copies of the application and plans with the board of health, conservation commission, building inspector, department of public works, and planning board, for their consideration, review, and report. 
(1)  Reports from other boards and officials shall be submitted to the special permit granting authority by the date of the public hearing, but in any case within 35 days of receipt of the reviewing party of all of the required materials; failure of these reviewing parties to make recommendations after having received copies of all such required materials shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. 
(2)  In the event that the public hearing by the special permit granting authority is held prior to the expiration of the 35-day period, said authority shall continue the public hearing to permit the formal submission of reports and recommendations within that 35-day period. 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection (c) shall not apply to applications for special permits to reconstruct, extend, alter, or structurally change a nonconforming single- or two-family structure. The zoning board of appeals may adopt regulations to establish procedures governing the form of such applications. 
(d)  Plans and other submittals. An applicant for a special permit shall submit a plan in substantial conformance with the requirements of section 34-215. At the discretion of the special permit granting authority, the submittal of a development impact statement (DIS) may be required. The DIS shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team including a registered landscape architect or architect, a registered professional or civil engineer, and a registered surveyor. 
(1)  Physical environment. 
a.  Describe the general physical conditions of the site, including amounts and varieties of vegetation, general topography, unusual geological, archeological, scenic and historical features or structures, location of significant viewpoints, stone walls, trees over 16 inches in diameter, trails and open space links, and indigenous wildlife. 
b.  Describe how the project will affect these conditions, providing a complete physical description of the project and its relationship to the immediate surrounding area. 
(2)  Surface water and subsurface conditions. 
a.  Describe the location, extent and type of existing water and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both within and adjacent to the site. 
b.  Describe any proposed alterations of shorelines, marshes or seasonal wet areas. 
c.  Describe any limitations imposed on the project by the site's soil and water conditions. 
d.  Describe the impact upon groundwater and surface water quality and recharge, including estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer and other activities within the site. 
(3)  Circulation systems. 
a.  Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the site per average day and peak hour. Also state the number of motor vehicles to use streets adjacent to the site per average day and peak hour. Such data shall be sufficient to enable the special permit granting authority to evaluate: 
1.  Existing traffic on streets adjacent to or approaching the site; 
2.  Traffic generated or resulting from the site; and 
3.  The impact of such additional traffic on all ways within and providing access to the site. 
b.  Actual study results, a description of the study methodology, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for implementing the study, shall be attached to the DIS. 
(4)  Support systems. 
a.  Water distribution. Discuss the types of wells or water system proposed for the site, means of providing water for firefighting and any problems unique to the site. 
b.  Sewage disposal. Discuss the type of on-site or sewer system to be used, suitability of soils, procedures and results of percolation tests and evaluate impact of disposal methods on surface water and groundwater. 
c.  Refuse disposal. Discuss the location and type of facilities, the impact on existing city refuse disposal capacity, hazardous materials requiring special precautions. 
d.  Fire protection. Discuss the type, location and capacity of fuel storage facilities or other flammables, distance to fire station and adequacy of existing firefighting equipment to confront potential fires on the proposed site. 
e.  Recreation. Discuss the distance to and type of public facilities to be used by residents of the proposed site, and the type of private recreation facilities to be provided on the site. 
f.  Schools. Project the increase to the student population for nursery, elementary, junior high school and high school levels, also indicating present enrollment in the nearest public schools serving these categories of students. 
(5)  Phasing. Where development of the site will be phased over more than one year, indicate the following: 
a.  Describe the methods to be used during construction to control erosion and sedimentation through use of sediment basins, mulching, matting, temporary vegetation or covering of soil stockpiles. 
b.  Describe the approximate size and location of the portion of the parcel to be cleared at any given time and length of time of exposure. 
c.  Describe the phased construction, if any of any required public improvements, and how such improvements are to be integrated into site development. 
(e)  Conditions. Special permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the special permit granting authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: private disposal of waste; deadline to commence construction; signage; alarm system; limits on vehicles, number of students, gender of residents, noise and possession of substances; maintenance requirements; landscaping; parking spaces; dust control; term for years with or without automatic renewals; sewer connection; bond; and limitation to the term of ownership or use by the applicant. 
(f)  Lapse. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months following the filing of the special permit approval (plus such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 17, from the grant thereof) with the city clerk. 
(g)  Regulations. The special permit granting authority may adopt rules and regulations for the administration of this section. 
(h)  Fees. The special permit granting authority may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for applications for special permits. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.3) 
State Law reference- Special permits, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 9 et seq. 
Sec. 34-215. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Applicability. The following types of activities and uses shall require site plan review: 
(1)  Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion of, or change of use within, a municipal, institutional, commercial, industrial or multifamily structure with four or more dwelling units; 
(2)  Construction or expansion of a parking lot for a municipal, institutional, commercial, industrial or multifamily structure or purpose. 
(3)  Construction or expansion of a medical marijuana treatment center or dispensary, and/or marijuana establishment, will require a major site plan review. 
(b)  Minor site plan approval. An application for permits to build, alter or expand any building, structure or use in any district where such construction: (1) will not exceed a total gross floor area of 8,000 square feet; and (2) will not generate the need for more than 25 parking spaces shall be deemed a minor site plan. For the purposes of computing the total gross floor area or parking spaces, all such applications made within the five previous calendar years shall be considered in the aggregate. Minor site plans shall be reviewed by the building inspector as follows: 
(1)  Minor site plans may be required to set forth all of the information required by subsection (e) of this section; provided, however, that the requirements for the preparation of such plans shall normally be relaxed by the inspector of buildings. 
(2)  The building inspector shall review and act upon the minor site plan within 60 days of its receipt, and notify the applicant of its decision. The decision of the building inspector shall be in writing. 
(3)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building inspector unless a minor site plan has been approved or unless 60 days lapse from the date of the submittal of the minor site plan without action. 
(4)  The time for decision making may be extended by written agreement of the parties. 
(c)  Major site plan approval. Major site plan review shall be conducted by the planning board and shall require a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in M.G.L. c. 40A, §§ 9 and 11. Applicants shall submit five copies of the site plan to the planning board for review, and within three days thereafter shall also submit a copy of the site plan to the city council, board of health, department of public works, building inspector and conservation commission, for their advisory review and comments. The planning board shall, upon written request and the payment of the cost of reproduction, submit one copy of the site plan to any neighborhood improvement group in whose neighborhood the use is proposed. Said neighborhood improvement group must be registered with the city clerk at the time of submittal of the site plan to the planning board. 
(1)  Waiver of submittal requirements. The planning board may, upon written request of the applicant, waive any of the submittal requirements for major site plans set forth in subsection (e) of this section, where the project involves relatively simple development plans. 
(d)  General procedural requirements. The following procedures apply to both minor and major site plans: 
(1)  Application for building permit. An application for a building permit to perform work as set forth in subsection (a) of this section available as of right shall be accompanied by an approved site plan. 
(2)  Application for special permit or variance. An application for a special permit or a variance to perform work as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be accompanied by a site plan approved in accordance with this section; in the alternative, any special permit or variance granted for work set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall contain the following condition: The work described herein requires the approval of a site plan pursuant to this section. Any conditions imposed in such site plan approval shall also be conditions of this special permit or variance. 
(3)  Conditions. Where the planning board approves a site plan with conditions, and said approved site plan accompanies a special permit or variance application to the zoning board of appeals, the conditions imposed by the planning board shall be incorporated into the issuance, if any, of a special permit or variance by the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  Consolidation. Where the planning board serves as the special permit granting authority for proposed work, it shall consolidate its site plan review and special permit procedures. 
(5)  Deviation. No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without modification of the original site plan in accordance with the process set forth in this section. 
(e)  Preparation of plans; contents. Applicants are invited to submit a preapplication sketch of the proposed project to the planning board and to schedule a comment period at a regular meeting of the planning board. The applicant shall submit one set of 24-inch by 36-inch sheets and nine sets of 11-inch by 17-inch sheets. Plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as appropriate. Dimensions and scales shall be adequate to determine that all requirements are met and to make a complete analysis and evaluation of the proposal. All plans shall have a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet. The contents of the site plan are as follows: 
(1)  Six separate plans prepared at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or such other scale as may be approved by the planning board. The plans are as follows: 
a.  Locus plan, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the entire project and its relation to existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance of 1,000 feet from the project boundaries or such other distance as may be approved or required by the planning board. 
b.  Site layout, which shall contain the boundaries of the lots in the proposed development, existing structures to be retained, proposed structures, drives, parking, fences, walls, walks, outdoor lighting, loading facilities, areas for snow storage after plowing, and all proposed recreational facilities and open space areas. 
c.  Topography and drainage plan, which shall contain the existing and proposed final topography at two-foot intervals and plans for handling stormwater drainage, and all wetlands including floodplain areas. 
d.  Utility plan, which shall include all facilities for refuse and sewage disposal or storage of all wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarm and firefighting facilities on and adjacent to the site. 
e.  Architectural plan, which shall include the ground floor plan and architectural elevations of all proposed buildings and a color rendering. 
f.  Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree lines, and all proposed landscape features and improvements including screening, planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and including proposed erosion control measures. 
g.  Marijuana establishments are required to submit a security and access plan, showing location of security cameras, all exits and entrances, card and keypad readers, any locking mechanisms, sensors and monitors. 
(2)  The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all phases thereof. There shall be submitted a written estimate, showing in detail the costs of all site improvements planned. 
(3)  A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted with the site plan indicating, where appropriate, the number of dwelling units to be built and the acreage in residential use, the evidence of compliance with parking and off-street loading requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for the property and a summary of the provisions of any ownership or maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will become common or public land, and any other evidence necessary to indicate compliance with this chapter. 
(4)  The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations by a registered professional engineer. Storm drainage design must conform to subdivision regulations. 
(5)  A DIS shall be submitted with each site plan application as set forth in section 34-214. The planning board may waive this requirement in accordance with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(6)  Certification that the proposal is in compliance with the provisions, if applicable, of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the state architectural barriers board. 
(7)  In the case of condominiums, cooperatives or similar forms of ownership for any real estate, a true copy of the condominium declaration or articles of incorporation, the bylaws of the owner's association, and the master deed shall be submitted. 
(f)  Decision. The planning board may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the applicant, including, but not limited to, those set forth in section 34-214(e), to promote these objectives. The planning board may withhold site plan approval where information necessary to endorse the plan is lacking or where the plan indicates noncompliance with a provision of this chapter. In considering an application for site plan approval, the planning board shall use the following criteria: 
(1)  The protection of visual corridors to the waterfront and/or Boston skyline. 
(2)  The use of landscaping to establish buffers between incompatible land uses. 
(3)  The provision of open spaces and pedestrian amenities available to the public. 
(4)  The arrangement of access points, driveways, parking areas and pedestrian walkways in a manner which facilitates interior circulation and minimizes conflict between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(5)  Provisions for underground placement of utilities. 
(6)  Provisions for surface runoff and the protection of the site and adjacent properties from erosion as a result thereof. 
(7)  The siting of buildings, structures and open spaces to permit maximum use of passive solar energy and to permit maximum protection of pedestrian areas from adverse impacts of winds, vapors or other emissions, and/or noise. 
(8)  Provisions for maintenance of common areas. 
(9)  In the case of application within the waterfront district and the industrial district: 
a.  The provision of linear access, access points where linear access cannot be provided, vantage points, sitting areas and pedestrian amenities along the waterfront. 
b.  The compatibility of new buildings and structures with existing development landward of the proposed development (including, in particular, the preservation of waterfront views from existing development). 
(10)  Compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after two years from the grant thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the planning board upon the written request of the applicant. 
(h)  Regulations; fees. The planning board may adopt and from time to time amend reasonable regulations for the administration of these site plan guidelines. The planning board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for site plan review. 
(i)  Appeal. Any decision of the planning board pursuant to this section shall be appealed in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, § 17 to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.4;  3-18-2013 , § III; Ord. of 3-26-2018(1) , Amds. 3, 4) 
Sec. 34-216. - Design review procedures for the Residential 3 (R3), Retail Business 2 (BR2) and Light Industrial/Office 2 (LI2) Districts. 
(a)  Established. To apply the zoning regulations and design guidelines effectively, the procedures in this section are established by which public review of new construction can be undertaken. The procedures provide an opportunity for the department of planning and development to establish conditions by which development can be shaped to serve city urban design objectives more effectively. It is the intent of these procedures to provide a method by which new development proposals can be assessed at an early stage. Such assessment offers the opportunity to explore potential modifications and refinements that would better serve the interests of both the city and the project proponent. Similarly, potential negative impacts can be identified and modifications explored that would reduce or eliminate them. 
(b)  Crescent Avenue District. Design review and resulting recommendations, if any, shall be required for all uses within the Crescent Avenue District, before the issuance of a building or occupancy permit for any such use, except for: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction or repair which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance of an existing building. 
(2)  Construction, reconstruction or alteration of any feature which the building inspector shall certify is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(c)  Design guidelines. The design review will evaluate the extent to which the proposed design satisfies the Residential 3 (R3), Retail Business 2 (BR2) and Light Industrial/Office 2 (LI2) Districts' design guidelines adopted on June 20, 2005. 
(d)  Preliminary meeting. Applicants are encouraged to meet with department of planning and development prior to the conceptual design phase of the project for a discussion of site specific design characteristics that should be considered during the design of the building. 
(e)  Application for design review. The application for design review shall be made during the schematic design phase of the project. At the completion of design development, a second submission shall be made, updated to reflect design development and responses to any recommendations made on the schematic design submission. 
(f)  Review and response by the city. 
(1)  Within seven days of receiving the submission, the department of planning and development shall submit one copy of the site plan to each of the following: the building inspector, the zoning enforcement officer, the planning board, the city engineer and the fire chief, who each shall return comments to the department of planning and development within 14 days. In the case of uses requiring special permits, the reviewing boards and offices shall have 35 days in which to return comments. Failure to return comments within the specified time period shall mean that the reviewing board or office does not take issue with the site plan. 
(2)  The department of planning and development shall, upon written request and the payment of the cost of reproduction, submit one copy of the site plan to any neighborhood improvement group in whose neighborhood the use is proposed. Said neighborhood improvement group must be registered with the city clerk at the time of the submittal of the site plan to the department of planning and development. 
(3)  Within a period of 21 days after the filing of the plans and application for design review, the department of planning and development shall schedule and hold a consultation session with the applicant or designee to determine whether the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or moving of the buildings, structures or appurtenant fixtures involved will be appropriate in terms of the purposes and conditions contained in this section. Within ten days of the consultation, the department will issue to the applicant written comments on the development as expressed by city staff and/or consultants hired to perform design review. 
(4)  In considering such application for a design review, the department of planning and development may consult an architect, city planner or urban designer employed by said department at the expense of the applicant, providing that in no case the applicant is charged more than one percent of the construction costs of the project being reviewed for the costs of processing an application for a design certificate. 
(g)  Submission contents. Application for design review shall be made on a form supplied by the department of planning and development. All document plans shall be prepared by a professional architect, landscape architect or registered professional engineer and shall show each of the following for the entire site, whether or not the development is to be phased, unless items are waived, in writing, by the department of planning and development: 
(1)  Location map at 600 feet per each. 
(2)  Survey of lot indicating property boundaries, metes and bounds, existing structures, locations of all easements, rights-of-way, grades at intervals of three feet, utilities, the owners of property and adjacent lot owners. 
(3)  Photographs eight inches by ten inches in sufficient quality and detail to indicate the environmental features of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, views of the Boston skyline, adjacent or nearby open space and adjacent structures and/or uses of land. 
(4)  Schematic design plans including: 
a.  Site plan which accurately locates all existing and proposed buildings and structures with their proposed uses, as well as gross and usable floor areas, parking areas, driveways, driveway openings, service areas, usable open space, landscaped areas and the proposed treatment thereof (including fences, walls, planting areas and walks), all facilities for storm drainage, sewerage, refuse, other waste disposal and other utility systems. 
b.  Ground floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses of interior areas in appropriate scale, access points for pedestrian and service areas. 
c.  Typical floor plan indicating major dimensions, gross and net floor area, proposed uses and vertical circulation for upper level floors. 
d.  All data required to enable the department to determine the amount and frequency of traffic volumes generated and the extent of compliance with off-street parking and loading requirements. 
e.  Sign plan indicating location, size, illumination and design of all signs on the site. 
f.  Elevations defining heights, proposed entrances, fenestration, signage, all materials, finishes, colors and features of the entire project. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 9.5) 
Secs. 34-217-34-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 34-241. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are herein defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the term "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the term "may" is discretionary; the term "lot" includes the term "plot"; the term "land" includes the terms "marsh" and "water." 
    Accessory building or use means a use, or detached building, which is located on the same lot with the main building or use and which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the use of the main building or the land. 
    Adult day care facility, large, means a social day care (SDC) program or an adult day health program as those terms are defined by the state executive office of elder affairs (EOEA), serving more than ten persons. 
    Adult day care facility, small, means a social day care (SDC) program or an adult day health program as those terms are defined by the state executive office of elder affairs (EOEA), serving not more than ten persons. 
    Adult entertainment establishments shall include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult paraphernalia stores, adult video stores, or establishments which display live nudity for their patrons as defined by M.G.L. c. 40A, § 9A, as amended. 
    Airport related uses. 
(1)  The term "airport related uses" means a use or activity whose purpose or function is primarily or partially dependent on location and/or access to the operations of an airport and whose functions are necessary for the daily operations and economic viability of a full-service commercial airport. 
(2)  The term "airport related uses" does not mean park and fly facilities, ride/park and fly facilities, or airport related employee parking. 
    Ambulance service means the business or regular activity, whether for profit or not, of providing emergency medical services, emergency response, primary ambulance response, training of employees, pre-hospital emergency medical care, with or without transportation, of sick or injured individuals by ambulance as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 111C. 
    Animal hospital or veterinary facility means commercial medical facilities for keeping animals to be treated, in treatment or recovering from treatment, in accordance with normal veterinary practice as established by the state board of registration and veterinary medicine. 
    Apartment building means a dwelling designed to accommodate four or more dwelling units. 
    Art use means the creation, manufacture or assemblage of visual art, including two or three dimensional works of fine art or craft, or other fine art objects created, manufactured or assembled for the purpose of sale, display, commission, consignment or trade by artists or artisans; or classes held for art instruction. 
    Attached dwelling means a single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. The term "attached dwelling" also refers to townhouses, townhouse dwellings or rowhouses. 
    Barbershop means a shop licensed by the state board of registration of barbers and owned and operated by a state certified barber. 
    Bed and breakfast means the providing of room and breakfast in a dwelling to not more than three transient guests for remuneration. There shall be no more than two persons per room. There shall be adequate off-street parking for residents and guests. 
    Boardinghouse means a building or premises, other than a hotel, inn, motel, tourist house or lodginghouse, where rooms are let and where meals may be regularly served by prearrangement for compensation; not open to transient guests, in contrast to hotels, restaurants and tourist homes, open to transients. 
    Building means a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. 
    Building coverage means the aggregate ground floor area of all buildings on the lot, including accessory buildings but excluding unroofed terraces and steps and cornices, eaves or gutters projecting not more than 30 inches, expressed as a percentage of the lot area. 
    Building height means, for the purpose of this chapter, the height of any building, which shall be the vertical distance from the mean finished grade of the building to the highest point of the top story (in the case of a flat roof) or to the mean distance between the plate and the ridge (in the case of a pitched roof). (See section 34-78(j) for exceptions to height regulations.) 
    Building lot. See Lot. 
    Child care facility means a day care center or school age child care program, as those terms are defined in M.G.L. c. 15D, § 1. 
    Club means a building or portion thereof or an area which is used to meet the social and recreational needs of a nonprofit group or organization to which membership is required, with or without the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Commercial recreation, indoor means paintball recreation, bowling alleys, archery tag, and mystery puzzle physical adventure games, where noise is confined to the building, and there is no adult entertainment. 
    Community residence means a nonprofit group living arrangement for individuals who cannot easily maintain or occupy their own housing, financially or otherwise, but who do not need nursing home or other institutional care. The individuals living together may care for themselves or have some support services. There shall be no more than six persons per residence. There shall be no more than two persons per bedroom. See also Shared elderly housing. 
    Condominium means a system of real estate ownership in which a person, partnership or corporation owns one or more units or parcels in a multiunit structure or parcel of land plus an undivided interest in elements and/or components owned jointly by all of the unit or parcel owners, or as defined in M.G.L. c. 183A. 
    Congregate housing means a shared residential living environment for six or more people which integrates shelter and service needs of functionally impaired and/or socially isolated older persons (age 50 years or older) who are otherwise in good health and can maintain a semi-independent lifestyle and who do not require constant supervision or intensive health care as provided by an institution. Each resident has a bedroom (or may share a bedroom) and may have a separate living room, kitchen, dining area or bathroom, and may share living, dining and bathroom facilities with other older persons, such as in a common dining facility. 
    Conversion means a transformation of all or a portion of a building which results in a greater number of units of each use. 
    Cooperative means a system of ownership in which shares in a corporation are owned, entitling owners to occupancy of a portion of real estate owned by the corporation. 
    Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets or ways having an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees. 
    Courier services means establishments primarily engaged in the delivery of individually addressed letters, parcels and packages (generally under 100 pounds), except by means of air transportation. Delivery is usually made by street or highway within a local area or between cities. 
    Design review means the process wherein a developer's site plan is submitted to the city for examination and evaluation of the technical elements of the submitted materials as well as determination of how well the plan itself meets officially adopted criteria. 
    Detached dwelling means a building which is designed or occupied as a single-family residence on its own lot and is separated by side and rear yards from any other structure or structures, except accessory buildings. 
    Distribution means the movement of products, generally between storage and retail locations. 
    Docks, commercial, means that area of a wharf or pier, which is used in connection with some type of waterborne commercial activity. 
    Dog kennel/dog daycare means the business or regular activity, whether for profit or not, of boarding, holding, daycare, overnight stays or training of dogs that are not the property of the owner of the establishment, at which services are rendered in exchange for consideration and in the absence of the owner of any such dog, provided that the kennel or dog daycare is not an animal shelter or pet shop and is licensed by the Chelsea Board of Health. 
    Duplex house means a house containing two dwellings adjoining side by side; that is, in which no part of one dwelling unit is over any part of the other dwelling unit. A duplex house shall be considered as one principal building occupying one lot for the purpose of determining yard requirements. The term "duplex house" is synonymous with the term "semidetached dwelling." 
    Dwelling. 
(1)  The term "dwelling" means any building or part thereof, used for habitation for one or more persons. 
(2)  The term "dwelling" does not include commercial accommodations for transient occupancy, or trailers or mobile homes, however mounted. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family. 
    Educational use, nonexempt, means a facility providing educational services, such as a dance studio or a martial arts classroom, but not exempt pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40A, § 3. 
    Everett Avenue urban renewal area means the Everett Avenue urban renewal plan prepared in accordance with M.G.L. c. 121B and adopted by the city council on March 23, 1998, as delineated on the zoning map, and amended from time to time, is fully incorporated into this chapter. 
    Family means any number of related individuals living together in one dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupancy, a lodginghouse, roominghouse, club, hotel or other communal arrangements; provided, however, that not more than four unrelated persons may constitute a family for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Family day care home, large, means any private residence operating a facility as defined in M.G.L. c. 15D, § 1. 
    Family day care home, small, means any private residence operating a facility as defined in M.G.L. c. 15D, § 1. 
    Fishing pier does not include the processing of fish. 
    Floor. See Story. 
    Floor area means the sum of the interior floor area of the floors of a building, exclusive of basements, stairwells, halls, bathrooms, corridors, attics, walls, partitions, porches, and attached accessory buildings, as measured between exterior faces of walls. 
    Floor area ratio means the gross floor area of all buildings on the lot divided by total lot area. 
    Freight forwarding terminal means a structure or area where freight brought by truck or rail is stored for routing and reshipment. 
    Frontage means the linear extent of a lot measured along a city accepted street or public or private way from the intersection of one side lot line to the intersection of the other of the same lot, which can be used for access to the lot but not including any portion thereof devoted to a right-of-way or a driveway serving more than one lot or dwelling. 
    Garage, private. 
(1)  The term "private garage" means covered space for the housing of motor vehicles, including a space accessory to a dwelling unit used by the resident thereof. 
(2)  The term "private garage" does not include the rental of more than two stalls or for commercial repair or commercial storage. 
    Garage, public. 
(1)  The term "public garage" means any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, operated for gain, and which is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles. 
(2)  The term "public garage" does not include the dispensing of gasoline or oil to motor vehicles. 
    General service establishment means establishments for trades and crafts which require manual dexterity, including but not limited to shops such as the following: plumbers, electricians, painters, paperhangers, upholsterers, sign painters, printers and monument works. 
    Gross floor area. 
(1)  The term "gross floor area" means the sum, in square feet, of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of a principal building, and its accessory buildings on the same lot, including basements and cellars, as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or centerlines of walls separating two buildings, including: 
a.  Elevator shafts and stairwells on each floor; 
b.  Attic space with a structural headroom of seven feet or more, except as hereafter excluded; 
c.  Interior mezzanines and penthouses; 
d.  Basement and cellar areas not devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building; 
e.  All-weather covered habitable porches and balconies. 
(2)  The term "gross floor area" does not include: 
a.  Areas used for parking garages, accessory parking or off-street loading purposes; 
b.  Basement and cellar areas devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building; 
c.  Open or lattice-enclosed exterior fire escapes; 
d.  Attic space and other areas for elevator machinery or mechanical equipment accessory to the building; 
e.  Open porches and balconies. 
Areas excluded from gross floor area are still subject to all dimensional requirements, including minimum yard setbacks and maximum building coverage. 
    Hazardous materials means a substance or solid material in a quantity or form that significantly contributes to serious illness or death, or that poses a substantial threat to human health or poses an unreasonable risk to health, safety, property or the environment when improperly managed, including all materials listed as hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency, under the Toxic Substance Control Act, Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or similar authority, the Department of Energy or by the state pursuant to applicable Massachusetts General Laws. 
    Health and fitness club means a private facility for the purpose of providing physical fitness, exercise, therapy, rehabilitation, and health-related services. 
    Height. See Building height. 
    Home occupation. 
(1)  The term "home occupation" means an accessory use which by custom has been carried on entirely within a dwelling unit, and is incidental and subordinate to the dwelling use. In connection with such use, there shall be no retail sale of merchandise on the premises. 
(2)  The term "home occupation" does not include barbershops, commercial stables or kennels, teaching of more than three pupils simultaneously, and in the case of musical instruction, more than one pupil at a time. 
    Hotel, motel or inn means a building designed or used for six or more paying guests, primarily the temporary abode of persons who have their residence elsewhere, who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which major provision for cooking may be made in a central kitchen, but may not be in the individual rooms or suites. 
    Hotel/motel, extended stay lodging, means a hotel, motel or guest quarters containing a minimum of 50 guest units intended primarily for rental to transient guests, who have a primary domicile elsewhere, by the day, week or longer and which may contain kitchenette facilities. A kitchenette facility may include a refrigerator, two burner stove, microwave oven, dishwasher and sink, but may not include a conventional oven. 
    Industrial park means an area planned for occupancy for more than one industrial establishment with shared common areas. 
    Junkyard facility means an area or structure used for the storage and/or sale of old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris; waste, junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof; iron steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials; and any item that contains a hazardous material as defined by the state department of environmental protection (DEP). 
    Kennel means facilities for keeping three or more animals, three months old or older, on a single premises, whether maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other purposes and including any shop where animals are customarily kept for sale, but this definition shall not include any business that meets the definition of dog kennel/dog daycare. 
    Kindergarten means a school or class of young children, usually from four to six years of age. 
    Landscaped area means land fully developed and maintained to present a pleasant appearance and to stabilize the soil, using primarily vegetation and natural features of the site, although these may also be supplemented by decorative paving. 
    Laundry, industrial means a centralized contract facility that washes or dry cleans garments and articles or goods of fabric, including but not limited to, restaurant, hotel or institutional bed linens or uniforms, in bulk for other businesses. 
    Light industry or light manufacturing. 
(1)  The term "light industry" or "light manufacturing" includes the following (with related offices), provided that such uses shall not include the sale or transfer of flammable liquids, gas, explosives or other potentially hazardous materials, except for the uses operating under a license granted under the authority of M.G.L. c. 148 as of the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
a.  Assembly of previously prepared or manufactured parts; 
b.  Laboratory or research establishments, including renewable or alternative energy research and development facilities. 
c.  Machine shops or other metal working; 
d.  Printing and graphic arts establishments; 
e.  Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, stamping or treatment of such products as candy, cosmetics, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceutical, toiletries and food products, and wood. 
f.  Renewable or alternative energy manufacturing facilities. 
(2)  The term "light industry" or "light manufacturing" does not include the rendering of fats or oils. 
    Loading space, off-street, means an off-street space or berth, on the same lot with a building, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or material, and which has access to a street or other appropriate means of ingress and egress. 
    Lodginghouse, licensed, means any dwelling other than a hotel or motel, inn or tourist home in which living space is let to four or more persons. 
    Logistics center means a business that contracts with third parties to perform shipping and storage. The majority of items shipped shall be routed from an off-site location to an off-site location without being stored on site. 
    Lot means an area or parcel of land or any part thereof in individual, joint or common ownership, or in ownership by the entirety, which is designated on a plan as a separate lot and which has boundaries identical with those on a plan recorded in the county registry of deeds. 
    Lot coverage means the building footprint area expressed as a percent of the total lot area. 
    Lot width means the shortest distance between the side lot lines of the lot measured at the minimum setback line. 
    Major commercial project means any nonresidential development or use: 
(1)  Having 25,000 square feet of gross floor area; or 
(2)  Generating more than 500 vehicle trips per day, as calculated using the most recent ITE manual; or 
(3)  Requiring more than 100 parking spaces by the terms of section 34-106. 
    Manufacturing means the fabrication of raw materials or assembly of parts or materials fabricated off site. 
    Manufacturing, bio-tech, means the use of living organisms, parts of organisms, or the products of organisms to develop microorganisms for specific uses. 
    Marina means a waterfront commercial activity whose primary purpose is the seasonal or year-round rental of berthing space for pleasure craft. Accessory uses include boat repair facilities, boat launching equipment, a fueling station, the sale of nautical equipment, and administrative space. 
    Materials recovery facility (MRF) means an area in conjunction with a structure/building designed to receive and process materials such as wood, paper, metals or plastics for the purpose of recycling said materials into usable products and/or materials for resale to industry and commerce; it shall not be construed that an MRF can be utilized for the production of energy for either public or private purposes. 
    Medical center. 
(1)  Any facility in which a variety of medical and/or dental services will be practiced by Massachusetts licensed medical and dental professionals, on an outpatient basis. Services may include and are not limited to: Cardiology; geriatric medicine, mental health, hematology, neurology, obstetrics/gynecology; occupational health; oncology; rehabilitation medicine; emergency dental services; dental exams and preventative dental care; dental restorative services; and dental rehabilitative services. 
(2)  The term "medical center" does not include hospitals, medical marijuana dispensaries, clinics and substance abuse treatment centers. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center shall mean a not-for-profit entity, as defined by Massachusetts law only, registered under the law, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. It shall further mean only those treatment centers registered with the commonwealth's department of public health. 
    Mobile home means any vehicle or object, which is drawn by or used in connection with a motor vehicle, and which is so designed and constructed or reconstructed or added to by means of such accessories as to permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, whether resting on wheels, jacks or other foundations. The term "mobile home" includes the type of vehicle or modular construction commonly known as a mobile home, containing complete electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities and designed to be installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for permanent living quarters. 
    Motel. See Hotel. 
    Motor freight terminal. See Freight forwarding terminal. 
    Motor vehicle parts stores means retail sales of parts, including accessory repairs conducted within a completely enclosed structure. 
    Motor vehicle repair, sales, filling station, storage. See Garage, private, garage, public, and gasoline station. 
    Motor vehicle service station means structures or lots used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, the sale and installation of tires and other automobile accessories, garages and bays for maintenance of motor vehicles; but excluding car washes and places of business which engage primarily in motor vehicle repair work requiring a license, auto body work, auto body spraying, and painting of motor vehicles. 
    Moving company. 
(1)  The term "moving company" means any person or entity, who directly, or by an agent or under a lease or any other arrangement, or by arrangement with any other moving company or with any contract carrier, transports property, or any class of property, for the general public by motor vehicle, for compensation, upon ways, over regular or irregular routes, including carriers by rail or water and express or forwarding companies, when engaged in such motor vehicle operations. On-site storage, if any, shall not exceed 30 percent of gross floor area. 
(2)  The term "moving company" does not mean freight forwarding terminals. 
    Multifamily. See Apartment building. 
    Municipal means a facility operated by the city. 
    Municipal education building being rehabilitated or converted means the conversion from such use to a nonmunicipal use for any use, by right, special permit or site plan approval, as allowed in the underlying zoning; and professional, business and governmental offices; research, development of software, and other development operations including related business office; medical offices; and light industrial establishments and residential dwellings containing three or more units. 
    Noncommercial research facility includes laboratories and other research facilities or educational institutions which supply services for a fee to persons other than enrolled students. No manufacturing associated with noncommercial research facility shall be located within the or Light Industrial District. 
    Nonconforming lot means any lot which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located; provided that such lot was in existence and lawful at the time of publication of the first notice of the public hearing before the city council or the special permit granting authority respecting the regulation to which it does not conform. 
    Nonconforming structure means any structure which does not conform to dimensional regulations or to the parking and loading requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located; provided that such structure was in existence and lawful at the time of the publication of the first notice of the public hearing before the city council or the special permit granting authority respecting the regulation to which it does not conform. 
    Nonconforming use means any use of land or building which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located; provided that such use was in existence and lawful at the time of publication of the first notice of the public hearing before the city council or the special permit granting authority respecting the regulation to which it does not conform. 
    Nursery school means a place for group preschool training of children. 
    Office park means an area planned for occupancy of more than one office establishment with shared common areas. 
    Park and ride/park and fly facility, or similar term means a facility for storage of vehicles for rent or for transient parking of vehicles for driver and/or passenger transfer to another vehicle or mode of transportation. 
    Parking area, community, means a parking area or facility which serves uses within more than one building or on more than one lot. 
    Parking area or facility means a building, structure, lot or part thereof where off-street parking spaces and waiting areas are provided including a park and ride, park and fly facility. 
    Parking space means a space inside or outside a structure for exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle. 
    Personal service establishment means personal services provided by a barbershop or beauty shop, professional, business or governmental office, bank; repair and maintenance of clothing and household articles by a cleaning or laundry agency or automatic equipment; cobbler, tailor, valet service; radio, television and appliance repairs; upholsterer. 
    Principal use means the main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied or maintained under this chapter. 
    Residential care facility means a facility consisting of independent and semi-independent dwelling units, each occupied by not more than two residents per dwelling unit, at least one of whom is 55 years of age or older; said facility shall have available on-site passive and active recreational facilities, supervised and unsupervised activities, housekeeping assistance, and full-time medical personnel to provide medical services, including, but not limited to, dietary and nutritional assistance and nursing care. 
    Residential planned development parcel means any parcel or assemblage of parcels that are the subject of an RPD special permit. The real property that is the subject of an RPD is as shown on an RPD plan approved by the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to the special permit requirements of section 34-214, and approved by the planning board, subject to the site plan review requirements of section 34-215. 
    Restaurant. 
(1)  The term "restaurant" means an establishment, other than a fast food restaurant, where the principal activity is the service or sale of prepared food or drink for on-premises or off-premises consumption. 
(2)  The term "restaurant" does not include facilities providing adult entertainment. 
    Restaurant, fast food, means an establishment whose primary business is the sale of food for consumption on or off the premises which is: 
(1)  Primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for use as an ingredient or component of meals; 
(2)  Available upon a short waiting time; and 
(3)  Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten, either inside or outside the premises where it is sold. 
    Retail means a business which supplies commodities, but not including exterior sales or services, drive-in or window services or the provision of any amusement, live or mechanical, except music or as incidental to the operations of a permitted church, school, club or similar nonprofit institution or educational use. 
    River or stream, bank of, means rising ground bordering a flowing body of water. 
    Rowhouse. See Attached dwelling. 
    Screen means to shield from view in the manner described herein. 
    Shared elderly housing means a dwelling unit shared by six or fewer residents, whether or not related to one another, each of whom is 55 years of age or older. 
    Shopping center means an area planned for occupancy by more than one retail establishment with shared common facilities. 
    Sign means any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks, whether stationary or portable, by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate or locate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are visible from a public or private street or right-of-way and used to attract attention. 
    Site plan, major, means any application for permits to build, alter or expand any building, structure or use in any district where such construction will exceed the standards for a minor site plan. 
    Site plan, minor, means an application for permits to build, alter or expand any building, structure or use in any district where such construction will not: 
(1)  Exceed a total gross floor area of 8,000 square feet; and 
(2)  Generate the need for more than 25 parking spaces. 
For the purposes of computing the total gross floor area or parking spaces, all such applications made within the five previous calendar years shall be considered in the aggregate. 
    Storage means the deposit and care of materials in a warehouse or otherwise for safekeeping and/or ultimate distribution. 
    Storage, bulk, means the storage of raw materials, including fuel. 
    Story. 
(1)  The term "story" means that part of a building or structure between any floor and the floor or roof above. For the purpose of this chapter, where a building or structure is not divided into stories, the term "story" shall be considered to be up to 12 feet in height. 
(2)  The term "story" does not include any cellar, basement or parking area that has more than half of its clear height below the average finished elevation of the finished lot grade. Further, steeples, penthouses and other projections used or intended to be used exclusively for utility service or access to the roof shall not be deemed a story. 
    Stream, bank of. See River or stream, bank of. 
    Street means a right-of-way which has been dedicated or intended for public travel, or private way offering the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    Street line means the dividing line between a street and a lot and, in the case of a public way, the street line established by the public authority laying out the way upon which the lot abuts. 
    Structure means any construction, erection, assemblage or other combination of materials upon the land, necessitating pilings, footings or a foundation, for attachment to the land to give support or shelter such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, fence of more than six feet in height, platform, swimming pool or the like. See Temporary structure. 
    Substance abuse counseling center shall mean any facility that provides substance abuse counseling practiced by a Massachusetts licensed professional, on an outpatient basis. A substance abuse counseling center shall not include any dispensing of medication to treat substance use disorders. The term substance abuse counseling center does not include hospitals, medical marijuana treatment centers, or substance abuse treatment centers. Any facility that dispenses any medication for the treatment of substance use disorders shall be determined to be a substance abuse treatment center and subject to that definition. 
    Substance abuse counseling center shall mean any facility that provides substance abuse counseling practiced by a Massachusetts licensed professional, on an outpatient basis. A substance abuse counseling center shall not include any dispensing of medication to treat substance use disorders. The term substance abuse counseling center does not include hospitals, medical marijuana treatment centers, or substance abuse treatment centers. Any facility that dispenses any medication for the treatment of substance use disorders shall be determined to be a substance abuse treatment center and subject to that definition. 
    Substance abuse treatment center means a facility providing substance abuse treatment services, including, but not limited to, counseling services, therapy sessions and/or the dispensing of medication to treat substance abuse, provided that: 
(1)  Adjacent properties are adequately protected from noise, odors and unsightly appearances. 
(2)  The hours of operation will not negatively impact surrounding areas in terms of traffic flow, nor create increases in traffic volume during peak periods in surrounding areas. 
(3)  Such facilities are located not less than 1,000 feet from properties used for public or private kindergartens, elementary schools, or secondary schools, unless the substance abuse treatment center is located within an existing medical center. 
    Swimming pool means an artificial pool of water or a natural pool with a depth of two feet or more at any point or 75 or more square feet of surface and used for swimming or bathing, located indoors or outdoors, together with the equipment and appurtenances used in connection with the pool. 
    Temporary structure means a structure which is erected for not more than a year. Such structures shall include tents, portable bandstands, bleachers, reviewing stands, a mobile home used in conjunction with construction activities or other structures of similar character. Such structures are deemed accessory uses permitted by special permits through special permit granting authority action in accordance with section 34-214. 
    Tourist home. See Hotel. 
    Townhouse. See Attached dwelling. 
    Trade or craft shop means facility serving a plumber, electrician, carpenter, including accessory office space, but not including a storage area or staging area for construction companies. 
    Trailer means any vehicle or object which is drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck terminal means any premises where the principal use is the outdoor or indoor storage, service, maintenance or repair of truck, bus, van, automobile or other motor vehicle fleets. 
    Veterinary. See Animal hospital. 
    Warehouse means a structure designed or used for the storage of goods. 
    Wholesale means the sale of goods in large quantity, for the purpose of resale and completely enclosed in a building. Such uses shall not include the sale or transfer of flammable liquids, gas, explosives or other potentially hazardous materials, except for those uses operating under a license granted under the authority of M.G.L. c. 148 on or before June 16, 1986. 
    Yard means an open space, other than an enclosed court, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings and a lot line, and is not occupied or obstructed from the ground upward by a building or a structure, except for fences. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the street line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. The depth of a front yard shall be the minimum distance between the building and front lot line. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the building and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the side lot line of the lot and the nearest line of the building, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front or rear lot lines, as may be. The width of a side yard shall be the minimum distance between the building and the side lot line. 
    Zoning enforcement officer means the person appointed under applicable city or state law who shall be duly charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, § 10.0; Ord. of 9-27-2010(01), § 5; Ord. of 9-27-2010(02); Ord. of 10-17-2011; Ord. of 6-25-2012, § 1;  3-18-2013 , § I;  6- 3-2013(2) , § I; Ord. of 5-4-2015(2) , § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2016(1) ; Ord. of 11-21-2016(7) ; Ord. of 11-21-2016(8) ; Ord. of 11-21-2016(12) ; Ord. of 6-19-2017(1) ; Ord. of 3-13-2017 ) 
Secs. 34-242-34-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-262. - Table of dimensional regulations. 
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
sf = square feet; NA = not applicable 
Zoning 
Districts Resi-
dential
R-1 Residential R-2 Resi-
dential
R-3 Retail Business Retail Business 2 Highway Business Shopping Center Waterfront Industrial Naval 
Hospital 
Development Business Light Industrial/Office Light Industrial/Office 2 1-2 Units (R-1) 1-3 Units (R-2) Apartment (R3) (BR) (BR2) (BH)6 (SC) (W) (I) Residential (NHR) Commercial (NHC) (B) (LI) (LI2) Minimum lot area (sf)  Per dwelling unit 3,500 3,500 3,000 950 NA 350 NA NA NA NA 3,500 NA NA NA 350  But not less than 7,500 5,000 10,500 5,000 NA 10,000 NA NA NA 1 acre 20,000 15,000 1 acre 1.5 acre 10,000 Maximum density NA NA NA 12 units per acre, 45 by SP NA 12 units per acre, 45 by SP NA NA 35 units per acre NA NA NA NA NA 12 units per acre, 45 by SP Minimum density NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 12 units per acre NA NA NA NA NA 12 units/acre Minimum frontage (ft.) 4 60 40 60 40 50 50 100 NA NA 150 60 60 150 150 40 for residential; 150 for other Maximum floor area ratio 2  Standard NA NA 1 1 NA NA NA 2 1.5 1.0 3 1 1 2 2 2  Bonus NA NA 2 1.5 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Maximum height (ft.) 5 35 35 40 36, 60 by SP 80 36, 60 by SP 20 12 80 35 40 12 40 40 100 25 12 36 Maximum number of stories 3 3 4 3, 5 by SP 8 3, 5 by SP 2 NA NA NA 2.5 4 8 2 3 Required yards (ft.) 7  Front 20 10 10 10 14 0 10 14 10 10 10 15 20 20 10 10 5  Side 1/4 the height of building 13 1/4 the height of building 13 1/4 the height of building 13 1/4 the height of building 13 10 10 10 10 10 NA 1/4 the height of building 13 1/4 the height of building 13 NA NA NA for industrial; 10 for residential  Rear 25 20 20 20 20 20 10 10 10 10 20 20 20 20 NA for industrial; 20 for residential Maximum percent lot coverage 30 40 40 40 NA NA NA NA NA 50 8 50 50 NA NA NA Minimum usable open space/family (sf) 500 9 300 9 150 9 150 9 100 100 NA NA 150 NA 150 NA NA NA 100 Min. area to remain as usable open space 3 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 15 10 NA 25 25 NA NA NA Min. distance between access points to same lot (ft.) 11 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 50 100 50 NA 100 100 100  
Notes: 
1. The regulations in this table shall not be applicable to plans submitted to any urban renewal plan approved by the city or to any planned development submitted under section 34-155. 
2. See section 34-78(l), floor area ratio. 
3. See section 34-78(m), maximum of 2.0 floor area ratio if the lot is two acres or more or if all parking is provided in a parking structure. 
4. Measured on the street which the main entrance of the principal building faces. 
5. See section 34-78(j), special height requirements. 
6. See section 34-78(g), gasoline service stations and automobile repair services and washing in BH district. 
7. See section 34-78(e), required yards. 
8. See section 34-78(k), lot coverage. 
9. See section 34-78(d), useable open space. 
10. See section 34-77(c), Waterfront District. 
11. See section 34-77(e), access road. 
12. See section 34-80(1), special permit relief. 
13. See section 34-78(e)(1), for further requirements for required yards. 
14. Reserved. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, app. A; Ord. of 12-3-2018 , §§ 1,2) 
Secs. 34-263-34-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TABLE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 

Sec. 34-283. - Table of required off-street parking spaces. 
TABLE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 
Use Required Parking Spaces Dwellings  Each dwelling unit in a one- or two-family dwelling Two parking spaces, except one in NHR  Each dwelling unit in a building containing three or more dwelling units except in the R-3 district 1.5 parking spaces, except two in the Waterfront District and one in NHR, plus 0.5 additional space for each bedroom in excess of two in any unit  Accessory uses to above In addition to the above, plus one space and one space for each nonresident employee Boardinghouse, lodginghouse, roominghouse, bed and breakfast One space for each person Public housing for the elderly 0.5 space per unit Tourist home One space for each guestroom, plus one additional space for each three employees on the largest shift Dormitory One space for each five occupants Hotel, motel, inn or club (see note 1) One space for every two bedrooms, plus three spaces for each 200 square feet of floor area available for meetings and functions and one space for each four employees on the largest shift Convalescent, rest or nursing home One space for each four beds, plus one space for each three employees on the largest shift Hospital, sanitarium or similar institution One space for each three seats, plus one space for each three employees on the largest shift (use required parking spaces) Church or similar place of assembly One space for each three seats Funeral home or chapel One space for each three seats, or one space for each 40 square feet of floor area open to the public, whichever is greater Community center, auditorium, gymnasium, theater, or places of public assembly (see note 2) One space for each three seats or five linear feet of bench area Public library, museum, or similar institution One space for each 200 square feet open to the public Retail business, commercial, or personal service establishment (see note 3) One space for each 300 square feet of floor area up to 50,000 square feet, plus one space for each 600 square feet thereafter Office  Professional, business or public One space for each 300 square feet of floor area up to 50,000 square feet, plus one space for each 600 feet thereafter  Medical or dental office or clinic Four spaces for each individual office or suite, plus four spaces for each additional doctor or dentist within a single office or suite Restaurant, taverns, or other place serving food or beverages One space for each three seats, permanent or otherwise, plus one space for each three employees on the largest shift Industrial, manufacturing, warehouse storage, laboratories or similar uses One space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each three employees on the largest shift Automobile washing and waxing establishment (see note 4) Five spaces per fixed stall equipped for washing or waxing Motor vehicle repair garages and service stations Two spaces for each pump, plus two spaces for each service bay and one space for each employee on the largest shift Outdoor or open air sales space One space for each 600 square feet Bowling alleys Five spaces for each alley Schools  Preschool through middle or junior high One space for each teacher or other employee anticipated during normal school hours  Senior high, places of higher education, professional school, trade school One space for each teacher or other employee anticipated during normal school hours, plus one space for each five students in a senior high school or one space for each two students in any other such institution Paintball facility, bowling alley One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area up to 50,000 square feet plus one space for each 600 square feet thereafter Moving company One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area up to 50,000 square feet, plus one space for each 600 square feet thereafter  
Notes: 
1. For hotels, motels, inns or dormitories in a Retail Business (BR) District, the ratio of spaces may be reduced by a special permit but to not less than one space per four rooms. 
2. Such a use may, by special permit, be allowed to reduce this ratio to the extent that the zoning board of appeals finds that compensatory spaces within 3,000 feet of the entrance to this use will generally be available at the times this use is in operation, but not to less than one parking space per 12 seats or one parking space per 400 square feet of usable gross floor area. 
3. Except that in a Retail Business (BR) District the first 5,000 square feet of usable gross floor area in nonresidential use (except as otherwise specified) shall be exempt from the requirement. 
4. Parking spaces in this case need not be stalls but may be waiting spaces in driveway. 
5. Where any computation results in a fractional number, the fraction shall be counted as one space. 
(Ord. of 6-20-2005, app. B; Ord. of 9-27-2010(01), § 3; Ord. of 9-27-2010(02)) 
Secs. 34-284-34-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-300. - Table of principal use regulations. 
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS 
Principal Use Districts R1 R2 R3 BR BR2 BH B SC W I LI LI2 NHR NHC A. Residential uses  Single-family dwelling Y Y Y N N N N N Y N N N N N  Two-family dwelling Y Y Y N N N N N Y N N N N N  Three-family dwelling N Y Y N N N N N Y N N N N N  Multifamily dwelling with four to six dwelling units N SP Y Y Y N N N SP N N SP Y N  Dwellings containing seven or more dwelling units N SP Y Y Y N N N SP N N SP SP N  Multifamily dwelling at a minimum density of 12 units and a maximum density of 35 units per acre N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N  Conversion of a dwelling Y Y Y N Y N N N N N N Y N N  Dwelling above the first floor of a building containing retail or office use N N Y(1) Y Y N N N N N N SP N N  Retail or professional service business, or business or professional office, within a dwelling structure N N N N N N N N N N N N SP N  Lodginghouse or boardinghouse N SP SP SP N N N N N N N N N N  Congregate housing SP SP SP N N N N N N N N N N N  Assisted and/or independent living facility N SP SP SP SP N N N SP N N N SP N  Shared elderly housing SP SP SP SP SP N N N SP N N N SP N  Community residence SP SP SP SP SP N N N SP N N N SP N B. Exempt and institutional uses  Use of land or structures for religious purposes Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Use of land or structures for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the state or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Family day care home, small Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Family day care home, large SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  Adult day care facility, small Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Adult day care facility, large SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  Child care facility in existing building Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Child care facility in new building SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP  Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture on a parcel of more than five acres in area Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Facilities for the sale of produce, and wine and dairy products, provided that during the months of June-September of every year, or during the harvest season of the primary crop, the majority of such products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner of the land containing more than five acres in area on which the facility is located Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Municipal facilities Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Essential services Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Hospital N N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP N N N N  Noncommercial research facility N N N N N N SP N SP SP SP SP N N  Parks and playgrounds Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y C. Commercial uses  Nonexempt educational use N N N Y Y Y SP Y Y N N N Y Y  Nonexempt educational use with a minimum of 20,000 square feet N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N  Animal clinic or veterinary hospital N N N SP SP N N SP N SP N N N N  Kennel N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Private club or lodge N N N Y Y SP N SP N N N SP N N  Nursing or convalescent home SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N N SP N  Funeral home N N N SP N SP N SP N N N N SP SP  Hotel, inn, motel, tourist home N N N SP SP SP Y SP SP SP SP N N Y  Hotel/motel, extended stay lodging N N N SP SP SP Y SP SP SP SP N N Y  Planned development SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  Bakery, delicatessen, candy, fish, including accessory food service N N N Y Y Y SP Y Y N SP SP N Y  Book, stationery, gift, clothing, dry goods, hardware, jewelry, or variety store N N N Y Y Y N Y Y N N N N Y  Convenience store with hours of operation not to exceed 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. N N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP N N N SP  Convenience store with hours of operation exceeding 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., and/or with the sale of beer and/or wine N N N SP SP SP N N N N N N N N  Convenience store with the sale of alcoholic beverages other than beer and/or wine N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Gasoline sales with convenience store N N N N N SP SP SP N SP N N N N  Supermarket with hours of operation exceeding 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., and/or with the sale of beer, wine and/or other alcohol N N N SP SP SP N N N N N N N N  Supermarket and grocery store N N N SP SP SP N SP N N N N N N  Department store, discount house N N N SP SP SP N SP N N N N N N  Retail stores and services not elsewhere set forth N N N SP SP SP N SP N N N N N N  Major commercial project N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  Motor vehicle sales and rental N N N N N SP N N N N N N N N  Motor vehicle repair services and washing and waxing establishments N N N SP N SP N N N N N N N N  Motor vehicle service station N N N SP N SP N N N Y N N N N  Motor vehicle parts stores N N N SP N SP N Y N N N N N N  Motor vehicle storage and repair N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Boat and accessory sales, service and rental establishments N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Boat storage facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Boatbuilding and shipbuilding N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Ferries and excursion facilities N N N N N N N N SP N N N N N  Fishing, commercial, and industrial vessel berthing, including docks N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N  Fishing pier N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N  Fabrication, storage, and repair of fishing equipment N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N  Fueling and bunkering of vessels N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Harbor and marine supplies and services N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Commercial docks and marinas N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Marinas, including boat storage and boat repair N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y  Yacht club, boat rental N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N  Marine construction and salvage facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Marine intermodal transportation terminals and facilities N N N N N N N N SP N N N N N  Marine offices N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Marine pollution control facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Tugboat, fireboat, pilot boat and similar services N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Food handling and preparation facilities N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP N N  Restaurant, including service of alcoholic beverages N N N Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP SP Y Y  Restaurant, drive-in or fast food N N N N N SP N SP N N N N N N  Professional, business and governmental offices N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  Medical centers N N N N N SP N SP N SP N SP N N  Independent marijuana testing laboratory N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N  Marijuana cultivator N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N  Marijuana product manufacturer N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N  Marijuana retailer N N N N N SP N SP N SP N N N N  Medical marijuana treatment center N N N N N SP N SP N SP N N N N  Substance abuse counselling center N N N N N SP N SP N SP N SP N N  Substance abuse treatment center N N N N N SP N SP N SP N N N N  Bank, financial agency N N N Y Y Y SP Y Y Y SP SP Y Y  Indoor commercial recreation N N N N N N N Y N SP N N N N  Personal service establishment N N N Y Y Y N Y N N N N N Y  General service establishment N N N Y Y Y N Y N N N N N Y  Adult entertainment establishment N N N N N SP N SP N N N N N N  Bed and breakfast SP SP SP N SP N N N N N N N N N  Parking facilities N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N N SP SP  Park and ride/park and fly facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Storage of vehicles for hire or return from hire N N N N N N SP N N N N N N N  Theaters, concert halls and cinemas N N N Y N N N Y N SP N N N Y  Trade and craft establishments N N N Y Y Y N Y N Y N Y N N  Health and fitness club N N N SP Y SP Y Y SP SP SP SP N N  Art use N N N SP SP SP N N N Y Y Y N N  Moving company, less than 15,000 square feet gross floor area (2) N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N  Moving company, 15,000 square feet or more gross floor area (2) N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N D. Industrial uses  Light manufacturing N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y N N  Wholesale business and storage in connection with wholesale business N N N N N N N N N Y Y SP N N  Inside display and sale of merchandise by distributors or manufacturers N N N N N N N N Y SP Y SP N N  Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N SP SP N N N  Manufacturing, bio-tech N N N N N N SP N SP SP SP N N N  Fabrication of marine related goods N N N N N N N N N Y Y N N N  Marine-related research, laboratories, and scientific development N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N  Marine-related wholesale, warehouse or storage N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N  Materials recovery facility N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Research and development, including related offices N N N N N N SP N SP SP SP SP N SP  Contractor's yard N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Junkyard or automobile graveyard N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Bulk storage of cargo and freight N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Bulk storage of petroleum products and byproducts N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Container shipping operations, marine cargo handling facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Freight forwarding facilities N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  Seafood processing, seafood packaging and seafood distribution N N N N N N N N SP N N N N N Commercial or industrial laundry N N N N N N N N N SP N N N N E. Other uses  Ambulance service N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP N N  Dog kennel/dog daycare N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N N  Drive-in window services at retail or other use N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  Municipal education buildings being rehabilitated or converted from such use to a nonmunicipal use SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  
Note: 
(1) For buildings fronting on Broadway only, provided that sufficient off-street parking is available for the residential uses. 
(2) In accordance with section 34-241, on-site storage, if any, shall not exceed 30 percent of gross floor area, except in instances where the zoning board of appeals, in accordance with section 34-214, may grant a special permit to allow storage up to 50 percent of the gross floor area. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2003; Ord. of 1-12-2004; Ord. of 5-5-2004; Ord. of 6-20-2005, app. C; Ord. of 9-27-2010(01), § 1; Ord. of 9-27-2010(02); Ord. of 3-12-2012; Ord. of 6-25-2012, § 2;  3-18-2013 , § II;  6- 3-2013(2) , § II; Ord. of 4-6-2015(1), § 2 , Ord. of 4-6-2015(2), § 1 ; Ord. of 11-21-2016(9) ; Ord. of 6-19-2017(1) ; Ord. of 3-26-2018(1) , Amd. 2; Ord. of 12-3-2018 , §§ 3,4) 
Appendix A - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this part is the Administrative Code promulgated by the city manager. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. At the request of the city, gender specific pronouns have been removed and replaced with gender neutral language. 

INTRODUCTION AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
    This administrative code is promulgated pursuant to section 6-1 of the Charter of the City of Chelsea. Section 6-1 authorizes the city manager under the administrative code to organize or reorganize city departments or agencies and to "prescribe the functions and administrative procedures to be followed by all such agencies." Further, section 2(b) of chapter 103 of the Acts of 1994, which established the city's Charter, directed the receiver for the City of Chelsea to promulgate the administrative code, "providing for the organization of city government into operating agencies in accordance with ... section 6-1," of the Charter. This administrative code, promulgated by the receiver, pursuant [to] that mandate, will remain in effect, unless modified or amended by the receiver under chapter 200 of the Acts of 1991 (the receivership legislation), or by the city manager upon taking office. 
    The administrative code of the City of Chelsea provides for the internal organization and administration of the Chelsea city government. The intention and purpose of this code is to establish a legal, practical, and efficient plan of organization and administrative procedures, which allows for and encourages the effective delivery of municipal services to the residents of Chelsea. The duties and functions of the departments and agencies described herein are to be read broadly, and serve to illustrate, but not to circumscribe, the duties and responsibilities of the departments and agencies of the city under the Charter, ordinances, and General Laws of the commonwealth. The administrative code is to be applied harmoniously and in concert with the applicable requirements of the Charter, ordinances and the General Laws, recognizing the broad authority given to the city manager to allocate, reallocate, or prescribe the functions city agencies under section 6-1 of the Charter. 
    The administrative code is composed of four parts, the purpose of which is to detail the various responsibilities, authorities, and methods of administering municipal agency services. The parts describe the elective organization which is based on Charter provisions and cannot be changed administratively, the multiple-member appointive organization, the administrative organization, and the administrative procedures of the city. A brief description of each part follows: 
    Elective organization: This describes all elective officers of the city, their manner and time of election, term of office, authorities, responsibilities and interrelationship with the other sections of the organization. It is based largely upon the provisions of the Charter and is provided as a section of this code for information purposes only and is not subject to the provisions of section 6-1 of the Charter. 
    Multiple-member appointive organization: This describes all multiple-member body appointments made by the city manager, and further delineates manner and time of appointment, terms of appointment generally, authorities, responsibilities and interrelationships with the other sections of the organization. 
    Administrative organization: This describes all of the administrative agencies of the city under the jurisdiction of the city manager. It further delineates the mission and functions of each said agency, the authorities, responsibilities and interrelationships amongst and between the administrative agencies, the multiple-member bodies, and the elective organization. 
    Administrative procedures: This describes all administrative procedures of the city. This part establishes procedures by which rules and regulations are adopted by administrative agencies. It specifies the manner in which all the entities of the city function administratively, through the promulgation of policies and procedures. 
PART I. - ELECTIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 1.00. - Offices and standards. 
1.01  Generally. The offices to be filled by the voters shall be a city council and a school committee. 
1.02  Eligibility. Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of councillor-at-large or school committee member; a district councillor shall be a voter and resident of the district from which the councillor is elected. No person shall simultaneously hold more than one elective city office. 
1.03  City elections. A preliminary election is held for the nomination of candidates on the sixth Tuesday preceding every regular city election. The regular city election is held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
1.04  Term of office. The term of office of all elective city officers shall be two years beginning on the first city business day in January in the year following election and continuing until their successors are qualified. 
Sec. 2.00. - City council. 
2.01  Composition and authority. There shall be a city council composed of 11 members that shall exercise the legislative powers of the city. Three members, to be known as councillors-at-large, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters at large. Eight members, to be known as district councillors, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters of each district, one such district councillor to be elected from each of the eight council districts into which the city is divided. The city council shall exercise all of the legislative powers of the city. 
2.02  Eligibility. Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of councillor-at-large. A district councillor shall be a voter and resident of the district from which the councillor is elected. A councillor-at-large who shall remove from the city during the term for which such councillor-at-large was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of councillor-at-large and the office shall be considered vacant. A district councillor who shall remove from one district to another during the term of office for which such district councillor was elected shall be deemed to have vacated the office of district councillor and the office shall be considered vacant. 
2.03  City council organization. After the councilors-elect have taken the oath of office, the city council shall be called together by the city clerk for the purpose of conducting an election among city council members for the office of city council president and vice-president to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The president presides at all meetings of the city council and performs such other functions as may be assigned by the Charter, by ordinance or by vote of the city council. The vice-president performs the duties of the president during the president's absence or disability. 
2.04  General powers and duties. Except as otherwise provided by law or by the Charter, specifically section 1-4, powers of the city; section 1-5, interpretation of powers and section 2-3, general powers and duties; all powers of the City of Chelsea shall be vested in the city council that shall provide for their exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligation imposed on the city by law. No member of the city council, nor any committee of the city council shall be directly involved in the conduct of the administrative business of the city. 
2.05  Filling of city council vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the office of city councillor, whether by failure to elect or otherwise, the remaining councillors shall, within 30 days following the date of such vacancy, act to fill said vacancy. The city council shall fill the vacancy for the reminder of the unexpired term by choosing the defeated candidate for said seat at the last regular city election; provided, however, that the defeated candidate shall have received at least 20 percent of the total votes cast for that office. If there was no other candidate for said office or the defeated candidate shall not have received at least 20 percent of the total votes cast, the city council shall at their discretion choose an individual, who may be the defeated candidate, from among the voters entitled to vote for such office to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any person so chosen shall take the oath of office and commence to serve forthwith. No vacancy shall be filled, in the manner herein provided, if a regular city election is to be held within 120 days following the date the vacancy is declared to exist. 
2.06  Exercise of powers. Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth or the Charter, the legislative powers of the city council may be exercised in a manner determined by the city council. 
2.07  Interrelationships. The city council interacts with all elective officers of the city, all multiple-member appointive boards, and the administrative organization of the city. A description of said interactions appears as part of the administrative code under each appropriate part and section that describe the officers and agencies of the city. 
Sec. 3.00. - School committee. 
3.01  Composition. There shall be a school committee composed of seven members elected by and from the voters at large. 
3.02  Powers and duties. The school committee shall have all the powers and duties given to school committees by the laws of the commonwealth. The school committee shall have general charge of the public schools of the city. The school committee shall have the power to select and terminate a superintendent of schools, establish educational goals and policies for the schools consistent with the requirements of the laws of the commonwealth and standards established by the commonwealth. 
3.03  Filling of school committee vacancies. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the school committee either by failure to elect or otherwise, the president of the city council shall, within 30 days following the date such vacancy, call a joint meeting of the city council and the school committee to act to fill said vacancy. At any such joint meeting a majority of those present and voting shall choose to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term by choosing the defeated candidate for said seat at the last regular city election; provided, however, that the defeated candidate shall have received at least 20 percent of the total votes cast for that office. If the defeated candidate shall not have received at least 20 percent of the total votes cast, the city council and the school committee shall at their discretion choose an individual, who may be the defeated candidate, from among the voters to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any person so chosen shall take the oath of office and commence to serve forthwith. No vacancy shall be filled in the manner herein provided if a regular city election is to be held within 120 days following the date the vacancy is declared to exist. 
3.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The school committee and the city council shall meet prior to the commencement of the budget process to review the financial condition of the city, revenue and expenditure forecasts, and other relevant information. The school committee chair and city council president preside over each joint meeting. The Charter serves as the basis for establishing and maintaining this interrelationship. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. The school committee interacts with any multiple-member body within the city as necessary to ensure furtherance of the committee's responsibility to educate the children of the city. 
PART II. - MULTIPLE-MEMBER APPOINTIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 1.00. - Offices and standards. 
1.01  Generally. This [part] describes all multiple-member body appointments made by the city manager and further delineates manner and time of appointment, terms of appointment generally, and authorities, responsibilities and interrelationships with the other agencies of the organization. City of Chelsea representatives to regional governmental boards and committees shall, unless the organic law establishing such a committee provides otherwise, be appointed by the city manager. 
1.02  Multiple-member bodies and advisory committees. 
    This part of the administrative code lists and describes all current multiple-member bodies of the city. The city manager may, by administrative order, reorganize, consolidate, create, merge, divide, or abolish multiple-member bodies of the city. Administrative orders establishing multiple-member bodies shall specify the following: membership, term of office, authorities and responsibilities, and interrelationships with both the city council and other agencies within the organization. 
    The city manager may establish advisory committees to assist in carrying out the manager's responsibilities. Advisory committees shall be limited to a particular subject area and serve only in that capacity for any duration of time the city manager deems necessary. Meetings and proceedings of advisory committees shall not be subject to the open meeting laws. 
1.03  Method of appointment; removal; term of office. 
    The city manager appoints all members of multiple-member bodies; provided, however, that appointments made by the city manager shall become effective on the 30th day following the day on which notice of the proposed appointment is filed with the city council, unless the city council shall within such period by majority of the full city council vote to reject such appointment or has sooner voted to affirm it. All members of multiple-member bodies shall take the oath of office within four weeks of their appointment and must take the oath of office prior to entering upon the duties of their office. Oaths of office are given by the city clerk. 
    Members of multiple-member bodies shall be deemed to have vacated office if said member fails to attend regularly scheduled meetings for a period of three consecutive months without express leave from the chair of such multiple-member body or if such member is absent from such duties for the period of one year notwithstanding the permission from the chair to be absent. 
    The terms of office of multiple-member bodies are arranged so that one-third of the terms, or as nearly that number as may be possible, shall expire each year. A vacancy shall be filled in the same manner of appointment for the remainder of the term. Length of term is three years, except as noted. Appointments are effective the first day of March, and expire the last day of February. Numbers of members for multiple-member bodies will vary. Whenever a vacancy occurs on a multiple-member body, because of death, resignation, removal from the city, removal by the city manager or the pending expiration of a term for which a person has been appointed, public notice shall be given indicating the title, the length of term, a brief description of duties and a general indication of the qualifications desired of candidates. Members may be removed by the city manager for such cause as the city manager deems sufficient. Such cause shall be stated in the order of removal. 
1.04  Annual reports. All multiple-member bodies shall prepare annual reports of their activities and submit same to the city manager and the city clerk on or before the fourth Friday in September. The annual report shall describe fiscal year activities for the year ending each June 30. Where required by state and/or federal regulations, certain boards may be required to submit copies of their annual reports to appropriate state and/or federal agencies. 
1.05  Multiple-member body internal organization. 
    In order to acquaint new members of multiple-member bodies with the affairs which will come before them, the chair shall make available to each new member, the minutes of the meetings of the two previous years and copies of any applicable laws, rules, or regulations governing such multiple-member body. 
    Each multiple-member body shall, at a minimum, annually elect from its membership, a chair, vice-chair and clerk, and such other officer or officers as are deemed necessary or as are required by statute. The annual election shall occur in March of each year. The city manager and city clerk shall be notified of the officers of the boards upon their election. 
    Each multiple-member body shall use Robert's Rules of Order, unless another provision is made by administrative order, and shall provide for the keeping of a journal of its proceedings. Such rules and journals shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. The chair presides over all meetings of the multiple-member body, and is the official representative of the multiple-member body in all proceedings before the city council and other officials of the city. The vice-chair performs the chair's functions in the absence of the chair. The clerk is responsible for the certification of the multiple-member body's meeting minutes, observance of the public records law, and maintenance of the journal of proceedings of the multiple-member body. If requested by any member, any vote shall be taken by a call of the roll and the vote shall be recorded in the journal provided. However, if the vote is unanimous, only that fact need by recorded. A majority of a multiple-member body shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time. 
1.06  Time and place of meetings. The clerk of each multiple-member body is responsible for notifying the city clerk on or before the first of April, of the regularly scheduled multiple-member body meeting times and dates for the ensuing calendar year. The notification shall also include a location for each regular meeting. This shall not prevent multiple-member bodies from amending the schedule or calling special meetings in addition to those regularly scheduled, provided that, in all instances, standards of the open meeting law are followed. The city clerk shall ensure posting of all meeting schedules consistent with the open meeting law. No multiple-member body shall schedule a regular meeting which conflicts with a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
1.07  Authority to establish subcommittees. Each multiple-member body may, by a majority vote of its membership, establish subcommittees of the multiple-member body for the purpose of addressing a particular issue or issues. A report of their activities shall regularly be made to the full multiple-member body. Each subcommittee so established shall observe laws relevant to the keeping of public records, the open meeting law, and any other applicable law, Charter or administrative order. 
1.08  Multiple-member body meetings with city council. The chair of each multiple-member body shall annually, upon election, meet with the chair of the respective city council committee to which the multiple-member body has an interrelationship, for the purpose of defining an appropriate relationship during the ensuing fiscal year. The meeting should establish the following: frequency and method of communications, official(s) or employee(s) responsible for communications, and multiple-member body and city council committee roles in the development of legislation. 
1.09  Authority of multiple-member bodies. Multiple-member bodies may be: 
    Advisory. Wherein the body has no legal authority to promulgate rules or regulations, decide individual cases or enact policy; 
    Regulatory. Wherein the body has legal authority to promulgate rules and regulations, decide individual cases and enact policy; 
    Ministerial. Wherein the body has legal authority to take actions which are essentially administrative in nature; or combinations of advisory, regulatory, and ministerial. 
1.10  Eligibility for service. Any resident of the City of Chelsea, except an elected official, is eligible to be appointed to a multiple-member body of the city. The residency requirement may be waived by the city council upon the recommendation of the city manager. Only where expressly authorized by the Charter, the administrative code, or General Law, shall an official or employee be appointed by the city manager for service on a multiple-member body. This limitation shall not apply to advisory committees, as further defined in part I, section 1.02. 
Sec. 2.00. - Appeals, zoning board of. 
    2.01 Established. There shall be a zoning board of appeals consisting of five members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Chelsea. The board shall annually choose a chair from among its members. The city manager may appoint an associate member to serve when a regular member is absent. The director of planning and development, or his/her designee, shall serve as administrative assistant to the board to provide advice and guidance to the board on all matters that require a board vote. 
( Admin. Order of 6-5-2018 ) 
2.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The zoning board of appeals hears and decides individual cases brought by persons seeking relief from the requirements of the zoning ordinance, all as provided for by state legislation, and by the city zoning ordinance. Specifically, the board hears and decides cases which involve variances from the zoning ordinance. It also hears and decides applications for special permits and special permits for planned developments. 
    The zoning board of appeals is a regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
2.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The zoning board of appeals interacts with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning planning and development policy in order to regularly apprise said committee on current activities and concerns of the zoning board of appeals. 
    City manager. The zoning board of appeals interacts with the city manager and the administrative organization primarily through the planning and development department, which provides administrative, technical and clerical staff support for the purpose to the board and coordinates interaction with the municipal inspections, public works, police and fire departments and the licensing and consumer affairs division. 
    Other boards. The zoning board of appeals interacts with the planning board, the conservation commission, the board of health, the economic development board, the traffic and parking commission and the licensing commission in order to accomplish the board's responsibilities. 
Sec. 3.00. - Assessors, board of. 
3.01  Established. There shall be a board of assessors consisting of three members. 
3.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The board of assessors annually makes a fair cash valuation of all estates, both real and personal, subject to taxation within the city. The board determines the annual tax rate necessary to meet all sums voted by the city. The board hears and decides all questions relating to the abatement of taxes levied by it. The board has all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities which are given to boards of assessors by General Laws. 
    The board of assessors is an advisory and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
3.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board of assessors interacts with the city council for the purpose of annually providing the city council with the necessary classification rate information for the holding of classification hearings, to include exemption recommendations, as well as to advise the city council on legislative and policy matters concerning valuation, classification, abatements, and otherwise. The board of assessors interacts primarily with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning financial policy, in order to advise on the aforementioned issues. 
    City manager. The board of assessors interacts with the city manager primarily through the management and budget division within the executive department to implement the board's determinations. The city manager otherwise provides support as requested or required by law. 
Sec. 4.00. - Cable television advisory committee. 
4.01  Established. There shall be a cable television advisory committee consisting of five members. 
4.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The cable television advisory committee advises the city manager on matters relating to the licensing and administration of a contract for cable television services in the city. Consistent with the cable television contract, the committee may be designated by the city manager to exercise certain authorities under the contract. 
    The committee provides a forum for citizen complaints and suggestions relating to the cable television services and refers subscriber complaints to the cable operator for appropriate resolution. The committee meets not less than once each quarter for the purpose of reviewing cable contract compliance, and advising on other licensing matters. 
    The cable television advisory committee is an advisory multiple-member body of the city. 
4.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The cable television advisory committee interacts with the city council for the purpose of advising the city council on matters relating to issues and legislation concerning cable television matters. 
    City manager. The cable television advisory committee meets regularly with the city manager, and otherwise provides advice and recommendations to the city manager in the matter of licensing for the cable contract. The city manager provides administrative staff support to the committee, through the licensing and consumer affairs division within the office of the city clerk, in order to effectuate efficient management of the cable license. 
Sec. 5.00. - Conservation commission. 
5.01  Established. There shall be a conservation commission consisting of five members. 
5.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The conservation commission protects, promotes and enhances the quality of the natural resources within the city, especially wetlands and water resources. The conservation commission is responsible for the preservation and protection of flood plains and other wetlands within the city. 
    The conservation commission is an advisory and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
5.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The conservation commission interacts with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning planning and development policy for the purposes of development policies and legislation for the city designed to protect, promote and enhance the quality of the wetlands and water resources within the city. 
    City manager. The conservation commission interacts with the city manager, primarily through the planning and development department, which provides administrative and technical support and coordinates the interaction of city departments, including the department of municipal inspections, the public health division, the department of public works, and the harbormaster. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. The conservation commission interacts with the planning board, the economic development board, the zoning board of appeals, the board of health, the licensing commission, and the traffic and parking commission. 
    Other agencies. The conservation commission interacts on the state level with the department of environmental protection, the coastal zone management program, and the executive office of environmental affairs to accomplish the commission's mission. 
Sec. 6.00. - Cultural council. 
6.01  Established. There shall be a cultural council consisting of seven members. 
6.02  Authorities and responsibilities. The cultural council decides the distribution of arts lottery funds or other funds that may be available to it and may also conduct other activities to promote and encourage the arts, humanities, or interpretive sciences. The cultural council is an advisory and ministerial multiple-member body of the city. 
6.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The cultural council interacts with the city council for the purpose of discussing policies and legislation designed to promote and encourage the arts within the city. The cultural council interacts primarily with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning health and human services policy for this purpose. 
    City manager. The cultural council interacts with the city manager and the administrative organization primarily through the recreation and cultural affairs division within the health and human services department, which provides administrative staff support to the cultural council. The cultural council provides advisory information to the recreation and cultural affairs division concerning program and supportive service delivery. 
( Ord. of 2-8-2018 ) 
Sec. 7.00. - Economic development board. 
7.01  Established. There shall be an economic development board under the administrative control of the executive director of planning and development, hereinafter called the board, which shall consist of five members, one of whom shall be appointed by the secretary of the executive office of communities and development. The board shall serve as the community development board organized under chapter 43C, section 12 of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 43C, § 12]. Members shall serve for a term of five years. 
7.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The economic development board advises and assists in the preparation of economic development plans and strategies, in the development of economic development initiatives and proposals, and in the implementation of specific economic development projects and programs to promote the growth and development of existing local businesses, new businesses, and businesses interested in locating in the city. In particular, the economic development board is responsible for coordinating and approving industrial development projects for financing by means of industrial revenue bonds. The economic development board provides for the increased economic health and strength of the city and its residents by developing an economic development policy and a comprehensive plan for the economic development of the city, and strategies for carrying out the plan's goals and objectives. The board shall be and operate as an urban renewal agency within the meaning and requirements of chapter 121B of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121B]. The board shall be and operate as an urban redevelopment corporation within the meaning and requirements of chapter 121A of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121A]. The board shall be, and operate as an economic development and industrial corporation within the meaning and requirements of chapter 121C of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121C]. In all such capacities the board shall operate as in conformity with the restrictions contained in these chapters. The board shall be an industrial development financing authority within the meaning of chapter 40D of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 40D]. 
    The powers, duties, and functions reserved to the city are as follows: 
(a)  To have, with respect to the board, all of the powers and liabilities of a municipality with respect to an authority under chapter 121B of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121B]; 
(b)  To enter into agreements with the state and/or federal government upon recommendation of the executive director of planning and development and approval of the city council relative to the acceptance or borrowing of funds for any project it determines to undertake and containing such covenants, terms, and conditions as it may deem desirable; provided, however, that nothing shall be construed to require approval by the city council or the appropriate state and/or federal agency of requisition agreements and similar contracts between an agency and the state and/or federal government which are entered into pursuant to an agreement approved by them; and 
(c)  To enter into, execute, and carry out contracts and all other instruments necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers granted by this act. 
    The city, or the board acting pursuant to chapters 121A, 121B and 121C of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121A, M.G.L. c. 121B and M.G.L. c. 121C], may obligate itself in any contract with the state and/or federal government for a loan or the payment of annual contributions authorized by General Law or this section, [and] to convey to the state and/or federal government the project to which such contract relates upon the occurrence of a substantial default with respect to the covenants, terms and conditions of such contract to which the city or the board is subject. Such contract may further provide that, in case of such conveyance, the state and/or federal government may complete, operate, manage, lease, convey, or otherwise deal with the project in accordance with the terms of such contract, provided that the contract shall require that, as soon as practicable, after the state and/or federal government is satisfied that all the defaults on account of which it acquired the project have been remedied, and that the project will thereafter be operated in compliance with the terms of the contract, the state and/or federal government shall reconvey to the city or the board the project in the condition in which it then exists. The obligation of the city or the board under such contract shall be subject to specific enforcement by any court having jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be severable, and if any such provision or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not be construed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any of the remaining provisions of this section or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent that this section would have been adopted had such invalid or unconstitutional provisions not been included therein. 
    The economic development board is an advisory, ministerial and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
7.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board interacts with the city council primarily through the city council committee which addresses matters concerning planning and development policy on those matters concerning economic development activities within the city. 
    City manager. The board interacts with the city manager for the purpose of seeking review and approval for bond approvals made on behalf of the city by the board. Administrative and technical support is provided through the planning and development department. Technical support may also be provided by the public works department, the department of municipal inspections, and the licensing and consumer affairs division. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. The economic development board interacts with the planning board, the traffic and parking commission, the conservation commission, the zoning board of appeals, and the board of health in the furtherance of its responsibilities. 
    Other agencies. The economic development board interacts with relevant federal and state agencies, including the U.S. Economic Development Administration, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the state executive office of communities and development, and the executive office of economic affairs. 
Sec. 8.00. - Elder affairs, council of. 
8.01  Established. There shall be a council of elder affairs, consisting of 11 members of which at least 60 percent of the membership shall be over the age of 60. 
( Admin. Order of 1-14-16 ) 
8.02  Authorities and responsibilities. The council of elder affairs coordinates and implements programs designed to meet the needs of the aging. The council of elder affairs surveys the elderly population to better determine their needs, problems and concerns. The council develops criteria for program and supportive services development based upon an assessment of needs and participates in programs offered by the commonwealth's department of elder affairs. The council of elder affairs is an advisory multiple-member body of the city. 
8.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The council of elder affairs interacts with the city council in the matter of developing policies and legislation concerning issues and needs facing the elderly within the city. The council of elder affairs interacts primarily with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning health and human services policy, in order to regularly apprise said committee on current activities and concerns of the council of elder affairs [sic]. 
    City manager. The council of elder affairs interacts with the city manager and the administrative organization primarily through the elder affairs division within the health and human services department, which provides administrative staff support to the council of elder affairs. The council of elder affairs provides advisory information to the elder services division concerning program and supportive service delivery. Council information on the provisions of the elections laws. 
Sec. 9.00. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10.00. - Health, board of. 
10.01  Established. There shall be a board of health consisting of five members, one of whom shall be a physician. 
(Amended 1-31-2002) 
10.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The board of health preserves and maintains the city's public health standards and protects its environmental resources through community education, and by promulgating reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to those matters placed under its jurisdiction by this administrative code, which shall include the communicable diseases, the sanitary code, the environmental code, food purity and quality, housing quality, solid waste, establishments possessing, processing, operating, or dealing in hazardous and/or toxic waste, solid waste haulers, septage haulers, noisome trades, fuel and chemical storage systems, dilapidated structures and lead paint, and all other areas of environmental quality. The board of health provides for appeals and variances as allowed for under state law, the state sanitary code, the state environmental code and the various state codes and city ordinances concerning food purity and quality, housing quality, solid waste disposal and dumpsters, and other areas of environmental quality. The board of health shall be responsible for site assignment for cemeteries, sanitary landfills, refuse treatment and disposal facilities, hazardous waste facilities, transfer stations, other solid waste handling facilities, and trades dangerous to public health. The director of the division of health serves as the secretary of the board, but has no vote. The board takes evidence in appeals, considers plans required by law, holds hearings and issues findings relative to these matters, but has no administrative or executive functions. The director of the division of health exercises the administrative and executive functions of the board, in cases of emergency, concerning the public health as allowed by law. The board may delegate the holding of hearings to the director of the division of health services, or the director of municipal inspections. The board establishes policies and programs for implementation by the division of health. 
    The board of health is an advisory and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
10.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board of health interacts primarily with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning health and human services to discuss public health policies and legislation. 
    City manager. The board of health interacts with the city manager and the administrative organization primarily through the health division of the health and human services department, which provides administrative staff support to the board of health, for the purpose of ensuring the implementation of the board's rules, regulations, and decisions. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. As necessary, the board of health interacts with other multiple-member bodies within the city on issues of concern to the public health, including the planning board, conservation commission, the economic development board, the zoning board of appeals and the licensing commission. 
Sec. 11.00. - Human rights commission. 
11.01  Established. 
    There shall be a human rights commission consisting of seven members. The commissioners shall, as far as it is practicable, be selected so as to ensure representation from those classes protected under state and federal law, including but not limited to, race, color, religious creed, national origin, sex, age, disability, veteran status, ancestry, sexual orientation, or public benefit status. 
    There shall be an executive director of the commission, who shall be so designated, and who shall coordinate and supervise the administrative duties of the commission, as directed by the commission. 
11.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The human rights commission has the authority to initiate and conduct hearings, and conduct investigations into the existence of unlawful discrimination or denial of equal access to housing, employment, education, public accommodations, services and facilities affecting any group or individual on the basis of their race, color, religious creed, national origin, disability, veteran's status, ancestry, sexual orientation, or public benefits status. It may attempt to resolve disputes through the use of mediation, and may report to the city manager on any matters which cannot be resolved through mediation. The commission has the authority to refer matters to the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination for enforcement. The commission does not hear complaints alleging discrimination on the part of any city agency or official. 
    Any contract entered into by the city or the Chelsea School Committee or any of their agencies, departments, or subdivisions shall contain a covenant by the contractor and subcontractors thereof not to discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, veteran status, ancestry, sexual orientation, or public benefit status. Breach of this covenant shall be considered a material breach of the contract, but shall not impair the obligation of any presently existing city or school department contracts. 
11.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The human rights commission reports annually to the city council on its investigation, hearing and enforcement activities with respect to discrimination affecting Chelsea residents. 
    City manager. The commission informs the city manager issues pertaining to discrimination against Chelsea residents, and reports to the city manager regarding any matters with the its jurisdiction which could not be resolved through mediation. 
    Other departments and multiple-member bodies. The commission may obtain and utilize the services of all city departments and agencies, in particular the procurement department, in order to effectuate the policy of the city to combat discrimination against protected groups. 
Sec. 12.00. - Board of trustees of the library. 
    The board of trustees provided advice, and shall be available for consultation, in the management of the public library and all property of the city under the care and custody of the public library. The board of trustees represents to the city the interests of the public library. The board of trustees establishes a written policy for the selection of library materials and the use of materials and facilities in accordance with the standards adopted by the American Library Association. 
12.01  Established. There shall be a board of trustees of the library consisting of seven members. 
12.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The board of trustees of the library manages the library and all property of the city relating to the library. The board of trustees represents to the city, the interests, issues, and concerns of the library. The board of trustees establishes a written policy for the selection of library materials and the use of materials and facilities in accordance with the standards adopted by the American Library Association. 
    The board of trustees is an advisory multiple-member body of the city. 
12.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board of trustees meets annually with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning health and human services policy for the accomplishment of the purposes described herein. 
    City manager. The board of trustees interacts with the city manager and the administrative organization primarily through the library division within the health and human services department, which provides administrative staff support to the board of trustees. 
Sec. 13.00. - Licensing commission. 
13.01  Established. There shall be a licensing commission consisting of five members, one of whom shall be the director of the municipal inspections department, and four residents. A resident member serves as chair. The city clerk, or designee, shall serve as the executive secretary to the licensing commission. The members shall not be engaged, directly or indirectly, in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages. If any member of said commission engages directly or indirectly in such manufacture or sale, the member's office shall immediately become vacant. 
(Amended 12-12-2002) 
13.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The licensing commission acts as the licensing authority for the city with all power to grant, suspend, or revoke licenses and permits for intoxicating liquors, and all licenses and permits now or hereafter vested by the General Laws in the mayors and city councils of cities of the commonwealth, including all licenses and permits not placed within the jurisdiction of another municipal department, agency, officer or employee by the Charter, ordinances, or [the] this Code. 
    The licensing commission is an advisory and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
13.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The licensing commission annually reports to the city council on the commission's licensing and regulatory activities. 
    City manager. The licensing commission interacts with the city manager primarily through the city clerk, who provides administrative staff support to the licensing commission. The licensing commission receives technical support from the planning and development department and the department of municipal inspections. The licensing commission interacts with the police department, which attends its meetings and performs investigations requested by the licensing commission. 
    Other boards. The licensing commission interacts with the planning board, the economic development board, the zoning board of appeals, the conservation commission, the traffic and parking commission, and the board of health, in the furtherance of its responsibilities. 
Sec. 14.00. - Planning board. 
14.01  Established. There shall be a planning board consisting of nine members established pursuant to chapter 41, section 81A of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 41, § 81A]. 
14.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The planning board coordinates the development of the city's vision, policies, goals and objectives for the physical, environmental, economic and social growth and development of the community. The board provides advice for the incorporation of the vision, policies, goals and objectives into a comprehensive plan and reviews planning and development proposals for conformance with that plan. The planning board continuously develops and revises the comprehensive plan for the physical, environmental and social needs of the city, and its constituent functional plans for housing, transportation, parks and open space, historic preservation, and geographic plans for the city's neighborhoods and retail business districts. The planning board assists in the development and review of the city's capital improvements program. It reviews and approves the subdivision plan for the city. The planning board is the agency assigned to review and provide comments on environmental impact reports. 
    The planning board also acts as the historical commission for the city, with its authorities and responsibilities to preserve, protect and develop the historical assets of the city. To meet this responsibility it may conduct research on places of historic value, and cooperate with the state historic preservation officer in conducting such research. It may also make recommendations to the city council, and subject to the approval of the council, to the Massachusetts Historical Commission, that certain places be certified as historical landmarks. 
    The planning board is an advisory and regulatory multiple-member body of the city. 
14.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The planning board interacts with the city council, primarily through the city council committee which addresses matters concerning planning and development policy, concerning items related to land use planning and development, making recommendations to amend the zoning ordinance, and historic preservation. 
    City manager. The planning board interacts with the city manager primarily through the planning and development department, receiving administrative, technical and clerical assistance staff support. It advises the city manager on land use and development policy. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. The planning board interacts with the zoning board of appeals by providing recommendations on special permit applications and special permits for planned development, [and with the] conservation commission, economic development board, licensing commission, traffic and parking commission, and board of health in furtherance of its responsibilities. The planning board may render recommendations of applications for chapter 91, licensing. 
Secs. 14.04-14.09. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14.10. - Registrars of voters, board of. 
14.11  Establishment. There shall be [a] board of registrars of voters consisting of the city clerk and three residents appointed so that the members, as nearly as possible, represent the two leading political parties. In no case will an appointment be made as to cause the board to have more than two members, including the city clerk, of the same political party. 
14.12  Authorities and responsibilities. The board of registrars has exclusive authority to carry out the duties and responsibilities assigned to it by the laws of the commonwealth. Registrars of voters shall hold such day and evening sessions for the registration of voters as are prescribed by law, and such other sessions as they deem necessary. Registrars, at such times and places as are appropriate, may receive affidavits of registration and applications to qualify for voting for electors of president and vice-president. The registrars shall, in accordance with the law, prepare an annual register containing the names of all qualified voters for the current year, by district, and seasonably furnish the same to election officers. Upon personal application of a person listed or omitted from such registrar for the correction of any error, the registrars shall investigate and correct the list. Upon submission of a properly filed petition for recount, the board of registrars shall hold a recount as required by law. The board of registrars of voters is a ministerial and regulatory board of the city. 
14.13  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board of registrars of voters interacts with the city council on those matters which concern the city council, to the extent the board of the board [of] registrars may legally do so. 
Sec. 15.00. - Traffic and parking commission. 
15.01  Established. There shall be a traffic and parking commission consisting of five members; one of whom shall be the chief of police who shall serve as chair; one of whom shall be the fire chief; one of whom shall be the director of public works; one of whom shall be the director of planning and development, or their designees, and one resident. 
15.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The traffic and parking commission has the exclusive authority, subject to approval of the city council, to adopt, amend, alter and repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with General Laws, relative to vehicular traffic in the city, and to the movement, stopping or standing of vehicles on, and their exclusion from, all or any streets, ways, highways, roads, and parkways under the control of the city, including rules and regulations, designing any way or part thereof as a throughway under and subject to the provisions of section 9 of chapter 89 of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 89, § 9], and may prescribe penalties for violation of any rule or regulation adopted. 
    The traffic and parking commission is an advisory and regulatory board of the city. 
(Amended 12-12-2002) 
15.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The traffic and parking commission interacts with the city council committee which addresses matters concerning public safety policy, to apprise that committee on the commission's activities and concerns. 
    City manager. The traffic and parking commission interacts with the city manager, primarily through the office of the city clerk, which provides administrative staff support to the commission. The commission received technical support from the planning and development department, the department of public works, the department of municipal inspections, and the police and fire departments. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. The traffic and parking commission interacts with the planning board, the zoning board of appeals, the economic development board, the licensing commission, and the conservation commission in order to accomplish the commission's responsibilities. 
Sec. 16.00. - Youth commission. 
16.01  Established. There shall be a youth commission consisting of 11 members. The composition of the youth commission shall be exclusively comprised of Chelsea youth between the ages of 13-20 who are enrolled in a public, private or charter high school. The members shall be appointed by the city manager after a solicitation of interest advertised by the city manager in a manner the city manager deems appropriate. 
16.02  Term and eligibility. 
    The youth commission is an advisory multiple-member body of the city, pursuant to section 9.5 of the city Charter. Notwithstanding section 9.5, the city manager shall make an annual appointment of commission members for a term of one year. To fulfill this section, the city manager shall recommend to the city council for its approval at its first meeting in February the youth commission appointees. Should any member resign or otherwise fail to serve, the city manager shall make an additional recommendation for approval to the city council so that commission maintains a membership of 11. 
    Youth commission appointees must be at least age 13 and no older than age 20 by December 1, of the calendar year of appointment. 
16.03  Authority and responsibilities. The youth commission advises and assists the city council, the school committee and the city manager in the development of policies, programs and delivery of services for the health and welfare of youth and their families. The commission regularly assesses the needs of youth as individuals and community members, in order to advocate for, coordinate and/or develop policies and programs to address these needs. The commission will provide community outreach to promote civic engagement and participation. The commission further advises and otherwise assists the city manager, the president of the city council and the chair of the school committee on utilization of all federal, state and municipal programs and services available to youth, and provides education and referral resources to all members of the community. At least annually, the youth commission, with the support of the city manager, city council, school committee and student representative of the school committee, shall organize a public meeting, in a manner so directed by the commission, to solicit the input of youth and other interested parties as to the status of youth in the community and to aid the commission in establishing goals for enhancing the health, welfare, education, recreation and empowerment of youth, as broadly defined as the commission shall see fit to adopt. The youth commission shall file with the city manager an annual report of its activities by January 31. 
16.04  Staffing and staff responsibilities. Unless otherwise directed by the city manager, the youth commission shall be staffed by an employee of the city's health and human services department. That staff will provide administrative support to the youth commission, including meeting notices, meeting room coordination, and minute keeping, and other administrative support as deemed necessary and appropriate by the director of the health and human services department. 
16.05  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The youth commission interacts with the city council subcommittee which addresses issues concerning health and human services policy relative to the establishment of policies and legislation concerning youth and family service programming within the city. 
    City manager. The youth commission interacts with the city manager primarily through the recreation and cultural affairs division of the health and humans services department, unless otherwise directed by the city manager, with that department providing administrative staff support to the youth commission, and through the police and school departments to ensure that the development and delivery of youth and family services are effective and responsive. 
    Other multiple-member bodies. As necessary, the youth commission interacts and meets with the school committee, the board of health, the cultural council and the council on elder affairs, or another board that may be appropriate and/or necessary, in pursuit of its mission. 
(Amended 11-20-2008; Amended 12-5-2016 ) 
Sec. 17.00. - Community schools advisory board. 
17.01  Established. There shall be a community schools advisory board consisting of nine members. 
17.02  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The community schools advisory board advises the director of community schools on matters relating to the administration, operation, and further development of the Chelsea community schools program. 
    The community schools advisory board is an advisory multiple member body of the city. 
17.03  Interrelationships. 
    Other agencies. The community schools advisory board interacts with the department of health and human services, through the director of community schools and user agencies of the community schools program for purposes of providing advice and recommendations on matter[s] relating to the administration, operation and further development of the Chelsea community schools program. 
Sec. 18.00. - Chelsea Affordable Housing Trust Fund Board. 
18.01  Established. There shall be an affordable housing trust fund board under the administrative control of the city manager or designees, hereinafter called [the] "board," which shall consist of seven trustees, including the city manager or designee, all others to be appointed by the city manager. The board shall serve as the municipal affordable housing trust fund organized under chapter 44, section 55C of the Massachusetts General Laws [M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C]. 
18.01(a)  The board shall be comprised of seven members, four of whom are residents of the City of Chelsea. There shall be at all times appointed to the board an individual with financial/lending experience and an individual with experience in housing development. Trustees shall be appointed for a two-year term. 
    The board oversees the City of Chelsea's Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The board advises and assists in the creation of a new affordable housing and the preservation, rehabilitation and maintenance of existing affordable housing in the City of Chelsea. The board is authorized to receive and accept contributions to the trust fund. The board ensures the monies in the trust fund are used appropriately. 
18.02(a)  Powers, duties and functions of the board are as follows: 
(1)  To accept and receive property, whether real or personal, by gift, grant, devise, or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public or private entity, including without limitation grants of funds or other property tendered to the trust in connection with provisions of any zoning ordinance or bylaw or any other ordinance or bylaw; 
(2)  To purchase and retain real or personal property, including without restriction investments that yield a high rate of income or no income; 
(3)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property at public auction or by private contract for such consideration and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make such contracts and enter into such undertaking relative to trust property as the board deems advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or contract; 
(4)  To execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases, loans, covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed, necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the board engages for the accomplishment of the purposes of the trust; 
(5)  To employ advisors and agents, such as accountants, appraisers and lawyers as the board deems necessary; 
(6)  To pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to apportion such compensation between income and principal as the board deems advisable; 
(7)  To apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as the board deems advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to create reserves for depreciation depletion or otherwise; 
(8)  To participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger or similar transactions; and to give proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution to vote any securities or certificates of interest; and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation or person; 
(9)  To deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee, and to delegate to such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the board may deem proper and to pay, out of trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of such committee as the board may deem necessary and appropriate; 
(10)  To carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values; 
(11)  To borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the board deems advisable, to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral; 
(12)  To make distributions or divisions of principal in kind; 
(13)  To comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in favor or against the trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the provisions of this act, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the board may deem appropriate; 
(14)  To manage or improve real property; and to abandon any property which the board determines not to be worth retaining; 
(15)  To hold all or part of the trust property uninvested for such purposes and for such time as the board may deem appropriate; and 
(16)  To extend the time for payment of any obligation to the trust. 
18.02  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board interacts with the city council primarily through the city manager and the city council's subcommittee on community development and housing. 
    City manager. Administrative and technical support is provided through the planning and development department, finance department and the department of inspectional services. 
    Multimember bodies. The board in the furtherance of its stated purpose interacts with the planning board, zoning board of appeals, conservation commission and the board of health. 
(Amended 6-16-2003) 
Sec. 19.00. - Chelsea Tree Board. 
19.01  Established. There shall be a tree board under the administrative control of the city manager or designee, hereinafter called [the] "board" which shall consist of five members, including the city manager or designee, all other to be appointed by the city manager. The board shall serve in an advisory role to the city administration as to the management of public shade trees. 
19:01(a)  The board shall be comprised of five members, four of whom are residents of the City of Chelsea. 
19.02  The board shall advise and assist the city's management of all public shade trees as described in Mass. Gen. Laws c. 87 [M.G.L. c. 87]; and more specifically described as those trees within the public rights-of-way and adjacent to public buildings and commons. The board shall establish rules ad regulations as to the care and control of all trees within the control of the city. 
19.02(a)  Powers, duties and functions of the board are as follows: 
(1)  To develop rules, regulations, tree inventory, manuals and other data, in conjunction with the city administration, to carry out the purposes and content of city ordinances; 
(2)  To work with and advise city administration to seek grants or other assistance concerning the preservation and maintenance of trees; and 
(3)  To hold public hearings in order to advise the city as to the removal, replacement, repair and planting of public shade trees. 
19.03  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The board interacts with the city council primarily through the city manager. 
    City manger. Administrative and technical support is provided thorough the department of public works and the department of planning and development. 
    Multimember bodies. The board in furtherance of its stated purpose interacts with the planning board and the conservation commission. 
(Amended 8-24-2006) 
Sec. 20.00. - Permitting authority for excavation and trench safety. 
20.01  Pursuant to Mass. General Laws c. 82A [M.G.L. c. 82A], the director of public works and/or designee is designated as the permitting authority or officer to issue permits for the purpose of creating a trench as that term is defined by M.G.L. c. 82A § 4 and 520 CMR 14.00. 
20.02  The permitting authority is responsible for the issuance of required trench permits and the collections of permit fees. 
20.03  The department of public works, inspectional services, fire department and police department are all responsible for the enforcement of that which is required in the commonwealth's regulations. 
PART III. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 1.00. - Offices and standards. 
1.01  Generally. All departments of the city are under the jurisdiction of the city manager and are described in this part of the administrative code. The description of departments delineates the mission and functions of each department, their authorities and responsibilities, and the interrelationships among and between the departments, the multiple-member bodies, and the elective organizations. 
1.02  Administration and finance division and the operations division. The departments of the city, except the police, fire and law departments, are organized under the executive department's administration and finance and operations divisions. The administration and finance division consists of the assessing department, the auditing department, the office of the city clerk, the information systems department, the personnel department, the procurement department and the treasury/collecting department. The operations division consists of the emergency management department, the health and human services department, the department of municipal inspections, the planning and development department, and the department of public works. 
1.03  Coordination of operations. 
    The city manager coordinates administration and finance, operations and public safety activities by meeting regularly to discuss division activity, seeking coordination of activities to mitigate duplication of services where possible. The city manager develops action programs, evaluates program completion, and reviews management, financial, personnel, and legal issues. Significant attention is paid towards coordination of work programs, so as to ensure minimal work disruption and efficient service delivery. 
    Department managers are accountable to the city manager, through such subordinate executive department employees as may be authorized for the achievement of department activities. 
    The delivery of services to the public requires coordination and cooperation among the various divisions, departments and programs within the city. Departmental managers within the administration and finance division, the operations division, the police department, the fire department and the law department identify those areas of concern where the various departments and divisions can assist each other in the accomplishment of their mission. 
1.04  Multiple-member body coordination. 
    It is an administrative obligation for the departmental liaison to a multiple-member body to regularly and accurately represent to management multiple-member body activities, policies and decisions, so as to ensure efficient implementation of said board activities. 
    It is further an administrative obligation to assist multiple-member bodies in the pursuit of their missions and responsibilities. Administrative personnel ensure that multiple-member bodies receive objective, timely, professional and accurate information upon request, in order to better assist multiple-member bodies in their activities. 
    The city manager ensures proper staff support to multiple-member bodies. The city manager may discuss with the chair of any multiple-member body the level and quality of administrative support provided upon the multiple-member body chair's request. Multiple-member body chairs are encouraged to communicate with the city manager, as necessary, in this and other matters. 
1.05  Elective organization coordination. 
    City departments provide professional support to the elective organization of the city primarily through the city manager and the school superintendent. 
    Coordination of reports to the city council occurs through the city manager. All departments under the jurisdiction of the city manager ensure that the city council receives objective, timely, professional and accurate information upon request, in order to better assist the city council in its legislative and policy decision making process. 
    In order to ensure that the coordination of reports to the city council is effective, the city manager assumes responsibility for the information transmittal. The procedure for transmittal of reports from a department to the city council is for information to route through the city manager. The procedure for transmittal of report or service requests from the city council to a department is for such requests to route through the city manager. 
    Coordination of report or service requests involving the school committee and school superintendent from any municipal department or agency is similarly transmitted through the city manager. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed to deny to members of the city council direct access to information that is readily available and provided by departments to citizens in the pursuit of their civic responsibilities or private business, nor shall staff members be discouraged from providing such information through formal or informal means. 
1.06  Annual reports. All departments shall prepare annual reports of their activities and submit same to the city manager, on or before the fourth Friday in September. The annual report shall describe fiscal year activities for the year ending each June 30th. Where required by state and/or federal regulations, certain departments may be required to submit copies of their annual reports to appropriate state and/or federal agencies. The city manager shall provide for a standard reporting format. 
A. - EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2.00. - City manager. 
    The administration of all city fiscal, business and municipal affairs are vested in the executive branch headed by the city manager. The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city and is the primary officer responsible for the implementation of city council policy, as reflected by the city council's votes and resolutions, enactment of ordinances, appropriation orders and loan authorizations. 
2.01  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The city manager appoints all department heads, officers, and employees, except employees of the city council and the school department. All multiple-member body appointments made by the city manager are subject to rejection by the city council. The city manager consults with multiple-member bodies as appropriate, concerning the appointments of certain department managers. 
    Consistent with the Charter, the powers, duties and responsibilities of the city manager include, but are not intended to be limited to, the following: 
    To supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all officers and employees appointed by the city manager and their respective departments and of all functions for which the city manager is given responsibility under the Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the city council; 
    To administer, either directly or through a person or persons supervised by the city manager, in accordance with the Charter, all provisions of general or special laws applicable to the city, all ordinances, and all regulations established by the city council; 
    To coordinate all activities of city departments or agencies; 
    To attend all regular and special meetings of the city council, unless excused, and to answer all questions addressed to the city manager which are related to matters under the general supervision of the city manager; 
    To keep the city council fully informed as to the needs of the city, and to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures requiring action by them as the city manager deems necessary or expedient; 
    To ensure that complete and full records of the financial and administrative activity of the city are maintained and to render reports to the city council as may be required; 
    To be responsible for the rental, use, maintenance and repair of all city facilities, except those under the jurisdiction of the school committee. Rental agreements of more than five years in duration shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
    To act as the chief procurement officer and be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, materials, and equipment. The city manager may delegate this function to some other officer or employee as deemed necessary; 
    To develop and maintain a full and complete inventory of all city owned real and personal property; 
    To administer personnel policies, practices, or rules and regulations, any compensation plan and any related matters for all city employees and to administer all collective bargaining agreements, except for school department agreements, entered into by the city; 
    To fix the compensation of all city employees and officers appointed by the city manager within the limits established by appropriation and any applicable compensation plan or collective bargaining agreement; 
    To be responsible for the negotiation of all collective bargaining agreements with city employees over wages, and other terms and conditions of employment. The city manager may employ special counsel to assist in the performance of these duties. Cost items of collective bargaining agreements shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
    To be responsible for the implementation and administration of the code of ethics for city officers and employees appointed by the city manager including the holding of disciplinary proceedings or removal, or to take other appropriate action involving any appointed official and to take any disciplinary action as provided for by article II of chapter 1 [now division 2 of article III of chapter 2] of the ordinances of the City of Chelsea; 
    To prepare and submit an annual operating budget, a capital improvements program and a long-term financial forecast as provided for in the Charter; 
    To keep the city council fully informed as to the financial condition of the city and to make recommendations to the city council as the city manager determines necessary or expedient; 
    To inquire into the affairs of any city department, agency or office; 
    To delegate, authorize or direct any employee of the city to exercise any power, duty or responsibility which the office of city manager is authorized to exercise; provided, that all acts that are performed under such delegation shall be considered to be the acts of the city manager; 
    To perform such other duties as necessary or as may be assigned by the Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the city council. 
2.02  Interrelationships. The city manager interacts with the city council on all matters noted above, and, as the chief administrative officer of the city, interacts as necessary with all other agencies, multiple-member bodies, and officers of the city. Detailed interaction descriptions specific to either the elective, multiple-member appointive or administrative organization are contained in this section of the administrative code. 
Sec. 3.00. - Law department. 
3.01  Established. There shall be a law department under the supervision of a city solicitor. 
3.02  Mission. The law department provides accurate, timely legal advice to all elected and appointed officials, multiple-member bodies and agencies of the city, so as to assure that municipal decisions are informed by appropriate legal authority, and the legal interests of the city are protected. In addition, the law department provides legal representation for the city in judicial and administrative proceedings involving the city, its officers, and agencies. 
3.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The city solicitor serves as legal counsel to the city council, school committee, city manager, and to all departments, agencies, and multiple-member bodies of the city. The city solicitor examines all titles to property purchased by the city [and] drafts such bonds, deeds, contracts and other legal instruments of whatever nature, as may be required by Charter, ordinance or this administrative code for the orderly administration of the affairs of the city. The city solicitor regularly attends meetings of the city council, and at the request of the president of the city council, advises the city council on questions of law relating to the subject matters before the city council and on the legality of any votes, motions or other actions proposed to be taken by the city council. The city solicitor provides legal advice and renders written opinions to the city manager, and all elected or appointed city officers, departments and multiple-member bodies on matters pertaining to the functions of their respective offices, or on questions of law relating to matters within their authority, including the application of the city's code of ethics to the performance of their duties of office. 
    The city solicitor prosecutes all legal actions brought on behalf of the city or any officer or agency; defends all actions brought against the city or any officer or agency in any court or other tribunal; and appears as legal counsel for the city in any other actions, which may involve the rights and interests of the city or any officer or agency thereof. The city solicitor advises the city manager on the advisability of compromising or settling claims or suits brought against the city. The city solicitor may settle such claims or suits, if in the city solicitor's opinion they can be settled advantageously to the interests of the city. In the case of legal claims for damages proposed to be settled in an amount in excess of $5,000.00, approval by the city manager shall be required. In the case of legal claims for damages proposed to be settled in an amount in excess of $10,000.00, approval by the city council shall be required. 
    In order to provide for the varied legal needs of the city, the duties and responsibilities of the city solicitor may, with the approval of the city manager, be performed by assistants and outside counsel, acting under the city solicitor's supervision and direction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate the authority of the school committee to employ legal counsel, as provided under the General Laws of the commonwealth or the city council or the city manager, as provided under the Charter. 
3.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The city solicitor interacts with the city council by attending city council meetings and advising the city council on questions of law relating to any matter before the city council, on the form of proposed votes or motions to be taken, the legality of proposed resolves or ordinances, or the legality of any other action proposed to be taken by the city council. 
    City manager. The city solicitor interacts with the city manager to assist the city manager in pursuing the city manager's responsibilities, as set out in the Charter, ordinances, and votes of the city council and serves further [to] advise the city manager on all matters of law related to the specific functions of city administration. 
    Other departments and multiple-member bodies. The city solicitor interacts with all elected and appointed officials, departments and multiple-member bodies, so as to meet the responsibilities set forth in this section. Elected and appointed officials, the city manager, departments, and multiple-member bodies are to consult on an ongoing basis and cooperate with the city solicitor to enable the city manager to assure the protection of the legal interests of the city. 
B. - ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE DIVISION 
    The administration and finance division within the executive department assists the city manager with the coordination and administration of the activities of the assessing, auditing, office of the city clerk, information systems, personnel, procurement, and treasury/collecting departments. The administration and finance division is responsible for ensuring that financial and internal support is provided to all departments, providing the general public with departmental information, and improving accessibility to local government and its services. 

Sec. 4.00. - Assessing department. 
4.01  Established. There shall be an assessing department under the supervision of the board of assessors. 
4.02  Mission. The assessing department provides for the city's fiscal stability by assuring that the personal and real property in the city, which serve as its tax base, are promptly, fairly and equitably evaluated and classified. The department also carries out its duties in a manner that assures that taxpayers are fairly and equitably treated. 
4.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The assessing department creates and maintains an accurate list of all properties for ownership identification and for tax billing purposes. The department appraises each account or parcel of taxable property within the city at its market value, so as to ensure an equitable distribution of the total tax burden within the city, and conducts a city-wide revaluation on a regular basis. The department also provides for the classification of real property as determined by the city council. The department administers motor vehicle excise tax, [and] acts on statutory exemptions and grievances regarding property values. 
4.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The assessing department interacts with the city council pursuant to the requirements of chapter 40, section 56 of the General Laws [M.G.L. C. 40, § 56] with regard to property tax classification by providing administrative information and recommendations to the board of assessors, which makes recommendations to the city council. 
    City manager. Interaction occurs on a regular basis in order to accomplish those areas of responsibilities noted. 
    Other departments. Interaction [occurs] with the departments of information systems, public works, and planning and development, and other financial departments for purposes related to providing and receiving support on a variety of administrative matters. 
Sec. 5.00. - Auditing department. 
5.01  Established. There shall be an auditing department under the supervision of a city auditor. 
5.02  Mission. The auditing department protects the fiscal interests of the city by assuring that financial records are accurately maintained and preserved; supervising and controlling the expenditures of city funds; utilizing sound accounting procedures; and performing all other auditing and accounting functions required by sound fiscal practice, pursuant to the Charter, ordinances and the laws of the commonwealth. 
5.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The auditing department produces monthly financial reports of revenues and expenditures. The department examines the books and accounts of all city departments and agencies entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of funds, and all original bills and vouchers on which funds have been or may be paid from the city treasury. The city auditor verifies the cash balance of the city treasury by actual count of the cash and review of the bank reconciliations, and sets out in the auditor's annual report the facts so found. 
    The city auditor audits annually the accounts of the trustees of any property where the principal or income, in whole or in part, is bequeathed or given in trust for the benefit of the city, and examines and estimates the funds, securities, and property held by such trustees. 
    The department examines all bills, drafts, orders and payrolls, and, if found correct, draws a warrant upon the treasury for their payment. The department disallows or refuses to approve for payment any claim found to be fraudulent, unlawful or excessive. 
    The department maintains a complete set of books and all accounts are kept, so far as practicable, in conformity with the classifications and forms prescribed by law. The department has custody of all contracts of the city. 
    The city auditor provides information to the city manager for the development of the annual operating budget, the capital improvements program, and long-term financial forecasts. 
5.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The city auditor interacts with the city council by participating, if requested, in the selection of a certified public accountant(s) to perform the annual audit. The auditor shall make all information available for the completion of the annual audit. 
    City manager. The city auditor is responsible for management of the city's financial resources. All matters of a financial nature receive city auditor and city manager approval. The city auditor advises the city manager, through the administration and finance division, on all financial matters so as to ensure the proper and efficient financial management of the city. 
    Other departments. All departments and agencies authorized to collect revenues, or expend funds, interact with the city auditor for the purposes stated herein. As indicated, interrelationships occur throughout the city, where matters of payroll, or other budgetary activities take place. 
Section.6.00. - Office of the city clerk. 
6.01  Established. There shall be an office of the city clerk under the supervision of a city clerk. 
6.02  Mission. The office of the city clerk symbolizes the stability and continuity of the government of Chelsea and takes great care in preserving and maintaining the city's official records, and providing ready access to those records. The office of the city clerk exhibits the city's responsibility of providing efficient, courteous and responsive public services to all individuals requiring its assistance. The office of the city clerk is the primary agency responsible for the issuance of certificates, licenses, permits, and the enforcement of the open meeting law. 
6.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The city clerk is the keeper of vital statistics of the city and of ancient and public records. The city clerk records and preserves original birth certificates, marriage licenses, and death records. The city clerk is responsible for the maintenance, disposition, and preservation of city archival records. The city clerk is responsible for all aspects of elections in accordance with federal, state, and local laws. The city clerk provides administrative support to the licensing commission, the traffic and parking commission, the cable television advisory commission, the water and sewer abatement board, and the harbormaster. The city clerk serves as the parking clerk, and, if required, acts as hearing officer for all other noncriminal citations issued by city agencies. The city clerk is the executive secretary of the licensing commission. The city clerk is the issuing authority for all licenses, permits, and other decisions of those agencies, and such other licenses or permits as may be authorized by law, ordinance or regulation. The city clerk records all business-related filings, including state and federal tax liens, uniform commercial code filings, and business name registration. 
    The city clerk provides administrative assistance to all other multiple-member bodies for the city, including the city council. The city clerk posts meeting notices for agencies, boards, commissions, and the city council. The city clerk administers the oath of office to elected and appointed officials, and notifies the city manager 30 days prior to the expiration of an appointed official's term of office. The city clerk furnishes copies of the open meeting and conflict of interest laws to all elected and appointed officials. The city clerk is the custodian of the rules, regulations, records, reports, minutes, and decisions of all city officers, agencies, and multiple-member bodies, and those received for the commonwealth. The city clerk keeps the legislative record of the city council, notified the auditor and treasurer of city council authorizations of appropriateness and assessments. The city clerk received official notice of all claims against the city, and promptly transmits those notices to the city manager and the city attorney. Under the Zoning Act, the city clerk receives copies of all decisions, and notices of appeal. The city clerk is the custodian of the city seal. 
6.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The city clerk interacts with the staff of the city council to ensure that the record of official acts of the city council are accurately maintained in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk also administers the oath of office to city council members, and calls together councillors-elect in order to organize a newly elected city council. 
    City manager. The city clerk interacts with city manager by keeping the records of the city manager's official acts and appointments. 
    Other boards and departments. The city clerk cooperates with all other multiple-member bodies and departments by keeping original records, including rules, regulations, and meeting minutes, posting meeting notices, and providing copies of need municipal records in a timely and accurate manner. All multiple-member bodies cooperate by providing original documents for safekeeping by the city clerk in a timely fashion. 
Sec. 7.00. - Information systems department. 
7.01  Established. There shall be an information systems department under the supervision of a director of information systems. 
7.02  Mission. The management information systems department provides support and professional services to all city departments related to information systems, so as to assist those departments in better meeting their responsibilities under this code. The department works to facilitate the coordination, integration, standardization, centralization and automation of the city's information resources. 
7.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The department is responsible for several major functional areas: systems development and planning, systems modification and enhancement, operations, central services, and management and administration of the hardware and software for the geographic information system in cooperation with planning and development and public works. The department provides computer hardware acquisition and maintenance support, [and] software acquisition, development and enhancement to all departments. It further is responsible for computer supplies management, binding, printing, plotting and scanning services, as well as desktop publishing and data communications. The department is responsible for developing a program for computer training, and most significantly, for processing of all municipal software programs on the host computer system and the city's local area network(s). The department is the central depository for all electronic information and associated systems maintained and utilized by the city. 
7.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The department interacts on a regular basis through the administrative and finance division, for the purpose of ensuring adherence to information systems procedures and practices by all departments, development and maintenance of information systems planning, and procurement, and compliance by all departments with the information systems policies and procedures for management of information systems. 
    Other departments. There is ongoing interaction with all departments to ensure accomplishment of the department's goals and objectives. The department works with other departments on special projects, development of software and/or hardware enhancements as needed, and provides for consistency with management policy. There is regular and recurring interaction with all users of information systems technology so as to ensure the effective and efficient integration of information systems within the city. 
Sec. 8.00. - Personnel department. 
8.01  Established. There shall be a personnel department under the supervision of a personnel director. 
8.02  Mission. The personnel department establishes and maintains an equitable personnel system that promotes the efficiency and economy of government, the morale and well being of city employees, and equal employment opportunity for all employees and candidates for employment. The personnel department is guided by the following principles: recruiting, selecting, and developing employees on the basis of their abilities, knowledge, and skills; providing equitable compensation; training employees as needed to assure high quality performance in delivering quality services to the public; retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose performance does not adequately improve; assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, age, sex, creed, mobility limitations, or any other nonmerit factor, except where such factor is a bona fide occupational requirement, and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens; prohibiting discrimination against any person on the basis of such nonmerit factors; and assuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for any purpose other than those duties and responsibilities directly associated with their positions in city government. 
8.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The personnel department administers the classification and compensation plans, collective bargaining agreements and personnel policies. The department provides advice and assistance to the city manager and departmental managers on personnel matters, including position classification and compensation levels, employee relations, employee grievances and disciplinary action. The department develops and administers recruitment, pre-employment physical and psychological examinations and employment processing programs designed to attract the best-qualified person to positions in the city's workforce. It plans, develops, supervises, and conducts training, education, employee assistance and career information programs. The department develops, establishes, and coordinates uniform personnel practices and procedures, including centralized personnel records, standardization of forms and records, position descriptions and compensation standards. It furnishes information relative to civil service and provides assistance to departments relative to civil service matters. The department investigates, authenticates, processes and resolves workers' compensation and active and retired police officer and firefighter indemnification claims. The department develops, establishes, and coordinates affirmative action and equal employment opportunity programs designed to reflect the diversity of the city's population in the workforce, ensures the city's compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, designs and administers the group health and life insurance programs, and manages the unemployment insurance program. 
8.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The personnel department is the primary department for management of the city's human resources. All personnel policies, directives, rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager and all provisions of collective bargaining agreements are implemented and enforced by the personnel department for all departments under the city manager's jurisdiction. 
    Other departments. The personnel department interacts with all city departments in any matter concerning management of the city's employees for the purpose of observing and enforcing the city's human resources management system. 
Sec. 9.00. - Procurement department. 
9.01  Established. There shall be a procurement department under the supervision of a chief procurement officer. 
9.02  Mission. The procurement department helps to preserve and protect the fiscal resources of the city by ensuring that the process for procurement of goods and services will be conducted under procedures assuring fair competition and objective standards for selection of contractors, through the development of fair, impartial, and uniform bidding, contract development and awarding procedures. The procurement process serves to assure the purchase of quality goods and services at a fair and reasonable cost in quantities necessary to accomplish service delivery objectives. 
9.03  Authority and responsibilities. The procurement department, through the requisition process, approves purchase orders and encumbers funds. The department prepares and distributes bids, request for proposal, and requests for qualification and specifications. It makes awards, prepares contract documents for execution, and sees that contracts are reviewed and executed by the appropriate city officials. The chief procurement officer keeps a central file of all executed contracts and distributes fully executed contracts to the city clerk, city auditor and the vendor. The procurement department addresses questions involving the awarding or implementation of contracts. The procurement department also disposes of property in the manner prescribed by law. 
9.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The procurement department is responsible for the management of the city's contracting and procurement process. The chief procurement officer will interact with the city manager, through the administration and finance division, for all purposes herein stated and the city manager will execute all contracts. The chief procurement officer works with the executive department to maintain accurate, efficient and consistent procurement practices. 
    Other departments. All agencies and departments interact with the procurement department to contract for goods and services and expend funds. The department provides prompt service to all departments to assist in the requisition of goods and services and interacts with all agencies and departments on a continuing basis to update policies and procedures and provide training on the procurement process. 
Sec. 10.00. - Treasury/collecting department. 
10.01  Established. There shall be a treasury/collecting department under the supervision of the treasurer/collector. 
10.02  Mission. The treasury/collection department preserves, protects, and manages the fiscal resources of the city by receiving and taking charge of all money belonging to the city, assuring that the city's finds are properly expended under state and city fiscal procedures and properly accounted for. The treasury/collecting department is also responsible for assuring that the city borrowing or investment of city funds is conducted in a prudent manner which is most advantageous to the fiscal needs of the city. 
10.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The treasury/collecting department collects and enforces the collection of committed taxes. The department receives all money belonging to the city, and expends and accounts for it according to the order of the city or its authorized officers. The treasurer/collector is the negotiating officer for all municipal borrowing and arranges the terms of the borrowing. The treasurer/collector establishes and maintains an efficient cash management system reflecting the breakdown of all receipts, disbursements and cash balances. The treasurer/collector invests funds to ensure maximum yield on investments while maintaining adequate availability of cash. 
    The treasurer/collector maintains all tax title accounts, prepares all collector's deeds, conducts sales of land of low value, and prepares documents required to petition for foreclosure. The treasurer/collector is responsible for the closing and reconciliation of all books and accounts in the treasury/collecting department and for the preparation of related reports. The treasury/collecting department maintains all tax title accounts and maintains all deeds. The treasurer/collector is the custodian of the funds of the contributory retirement system. 
10.04  Interrelationships. 
    City council. The treasury/collecting department interacts with the city council with respect to municipal borrowing. 
    City manager. The treasury/collecting department interacts extensively with the city manager by providing the city manager with necessary information on the fiscal status of the city's receipts, expenditures, borrowing, and investments. 
    Other departments. The treasury/collecting department interacts with all other departments in order to meet its responsibilities set out above. The treasury/collecting department interacts with the assessing, auditing, and procurement departments in connection with the management of city funds, as well as the department of public works and the division of licensing and consumer affairs in connection with liens for water and sewer fees. 
C. - OPERATIONS DIVISION 
    The operations division within the executive department assists the city manager with the coordination and administration of the activities of the health and human services, municipal inspections, planning and development, and the public works departments. The operations division is responsible for establishing and maintaining direct service delivery systems to the residents of the city in the most efficient and economical means possible, providing the general public with departmental information, and improving accessibility to local government and its services. 

Sec. 11.00. - Health and human services department. 
11.01  Established. There shall be a health and human services department under the supervision of an executive director. There shall be the following divisions within the health and human services department: elder services, employment and training, health, public library, recreation and cultural affairs, and veterans' services. 
11.02  Mission. The health and human services department and the divisions included therein ensure that Chelsea residents, including linguistic and cultural minorities and members of the disability community, have access to programs and services of high quality which encourage self sufficiency, offer opportunities to develop their full potential, and celebrate the proud history of diversity, racial tolerance, and cultural harmony in the City of Chelsea. It combats potential threats to the overall health of the community and promotes the economic, physical and emotional well-being in Chelsea neighborhoods. To these ends the department seeks to collaborate with residents, other city departments, local, state and federal agencies in developing appropriate programs and services. 
11.03  Interrelationships. The health and human services department interacts with the planning and development department on those issues such as lead paint [hazard] prevention, jobs and economic development, recreation and open space, and community schools. The department interacts with the department of public works on issues of park maintenance; the police department on issues of safety in the parks and concerted efforts to prevent crime in the "weed and seed" target area. It interacts with other departments in order to bring an interdepartmental approach to issues affecting the health and human services of the residents of Chelsea. 
Sec. 11.00-A. - Elder affairs division. 
11.01-A  Established. There shall be an elder affairs division within the health and human services department. 
11.02-A  Mission. The elder affairs division identifies the total needs of the city's elderly population in order to design, promote and implement services to fill the needs of the city's elderly population and to coordinate present existing services in the city. It ensures that extensive outreach is made to linguistic minority elderly communities within Chelsea, as well as other difficult-to-reach elders, so as to ensure their equal access to elder services. 
11.03-A  Authorities and responsibilities. The division of elder affairs operates a senior center for the recreation and enjoyment of all elders within the city in coordination with the council of elder affairs. The division is responsible for outreach to elders in the community, in particular to hard-to-reach elders, including those with limited English-speaking abilities or with mobility impairments. The division will develop health, cultural and recreational programs and will manage the operations of the center. 
11.04-A  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The elder affairs division interacts with the city manager primarily through the operations division, for program approval, budget expenditures, and other matters. 
    Other departments. The elder affairs division interacts with the department of public works relative to facilities program preparation, maintenance, and improvement. It interacts with the public health department for cooperation in providing appropriate health services. Ongoing interaction with all other departments to ensure accomplishment of the department's goals and objectives. 
    Multiple-member bodies. The elder affairs division provides administrative support to the council of elder affairs and receives advisory information regarding program service delivery. 
Sec. 11.00-B. - Workforce development [division]. 
11.01-B  Established. There shall be a workforce development division with the health and human services department. 
11.02-B  Mission. The division of workforce development ensures the provision of a comprehensive employment and training system within the city available to all residents in need of these services. The goals of this system are to provide services, which will prepare residents for meaningful employment and assist them in achieving economic self-sufficiency. The division of workforce development coordinates efforts with providers of job training and development, and local area employers, so as to ensure that local and regional workforce development services of high quality are available to all residents in an adequate and appropriate manner. 
11.03-B  Authorities and responsibilities. The division will participate along with other employers and providers in the implementation of a comprehensive workforce development system for residents, supervises the provision of state and federal youth employment programs, develops and coordinates a comprehensive and unified internship program for high school students, and will monitor any job ordinances the city council may adopt. 
11.04-B  Interrelationships. The division of workforce development will interact with the planning and development department in order to provide local employers with a well-trained pool of employees from the city; [with] the division of recreation and cultural affairs in order to coordinate summer jobs for youth programs, involving the maintenance of municipal parks; and [with] the school department in the development of internships for high school students. 
Sec. 11.00-C. - Health division. 
11.01-C  Established. There shall be a health division within the department of health and human services under the supervision of a director of health who shall be the executive and administrative head of the board of health. 
11.02-C  Mission. The division of health promotes and protects the health and wellness of the people within Chelsea, and carries out the core functions of public health assessment, assurance, and policy as developed by the board of health. The division of health provides administrative support to the board of health and works with other divisions of the department of health and human services to bring an integrated and multi-faceted approach to issues of human services. 
11.03-C  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The health division administers and enforces rules and regulations of the board of health and enforces all state and local laws, regulations and standards relating to public health, as provided for in the administrative code. The division investigates and controls the causes of diseases affecting the public health, and provides for the detection, reporting, prevention and control of any diseases or health hazard, considered dangerous or important, or which may affect the public health. The division establishes and maintains reasonable health programs, consistent with General Laws, as necessary or desirable for the promotion or protection of the public health and the control of disease or necessary to ameliorate the risk factors associated with the causes of injury, sickness, death and disability within the City of Chelsea. The health division conducts periodic assessments in order to identify prevalent health needs and recurrent health problems of the community, and assures that health-related services offered by private, nonprofit and public organizations meet standards of quality and need. It assesses the availability of necessary or desirable health services. The division provides supervision and support to the animal control officer. The health division prepares, publishes and disseminates such information as may be necessary to inform and advise the public concerning the health and wellness of the population, specific hazards and risk factors that may adversely affect the health and wellness of the population, and specific activities that individuals and institutions can engage in to promote and protect the health and wellness of the population. 
    Specific areas of responsibility include, but are not limited to, the promulgation, enforcement and administration of reasonable rules and regulations and enforcement of laws concerning communicable diseases, immunization and vaccination of residents; investigations of all disease-related complaints; site assignment for cemeteries, sanitary landfills, refuse treatment and disposal facilities, hazardous waste facilities, transfer stations, other solid waste handling facilities, and trades dangerous to public health; burial permits; animal control and the school nursing program. 
11.04-C  Interrelationships. The health department interacts with the planning and development department on lead paint [hazard] prevention projects and site assignments and the school department in order to serve as an internship site for high school students interested in public health-related experience. The health division works closely with the police department on issues of animal control. 
( Ord. of 6-12-2015 ) 
Sec. 11.00-D. - Public library. 
11.01-D  Established. There shall be a public library division within the health and human services department. 
11.02-D  Mission. The Chelsea Public Library provides for access free of charge to the public to the print and other education media resources of the city. 
11.03-D  Authorities and responsibilities. The library provides for the free circulation of books and information technology and video tapes and for the maintenance of Chelsea memorabilia for the community and may receive and hold gifts, bequests and devices for its use. The library makes available public meeting space. 
11.04-D  Interrelationships. In addition to interacting with all the municipal departments of the city, including the school department, who may be in need of its services, the library also participates in a regional library consortium in order to increase the availability of library services. 
Sec. 11.00-E. - Recreation and cultural affairs division. 
11.01-E  Established. There shall be a recreation and cultural affairs division within the department of health and human services. 
11.02-E  Mission. The recreation and cultural affairs division creates, coordinates and/or implements a comprehensive recreational and cultural activities program for all residents which enhance the quality use of leisure time. 
11.03-E  Authorities and responsibilities. The division is responsible for the establishment, coordination and/or implementation of community sports programs for all boys and girls as well as adults and including working with the city's youth leagues; the supervision and coordination of a community schools program within the new public schools scheduled to be opened in 1996; the planning and coordination of cultural events including celebrations of the 4th of July, Memorial Day, December holidays, and any festivals or public events; collaboration with, and coordination of "weed and seed" and safe haven programs within the designated target area; and the supervision and coordination of programmatic activities within the municipal parks. 
11.04-E  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The recreation and cultural affairs division interacts with the city manager for the purpose of program approval, budgeting, expenditure, and grant assistance. 
    Other departments. Department of public works interaction on a regular basis to prepare, maintain, and improve facilities. The recreation and cultural affairs division and public works staff meet on a regular basis to review facilities management issues. Police department interaction in scheduling of recreation and cultural and public events programs, special details, patrols and coordination of recreational services with public safety concerns. The recreation and cultural affairs division meets periodically with the chief of police to review public safety and coordination issues. School department interaction concerns utilization of school gyms, fields, coordination of special needs activities with the school department's special needs division, and scheduling activities for athletic fields. 
    Multiple-member bodies. The recreation and cultural affairs division provides administrative support to the youth commission and the cultural council, implementing the policies of said multiple-member bodies through the promulgation of rules and regulations that are subject to approval by the city manager. 
Sec. 11.00-F. - Veterans' services. 
11.01-F  Established. There shall be a veterans' services division within the health and human services department. 
11.02-F  Mission. The veterans' services division provides assistance in obtaining benefits from federal, state, and local programs for veterans and their dependents, as well as aiding them financially for ordinary living expense and medical needs. 
11.03-F  Authorities and responsibilities. The veterans' services division provides aid and assistance to veterans and/or their dependents, secures appropriate benefits for this service group, [and] provides outreach, counseling, medical, employment, and other support services. 
11.04-F  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The veterans' services division interacts with the city manager who approves programs, and budgets. 
    Other departments. Interactions with auditing and treasury/collecting to provide the financial needs of veterans in an acceptable manner under law and in a timely fashion. Interaction with assessing to assist veterans with real estate tax abatements. 
Sec. 12.00. - Emergency management department. 
12.01  Established. There shall be an emergency management department under the supervision of an emergency management director. 
12.02  Mission. The department seeks to maximize survival of persons and preservation of property in the city in the event of a natural or man-made disaster by effective planning and by making use of all manpower, equipment, available shelter protection and other resources during an actual emergency. 
12.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The emergency management department provides planning, resources, communications and recovery services in support of emergencies in the city, adjacent communities, and the commonwealth. The department functions as the emergency preparedness department consistent with the chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950 and is responsible for coordinating and planning all disaster emergency functions and services within the city amongst all municipal and nonmunicipal agencies and departments. The department updates and exercises a plan of pre-emergency actions known as the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and the Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1980 title III plan; mitigates emergencies; assists in responses to hazardous materials incidents and administers cost recovery and other reimbursement programs. 
12.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. The department, in fulfilling its role, provides assistance to the city manager in a declared emergency. 
    Other departments. Extensive interaction with the fire department, the police department, the department of public works and the department of municipal inspections. 
12.05  Incident management system. 
(1)  The City of Chelsea hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the common foundation for incident management, coordination and support activities. 
(2)  All departments, offices, multimember boards and agencies responsible for managing and/or supporting incident response and disaster operations shall incorporate into their planning and operations the NIMS as prescribed by the United States Department of Homeland Security as implemented by the City of Chelsea Emergency Management Department. 
(3)  The City of Chelsea hereby adopts Incident command System (ICS) for command and control of all incident response operations. All departments, offices, multi-member boards and agencies responsible for managing and/or supporting incident response and disaster operations shall: 
a.  Integrate ICS into functional and system-side emergency operations policies, plans and procedures. 
b.  Train responders in the appropriate level of ICS, as prescribed by the United States Department of Homeland Security as implemented by the Chelsea Emergency Management Department. 
c.  Conduct and/or participate in ICS-oriented exercises involving responders from multiple disciplines and cooperating jurisdictions. 
(4)  The director of emergency management shall possess authority and responsibility for ensuring all cabinets, departments, offices, and agencies take appropriate and timely measures to ensure expedient NIMS compliance and full implementation of this administrative order [code]. 
(5)  All public safety officers, department heads and city employees are hereby directed to render such aid and assistance as is required for the implementation of the foregoing policy. 
(Amended 9-11-2006) 
Sec. 13.00. - Department of municipal inspections. 
13.01  Established. There shall be a department of municipal inspections, also known as the inspectional services department, established in accordance with the provisions of chapter 43B, section 13 of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 43B, § 13] under the supervision of a director of municipal inspections who shall serve as the building inspector. All books, papers, documents, equipment, building facilities, land and any other property, both real and personal, which is in the custody and control of any agency or department affected by the consolidation set forth in this section, shall forthwith be transferred by the former department to the department of municipal inspections. All monies which have been appropriated to any department or agency which is included in any consolidation under the provisions of this section shall be credited to the account of department of municipal inspections. All contracts in force shall be continued in force by the department of municipal inspections until they otherwise expire or are cancelled. Any judicial proceeding in which any department affected by any consolidation under this section is a party shall not be affected by the consolidation, but the department of municipal inspections shall stand in the place of the former department. All inspectional service agencies currently performing an inspection function, except the conservation commission and the fire prevention bureau of the fire department, shall continue in full force and effect except that for administrative purposes, all personnel performing inspection functions for the existing department, shall, when performing such inspection services, be subject to the administrative control and direction of the director of municipal inspections, but not otherwise. 
13.02  Mission. The department of municipal inspection enforces laws and state codes, and promulgates and enforces reasonable rules and regulations relating to building construction, zoning enforcement, health and sanitation, and weights and measures for the purpose of protecting public health and safety. The department coordinates the various jurisdictions to simplify public access to these services and streamline the permitting process. The purpose of coordinated inspections to make each inspector aware of the various activities being performed, thus improving consistency of enforcement. Specifically, the department coordinates all inspection functions which are to be carried out by any municipal officer or agent under this section; maintains in a central location and recorded in a common index all the recordkeeping functions relating to all municipal inspections, which shall be under the supervision and control of the director; provides a single application process, which would record all inspections which might be necessary, including, but need not be limited to, any inspections under the zoning law or zoning ordinances, the state building code, wire code, plumbing and gas code, state sanitary code, and any other local inspections as may be otherwise authorized. 
13.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The department of municipal inspections provides a variety of services relating to the health, safety, and environmental concerns of the city and its residents. The department has three areas of responsibility: buildings; health and sanitation; and weights and measures. Interaction of the areas is essential to providing efficient and effective public service. 
    The department makes inspections, issues such permits, enforces ordinances and promulgates and enforces reasonable rules and regulations as may be required under the state building, wiring, plumbing and gas code. The department enforces the provisions of the zoning ordinance. The department abates nuisances declared by the city council. 
    The department makes inspections and issues permits, licenses, and certificates and promulgates and enforces reasonable rules and regulations, and provides for appeals and variances as required under the state sanitary code, the state environmental code and the various state codes and city ordinances concerning food purity and quality, housing quality, trash disposal and dumpsters, and other areas of environmental quality. 
    Specifically, the department makes inspections and issues permits, licenses, and certificates and promulgates and enforces reasonable rules and regulations and enforces laws, state codes and regulations, [and] provides for appeals and variances relative to: noisome trades; fuel and chemical storage systems; establishments possessing hazardous and/or toxic waste; food establishments; swimming pools; seasonal rental units; motels; campgrounds; saunas; vapor baths; bed and breakfast [establishments]; retail food; continental breakfasts; frozen dessert and mixes; food units; milk pasteurization; funeral homes; masseuse; garbage haulers; septage haulers; adulteration and misbranding of food; bottling of carbonated and noncarbonated nonalcoholic beverages, bakeries; cold storage or refrigerating warehouses; carcasses of slaughtered animals and all meat, fish, vegetable, produce, fruit, or provisions and may seize and destroy same; articles of food kept or stored for sale; poultry dressing; false labeling of products as kosher; manufactured housing communities; nursing homes, infirmaries, charitable homes for the aged, [and] intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded; tanning facilities; atmospheric pollution; stables; house drainage and connection with common sewers; dilapidated structures and lead paint. 
    The department regulates the sale of commodities by weight or measure, inspects and tests weighing and measuring devices, the operation and use of electronic retail checkout systems, and the method of sale of commodities and the labeling of prepackaged commodities. 
13.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. Interaction [is] primarily for program approval, budget, expenditures, and to further provide city manager information concerning public safety and environmental health issues and problems. Secondarily, and through the operations division, for all other matters. 
    Other department. Extensive interaction with most departments. Daily work with the prevention division of the fire department and planning and development department on areas of permitting and zoning; daily involvement with police and fire departments and the licensing and consumer affairs and health divisions on areas of mutual concern. 
    Multiple-member bodies. Interaction with the board of health on public health matters and policy under its jurisdiction. Provides information to the zoning board of appeals and conservation commission. Provides technical support to the licensing commission. 
Sec. 14.00. - Planning and development department. 
14.01  Established. 
    There shall be a planning and development department under the supervision of an executive director. The planning and development department shall serve as the department of community development organized under the provisions of chapter 43C, section 12 of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 43C, § 12]. The redevelopment authority of the city, and the industrial development financing authority are hereby abolished; the office of community development, the planning board, the zoning board of appeals and the conservation commission are consolidated into the department. The planning board, the zoning board of appeals and the conservation commission are consolidated under the administrative control of the executive director of planning and development. This consolidated department shall not act as, nor be construed as, including the local housing authority organized under section 3 of chapter 121B of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 121B, § 3]. 
    All books, papers, documents, equipment, building facilities, land and other property, both real and personal, which are or have been in the custody and control of the redevelopment authority, the office of community development, the planning board, the industrial development financing authority, the zoning board of appeals and the conservation commission, shall forthwith be transferred by the said agencies to the department of planning and development. 
    All monies and assets including grants and reimbursements from whatever source, to the redevelopment authority, the office of community development, the planning board, the industrial development financing authority, the zoning board of appeals and the conservation commission are hereby credited to the account of such department. All contracts in force shall be continued in force by such department until they otherwise expire or are cancelled. Any judicial proceeding in which the redevelopment authority, the office of community development, the planning board, the industrial development financing authority, the zoning board of appeals [or] and the conservation commission, is a party, shall not be affected but the department shall stand in place of said agencies. 
14.02  Mission. 
    The planning and development department provides professional planning, project and program management services to city residents and businesses, multiple-member bodies, the city manager, the city council and other city departments as regards the physical, economic, social and environmental needs of the city. 
    The department develops the city's vision, policies, goals and objectives for the physical, environmental, economic, and social growth and development of the community, and incorporates this vision, policies, goals and objectives into a comprehensive plan and reviews planning and development proposals for conformance with that plan. 
14.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The planning and development department is organized so that it provides services in the following areas: housing planning and development, which includes all housing programs and community development program applications and administration; economic planning and development, which includes industrial, commercial and retail activities; capital facilities planning and development, which includes transportation, parks and open space and public facilities planning; program and project implementation; planning and coordination, which includes the comprehensive planning process, including functional, geographic and capital improvement planning; land use review and controls such as zoning, site plan and design review process; responsible for the enforcement of the city's construction jobs program, and other administrative and technical services. 
    The planning and development department activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
    Research and database development. Conduct studies of the resources, possibilities and needs of the city and its relationship with other municipalities in the metropolitan region; collect data and create a database for the city and relevant components; provide analysis and interpretation of data and studies. 
    Planning. Initiate and propose policies, goals and objectives for the physical, economic, social and environmental needs of the city. Incorporate these in a comprehensive plan and its constituent functional plans for land use and zoning, housing, transportation, parks and open space, public facilities, capital improvement plan, historic preservation, and geographic plans for the city's neighborhoods, waterfront and downtown, and update them as required. 
    Economic development. Prepare economic development policies, strategies and plans for the city, develop economic initiatives and proposals, and implement specific economic development projects and programs. 
    Project management. Manage the planning, design, and construction of capital facility, community and economic development projects, either independently or in cooperation with other agencies as appropriate. 
    Program management. Develop and implement programs to carry out community policies, goals and objectives, including the construction jobs programs. 
    Policy/project/program review and recommendations. Review and analyze proposals for housing, transportation, parking and traffic circulation, parks and open space, historic preservation, environmental resources, public facilities, industrial, commercial and retail development and related matters to assist the city manager, city council, multiple-member bodies, and other agencies in the making of any recommendations or rendering of any approvals, which they may be required to make concerning such matters. 
    Site plan review and design review. Provide site plan review and design review services for public and private projects for the city, for all projects which seek city permits or approvals. 
    Multiple-member bodies. Act as administrative and technical advisor and render clerical support to the planning board, the zoning board of appeals, the economic development board and the conservation commission, and provide technical support to the traffic and parking commission and licensing commission. 
    Agency participation/representation. Act as lead city agency with appropriate federal, regional and state agencies. Represent [the] city to agencies, organizations and individuals in relation to relevant planning and development matters. 
    Resource development. Prepare applications for grants and provide grant administration for those received. 
    Community participation. Encourage and facilitate participation of, and input from, residents, businesses and institutions in relevant planning and development matters. 
    Administration. Carry out, as necessary and appropriate, all administrative and financial functions, including budgeting, contract management, financial management, grant administration, and record keeping and reporting. 
14.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. City manager interaction is most often through the executive director of the department, encompassing approval for programs of work, budgeting, expenditures, and specific issues of concern to the city. 
    Other departments. Extensive interaction [occurs] with other city departments, including: public works department on a variety of planning, engineering and operational issues related to the maintenance and improvement of the city infrastructure; administrative and financial services departments concerning procurement, operational budgeting and capital planning; [the] department of municipal inspections for coordinated project review and approvals; and licensing and consumer affairs divisions for coordination of land use and environmental controls; and health and human services for coordination of social programs, the construction jobs programs, and physical improvements. 
    Multiple-member bodies. As noted, providing administrative, clerical and technical support. 
    Outside agencies. Significant interrelationships exist between the department and a number of federal, regional and state agencies. In particular, on the federal level with the Department of Housing And Urban Development, the National Parks Service, Small Business Administration, and the Department Of Transportation. At the state level, interaction occurs with the executive offices of communities and development, economic affairs, environmental affairs and its subsidiary land use and regulatory agencies, the division of capital planning and operations, Mass Port, the turnpike authority, the MBTA, the Massachusetts Government Land Bank, [the] metropolitan area planning council and other public agencies and quasi-public agencies, as appropriate. 
Sec. 15.00. - Department of public works. 
15.01  Established. There shall be a department of public works under the supervision of a director of public works. 
15.02  Mission. The department of public works provides professional quality maintenance, repair and construction services under each of the following areas: infrastructure; parks and playgrounds; general government buildings; transportation control devices; environmental protection through stormwater control, sewage treatment and general construction procedures; operation and maintenance of the water distribution system including fire hydrants, sanitary, storm and combined sewer collection systems including operation and maintenance of the stormwater drain pump station; solid waste disposal and recycling and collection and disposal contract administration with others; the Garden Cemetery; and general engineering survey, design and construction management for all segments of city government. 
15.03  Authorities and responsibilities. 
15.03.1  Administration. Provides centralized administrative and management support. Activities include policy, program planning and procedural guidance, operations procedures, procurement and contract administration, position and budgetary management, [and] establishment of community relations. 
15.03.2  Engineering. Design and administration of design and construction of public works projects including buildings, roads, bridges under the direct control of the city, culverts, sidewalks, bike paths, drainage, traffic control devices; providing technical support to other city departments and agencies; providing routine and special survey services in support of city projects; maintenance of drawings and maps; preparation and updating of assessors maps. Operation, jointly with other departments and agencies, the hardware and software for the geographic information system. 
15.03.3  Streets and sidewalks. Maintenance and repair of roads, sidewalks, drainage structures; sweeping of roads and parking lots; roadside brushing; installation and maintenance of traffic markings; snow and ice control; and maintenance and repair of vehicles and equipment. 
15.03.4  Solid waste/recycling. Management of solid waste programs including management of contracts for solid waste collection and recycling and promoting and conducting a recycling program. 
15.03.5  Structures and grounds. Maintenance and custodial care of city buildings; operation and maintenance of the Garden Cemetery; maintenance and field preparation of recreation areas; planting, care and maintenance of flower beds, trees, and ornamental shrubs along city-maintained ways, parks, recreation areas and conservation lands; servicing of trash containers located throughout the city. 
15.03.6  Water/sewer. Management of the wastewater collection system including operation and maintenance of a pumping station, and gravity mains; maintenance of an accounts receivable and billing system for water and sewer use, and relative thereto all abatement as allowed by law. 
15.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. In respect to most activities, significant interaction through the operations division is commonplace. 
    Other departments. As the department services most departments, interaction is recurring, dependent upon the specific activity to be undertaken. 
    Multiple-member bodies. The department interacts with the planning board, and provides technical support to the traffic and parking commission. 
Sec. 16.00. - Fire department. 
16.01  Established. There shall be a fire department under the supervision of a chief of fire. 
16.02  Mission. The fire department provides protection of life and property for individuals and businesses within the city against the ravages of fire, medical emergencies, hazardous incidents and other dangerous conditions. The department prevents fires; prevents loss of life and property if a fire starts; confines fire to where it started; and extinguishes fires. 
16.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The fire department takes all necessary steps for the extinguishment of fires and the mitigation of hazardous incidents within the city, including the utilization of all necessary personnel and equipment therefor, the destruction of any building or structure and the removal of any obstruction for the purpose of checking or extinguishing fires or hazardous incidents. The department establishes the location, relocation or removal of all public fire alarm boxes. The department assists in the re-establishment of order in the event of civil disturbance, disaster or riot or any other declared emergency. The department provides for and administers a program for the training of firefighters. The department maintains a record of all fires which occur within the city requiring the services of the department. The department carries out the terms and provisions of all fire service agreements entered into with other governmental units. The department investigates the causes of all fires and provides for written reports of all suspected arson [and] inspects all buildings and structures as provided for by the state fire code, and for the issuance and renewal of certificates of occupancy. 
16.04  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. As the chief administrative officer of the city, the department has extensive interaction with the city manager concerning issues of budget, policy and personnel. 
    Other departments. Interaction with many municipal departments for a variety of reasons. Particular interaction with the department of public works, information systems, and municipal inspections. Other agency involvement includes most federal, state and regional fire service agencies. 
Sec. 17.00. - Police department. 
17.01  Established. There shall be police department under the supervision of a chief of police. 
17.02  Mission. The police department is committed to the protection of life and property, respect for individual rights and human dignity, and the delivery of high-quality police services. Members of the department work with other city agencies, officials and community members to identify public safety issues, design and implement strategies that enhance community safety and improve the quality of life within the city. 
17.03  Authorities and responsibilities. The police department acts pursuant to the authorities vested to police departments under MGL Chapter 41, §§ 97A and 98 [M.G.L. c. 41, §§ 97A and 98]. The police department is responsible for the protection of life and property, the preservation of peace, order and safety, the safeguarding constitutional guarantees, the prevention of crime and the detection and arrest of offenders. The department investigates incidents and is empowered to enforce laws and ordinances. The department administers and enforces regulations and laws regulating, directing, controlling and restricting the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the general use of the streets by vehicles and the public. The department operates a training program to maintain and improve the competency and efficiency of members of the department. The department prepares reports on injuries to persons and property occurring by accident or otherwise on the streets and other public places within the city as required by law. The department provides for a procedure for the sale, destruction or other disposition of all weapons or other articles used in the commission of crime or coming into the custody of the department. The police department provides for a procedure for the sale of unclaimed, lost or stolen articles coming into the custody of the department. The chief of police issues licenses and permits for firearms and gunsmiths, and appoints constables and special police officers. 
17.04.  Interrelationships. 
    City manager. As the chief administrative officer of the city, the department has extensive interaction with the city manager concerning issues of budget, policy and personnel. 
    Other departments. Interaction with many municipal departments [is] for a variety of reasons. Particular interaction [occurs] with the department of public works, information systems, municipal inspections and schools. The police department conducts investigations for the department of municipal inspections, the licensing commissions and the law department. Other agency involvement includes most federal, state and regional law enforcement agencies. 
Sec. 17.00-A. - Division of emergency communications. 
17.01-A  Established. There shall be a division of emergency communications within the police department. 
17.02-A.  Mission. The division of emergency communications is committed to the prompt and courteous receipt of all emergency calls; the proper referral of said calls for intervention and maintenance of all necessary communications and electronic equipment. 
17.03-A  Authorities and responsibilities. 
    The division of emergency communications is responsible for the receipt and appropriate dispatch of all public safety service requests including, but not limited to, calls for police, fire, emergency medical services or animal control services. The division is responsible for the operation of the city's public safety answering point and all matters relating to the implementation and operation of the "E-911" operation. The division provides 24-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week communications. 
    The division is responsible for maintaining proper communications interfaces with the Massachusetts Criminal Histories Systems network and assuring compliance with all state and federal laws regarding the proper collection and dissemination of criminal offender record information (CORI). The division maintains and coordinates proper regional communication links with the Boston Area Police Emergency Radio Network (BAPERN), the Metropolitan Fire Control Network and any similar public safety emergency communications network. 
17.04-A  Interrelationships. 
    Other departments. The division closely interacts with the fire and emergency management departments. 
Sec. 17.00-B. - Harbormaster. 
17.01-B  Established. The city manager shall appoint the harbormaster and any assistant harbormasters deemed necessary. The harbormaster and assistant harbormasters(s) shall have all the powers and duties imposed upon harbormasters by law. The harbormaster and any assistant harbormasters, as deemed necessary, shall be under the supervision of the chief of police. 
17.02-B  Mission. The harbormaster is committed to insuring the safe and orderly operation of vessels and placement of buoys and moorings within city waters. 
17.03-B  Authorities and responsibilities. The harbormaster shall set rules and regulations related to the operation of vessels and the placement of buoys and moorings within city waters. 
17.04-B  Interrelationships. 
    Other departments. the harbormaster interacts with the police department, planning and development department and the conservation commission. 
(Amended 6-30-2003) 
PART IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 1.00. - Generally. 
    This section describes administrative policies established for the purpose of guiding the development and implementation of administrative procedures within the city. The administrative policies and hence the administrative procedures describe all administrative and adjudicatory procedures of the city. It establishes policies and procedures by which rules and regulations are adopted by administrative agencies. It specifies the manner in which departments and agencies function administratively, through the promulgation of policies and procedures. It delineates the method and manner in which adjudicatory proceedings are to be conducted by the various agencies and officials who have the responsibility of deciding individual cases. 
1.00-A  Officers and department heads. 
    Each officer and department head shall perform all duties required of their office or position by state law, the Charter, this administrative code and the ordinances of the city, and such other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
    The officers and departments heads shall: 
    Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
    Inaugurate sound practices and keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit and service to the public; 
    Submit annual reports of the activities of their department to the city manager; 
    Establish and maintain systems of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of department activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
    Supervise all subordinates under them; 
    Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their departments. 
1.02  Bonds. Officials required by law shall each, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, give a good and sufficient surety company bond to the city, duly approved by the city solicitor, and conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective duties, and for proper application and payment of all money or property coming into their hands by virtue of their offices. The city shall pay the cost of each official bond. Official bonds of city officers shall be in the custody of the city auditor. 
1.03  City hall business hours. City hall shall be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Tuesdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Fridays. 
1.04  Communications. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea that effective communication, whether written, oral, or graphic, be exhibited on all occasions in order to convey all relevant goals, policies, procedures, and facts related to all issues. 
    Effective management is based on effective communication. The nature of communicating is ever changing as more people are involved and depend on information; information is more complex, subtle, and subliminal; and communication depends far more on technology. In light of these realities, the city's communication practices are based on the following goals: clarity, succinctness, and timeliness. 
    The city manager shall prescribe a standard format of city stationery for external written communications and a standard format for internal communications for all departments and agencies under the city manager's jurisdiction. 
1.05  Computers and automation. 
    The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for the selection and utilization of computers. This policy is also intended to establish support procedures and personnel for assisting users in acquiring and utilizing computers. 
    Computers are currently being acquired and used in all departments. This occurrence is streamlining work and changing the way many employees view information and its affect on their jobs. The decreasing costs and increasing power have put computers in the reach of all departments. The city recognizes the need to define the appropriate role for the computer. 
    While acknowledging the power of the computer to increase productivity, there is a need to set standards for ensuring compatibility. There is also a need to review uses for appropriate minicomputer applications and ensure that information systems needs could not be handled better in some other manner. These computer policies are specifically intended to attain the following objectives: 
-  Encourage the use of technology of all types to improve and enhance the efficiency of the city's procedures and practices whenever and wherever possible. 
-  Maintain and promulgate standards for computer technology and general electronic information management. Provide policy guidance to management on the review and purchase of computer technology (hardware, software, and communications) so as to ensure compliance with published standards. 
-  Maintain procedures and policies to ensure that the city's electronic resources are properly managed. Emphasis is placed on ensuring that electronic information is easily accessible by those departments requiring access. 
-  No deviation from published hardware, software, communications, or information management policies/standards without a written waiver signed by the city manager or designee. 
-  Centralize functions which can be automated and/or centralize[d] so as to maximize the utilization of the city's personnel and/or other financial resources. 
1.06  Deposits. All departments and agencies shall make a daily deposit to the treasury of any monies received directly from the public. 
1.07  Financial. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea that financial management be conducted with the objectives of providing municipal service in a predictable manner and alignment with public policy goals as set forth by the city council. 
    The City of Chelsea faces continuing operational and capital requirements to meet the increasing needs of its residents. These requirements have to be met within the constraints of proposition 21/2. To help ensure the city's financial stewardship, an established program of managing the city's finances becomes essential. To this end, the city manager seeks policies and procedures that are financially prudent and in the city's best economic interest. The city manager promulgates these financial policies consistent with the city manager's responsibilities pursuant to the provisions of part V, financial procedures, of the Charter. 
    In following this policy, the city shall pursue the following goals: 
-  To develop effective financial management within the city which conform to generally accepted accounting principles; 
-  To simplify, clarify, and modernize the financial systems of the city as the need occurs; 
-  To provide increased public confidence in public financial management; 
-  To provide increased economy and financial performance and to maximize to the fullest extent practicable the use of public funds of the city; and 
-  To provide safeguards to ensure quality and integrity of the financial systems. 
    In order to obtain the above goals, the city adopts the following policies: 
1.07-A  Accounting, auditing and financial planning. 
1.  The city will establish accounting practices which conform to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth by the authoritative standard-setting body for units of local government. 
2.  An annual audit will be performed by an independent public accounting firm selected by the city council, and an official, comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) shall be issued no later than six months following the end of the fiscal year. 
3.  A management letter, a by-product of an annual audit, shall be provided by the independent public accounting firm no later than February 1. Additional findings and recommendations may be communicated in a separate letter to be provided no later than March 1. 
4.  A capital improvements program shall be prepared annually by the city manager, in accordance with the Charter, section 5-4, which shall include a summary of its contents; an itemization of all capital improvements, including those of the school department, proposed to be undertaken during the next five or more fiscal years with supporting data; cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules; and, the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities included. The capital improvements program shall be submitted within 90 days prior to the date for submission of the operating budget, unless some other time is provided by ordinance. 
5.  A long-term financial forecast shall be prepared annually by the city manager, in accordance with the Charter, section 5-5, projecting revenues and expenditures for all operating funds. This forecast shall be used as a planning tool in developing the following year's operating budget and capital improvements program. The forecast shall be submitted no later than October 1. 
1.07-B  Insurance reserve funds. 
    A self-insurance reserve fund will be maintained to cover workers' compensation as authorized by M.G.L. chapter 40, section 13A [M.G.L. c. 40, § 13A] and property losses as authorized by M.G.L. chapter 40, section 13 [M.G.L. c. 40, § 13]. 
    In order to cover losses arising out this fund, amounts will be appropriated to cover the stop loss premium and a sum to establish the fund for future losses. 
    It is the intention of this fund to cover all losses arising out of employment injury, fire, vandalism, burglary, theft and repairs. A stop loss insurance through an insurance carrier will be provided for catastrophic losses. 
1.07-C  Gifts and grants. 
    All grants shall be managed to comply with the laws, regulations and guidance of the grantors. All gifts and donations shall be managed and expended according to the wishes and instructions of the donor consistent with the requirements of the constitution, General Laws, Charter, and ordinances. 
    All gifts and grants shall be evaluated for suitability and consistency with city policies. They shall also be formally accepted by the city council. 
1.08  Fleet services. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea to authorize the acquisition and utilization of vehicles for use by officials and employees of the city, in the conduct of their employment responsibilities. Municipal officials and employees are obligated to comply with the provisions of this policy when their employment responsibilities require use of a municipal vehicle. 
    This policy is based on the following guidelines: 
-  Legal compliance with all federal and state laws, rules, and regulations; 
-  Appropriate financial security; 
-  Proper maintenance of all city vehicles; and 
-  Superior ethical conduct by city employees when using vehicles. 
1.09  Financial. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea that, giving due regard to the financial limitations of the city, prudent managerial oversight should limit risks and exposures. 
    Local governments are subject to four basic types of risks: real and personal property loss; loss of income or increased costs associated with property loss; personnel loss; and liability. In response to these potential losses, the City of Chelsea shall always consider and pursue the best action or combination of actions to control risk: risk avoidance, risk prevention, risk assumption and risk transfer. 
    The purpose of this policy is to provide a functional tool for insurance management. In pursuing this policy, the city shall abide by the following goals: 
-  The city should not insure itself against minor recurrent losses; 
-  Self-insurance should be used where risks are recurrent and financially manageable; and 
-  Insurance should be sought for potential major losses. 
1.10  Investment. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea that, giving due regard to the safety and risk of investment, all available funds shall be invested in conformance with legal and administrative guidelines and maximize yields with the minimal risk and utilization of collateralization when requested. 
    Effective cash management is recognized as essential to good fiscal management. An aggressive cash management and investment policy will be pursued to take advantage of investment interest as a viable revenue source. The city's portfolio shall be designed and managed in a manner responsive to the public trust and consistent with state and local law. Investments shall be made with the primary objectives of: 
-  Preservation of capital; 
-  Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating needs; 
-  Security of city funds and investments; 
-  Diversification of investments to avoid unreasonable or avoidable risks; and 
-  Maximization of return on the portfolio. 
1.11  Oaths of office. All officers, members of multiple-member bodies, police officers, special police officers, constables and firefighters shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of duties, which oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city clerk. 
1.12  Personnel. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea to establish and maintain an equitable personnel system. This system should also promote the efficiency and economy of government, promote the morale and well-being of city employees, and promote equal employment opportunity for all employees and candidates for employment. 
    The dynamics of personnel management must mediate between organizational change and the need for technical stability through affirmative action, human resource planning and cutback management, productivity, and labor relations. Effective personnel management must also balance the four values of social equity, responsiveness, efficiency, and individual rights. The personnel policies are based on the following principles in order to balance these values: 
    Recruiting, selecting, and developing employees on the basis of their abilities, knowledge, and skills. 
    Providing equitable compensation. 
    Training employees as needed to assure high quality performance in delivering quality services to the public. 
    Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose performance does not adequately improve. 
    Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, age, sex, creed, mobility limitations, or any other nonmerit factor, except where such factor is a bona fide occupational requirement, and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens; prohibiting discrimination against any person on the basis of such nonmerit factors, and assuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for any purpose other than those duties and responsibilities directly associated with their positions in city government. 
1.12.01  Residency. 
    It is the policy of the city manager that residency is a legitimate factor for determination of merit and fitness for employment. When knowledge, skills and ability are, in the opinion of the city manager equal, the city manager shall give preference to the Chelsea resident. 
    Officers and employees appointed by the city manager, on or after January 1, 1996, except those appointed to the police department and the fire department, shall become residents, as defined by section 9-3(i) of the Charter, within six months of the date of appointment and shall not cease to be residents of the city during employment. 
    Upon employment, and by January 15 of each year thereafter, officers and employees subject to the provisions of this section, shall certify their name and place of residence to the personnel department on a form prescribed. 
    If upon certification of residence of a place not within the city, or failure to file such certification, a hearing shall be held by the city manager upon the matter. Any officer or employee subject to a hearing shall receive notice at least ten calendar days before such hearing containing a general statement of its purpose and the disciplinary action that may result. 
    A waiver from the provisions of this section may be granted by the city manager. The city manager shall by written communication inform an applicant or employee of a grant of waiver, including the reason(s) therefor. Waivers shall become part of the personnel record, filed with the city clerk with a copy transmitted to the city council. 
    The requirements in this section shall be subject to and in compliance with provisions of chapter 150E of the General Laws [M.G.L. c. 150E]. 
    These provisions shall become effective 30 days following the effective date of this amendment. 
1.12.02.  Residency oversight by city council. Notwithstanding any language in section 1.12.01 above, the city manager shall provide to the city council at three-month intervals, due on or around January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each calendar year, a report setting forth the names and residential addresses of all persons hired by the city during the previous 12 months. The report shall include a statistical analysis of the percentage of employees hired during the previous 12 months who are non-residents of Chelsea. Further, prior to the granting of any waiver pursuant to section 1.12.01 above, the city manager shall provide notice to the city council and give such councilors at least seven days to comment on the proposed waiver. The city manager shall consider any comments received by the council prior to making any final decision on a residency waiver. the city manager shall not grant any waiver until the seven day notice period has expired. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2017) 
1.13  Procurement. Disposal of tangible supplies owned or otherwise controlled by the city shall be disposed through the solicitation of three quotes for the sale of such tangible supplies and shall be awarded to the responsible party providing the highest quote. When, after solicitation of three quotes, no such quote is received for the sale thereof, the chief procurement officer shall make a disposal of such goods as will be in the best interests of the city as allowed under law. For tangible supplies or goods with an estimated value of less than $5,000.00, the city shall not be required to solicit three quotes for disposal of same, but instead, may make a disposal of such goods as will be in the best interests of the city as allowed under law. 
(Amended 12-18-2002) 
1.14  Property management. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea to manage its public land and waters, buildings and structures in order to protect the public's investment. 
    Effective property management is based on the following basic principles: 
1.  Protect against liability; 
2.  Preserve and enhance financial and natural assets; 
3.  Provide for appropriate access; 
4.  Maintain visual and cultural character; 
5.  Use of public lands and facilities shall be consistent with applicable open space, recreation, historic, building, and land management plans. 
    These principles are best served by the pursuit of the following goals: 
    Protect against liability. 
a.  Ensure that insurance policies provide for asset replacement where practical; 
b.  Provide appropriate security for all properties; 
c.  Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of buildings, structures and lands; 
d.  Seek the removal of attractive nuisances; 
e.  Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities. 
    Preserve and enhance financial and natural assets. 
a.  Implement long-range capital improvement plan; 
b.  Develop management plans for all lands and facilities; 
c.  Establish guidelines for asset acquisition and disposition; 
d.  Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of buildings, structures and lands; 
e.  Enforce rules and regulations regarding public use and access. 
    Provide for appropriate access. 
a.  Enforce rules and regulations regarding public use and access; 
b.  Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities; 
c.  Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of buildings, structures and lands; 
d.  Implement American with Disabilities Act plans for access; 
e.  Develop management plans for all lands and facilities. 
    Maintain visual and cultural character. 
a.  Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of buildings, structures and lands; 
b.  Enhance and preserve the physical appearances and vistas; 
c.  Ensure conformity to existing zoning, historic guidelines, and local comprehensive plan guidelines. 
    Use of public lands and facilities shall be consistent with applicable management plans for open space, recreation, historic, building, and land. 
a.  Develop management plans for all lands and facilities, and update every ten years, or more often as is required, except as noted below; 
b.  Ensure conformity to existing zoning, historic district guidelines, and local comprehensive plan guidelines; 
c.  Provide appropriate security for all properties; 
d.  Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of buildings, structures and lands; 
e.  Ensure that all maintenance and improvements to existing buildings and structures or the development of new ones are energy efficient; 
f.  Seek the removal of attractive nuisances; 
g.  Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities; 
h.  Develop and implement the city's open space and recreation plan, and update every five years, or more often as is required; 
i.  Follow appropriate federal and state grant guidelines to ensure eligibility for funding property management objectives; 
j.  Establish effective coordination with the state and federal government, other municipalities, [the] Suffolk County Fire Department, not-for-profit organizations, and others where necessary. 
In order to effectuate this policy, the city should ensure consistency in the application of all other administrative policies which have a direct interrelationship to the property management policy of the city. 
1.14-A  Property management procedures. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea to provide access to public lands [and] open spaces in a manner which harmonizes, to the extent reasonably possible, the various and divergent interests of the community. 
    This policy shall be construed and understood to comply with the property management policy expressed in part IV, section 1.14 of this administrative code. Neither the public ways, under the jurisdiction of the traffic [and parking] commission, or any property dedicated to the use of any particular department be subject to this policy. 
    In carrying out the property management policies of the City of Chelsea, city departments, agencies and officers shall adhere to the following practices, procedures, and guidelines: 
1.  The appropriate city agency, upon designation by the city manager, shall coordinate the scheduling of all events occurring on public lands and open spaces subject to this policy. 
2.  The appropriate city agency, upon designation by the city manager, shall coordinate the granting of permits and shall by permit give prior authorization to all organized uses of the public spaces, including the parks, recreation areas, and city hall environs. Proof of an organized use shall be shown if an attendance of more than ten people is expected. Permits shall be handed out on a first-come first-serve basis, based upon the time and date of filing of the request. 
3.  Appropriate city agencies, upon designation by the city manager, shall cause a registration form to be completed prior to any authorization being granted. This registration form shall at a minimum include questions regarding: (i) name, address and phone number of sponsoring organization, (ii) name, address, and phone number of principal contract, (iii) site and time(s) and date(s) desired, (iv) expected crowd, (v) use of equipment, (vi) existence of fires, cooking, etc., (vii) use of amplification devices, (viii) use of the public ways, (ix) presence of vendors, (x) expected entertainment, if any. 
4.  Persons requesting the use of the public lands and open spaces shall obtain the prior approval of the following departments: police, fire, inspectional services, and public works, except as otherwise determined by the coordinating city agency, and also the prior approval of the licensing commission and the traffic [and parking] commission shall be required in the requisite circumstances. The coordinating city agency, upon designation by the city manager shall ensure that all requests carry such approval(s) prior to authorizing such an event. 
5.  No promise of the use of public services, in-kind, financial or otherwise shall be made except by the department authorized to provide such services. 
6.  The city shall have no obligation to provide special facilities for the use of the permittees, unless generally such facilities are made available to the public. 
7.  There shall be no guarantee given to any person for the use of public lands or open spaces. Persons using public property shall be informed that the use is at all times subject to public health and safety concerns. Persons using public property shall be informed that they must comply with all directions and orders of the of the police department, fire department, inspectional services, the public works department, emergency management director, and other appropriate officials. Any grievance of such action may be subsequently filed by the permittee with the city manager, or designee, who shall investigate the matter and recommend an appropriate response to the city manager for final action. 
8.  Authorized events shall be scheduled so as not to interfere with one another, and may be so regulated so as not to cause such interference. 
9.  The use of public lands and open spaces shall be limited by the size of the expected crowd, and the capacity of the site as determined by the chief of the fire department, taking into account the estimated capacity, and the opinion of the chief of police taking into account access, traffic conditions, and availability for other spaces. 
10.  The use of the public lands and open spaces shall not result in the deterioration of the space for subsequent users. The sponsoring person(s) and/or organization(s) shall be responsible for cleaning of the site when finished. When sponsoring person(s), and/or organization(s) fail to clean the site when finished, the department of public works is authorized to undertake such clean up and charge the actual cost for such services to the sponsoring person(s) or organization(s). 
11.  Persons requesting use of the public property shall make such a request at least 14 days prior to the date requested, unless the circumstances of unfolding political events cause or create a need for quicker response or activity. 
12.  It is the policy of the city that no application fee in excess of $5.00 shall be charged per event. 
13.  The following additional regulations shall guide the use of public property for First Amendment-protected activities. 
a.  No person or organization shall demonstrate, picket, make speeches, march, hold a vigil or undertake other like forms of conduct which involve the communication or expression of views or grievances engaged in by one or more persons, the conduct of which has the effect, intent or propensity to attract a substantial crowd of onlookers, participants or counter-demonstrators unless a permit thereof has first been obtained from the city. 
b.  The city shall honor all requests for such permits, except that the division may by reasonable regulation, policy or procedure regulate as to time, place and manner of the activity in order to accommodate competing demands for public use, and to protect the public safety and convenience. 
c.  The city shall have the authority to modify the time, place and manner of the requested activity to facilitate crowd control in order to protect the public safety and relieve congestion. In doing so the city shall leave open ample alternative channels of communication. 
d.  No authorization shall be granted for public speaking within 100 feet of a residential dwelling before 9:00 a.m. on a Saturday or Sunday, [n]or shall [authorization] be granted which [would] otherwise conflict with the noise control ordinance, being section 2-16 [now section 16-99] of the city ordinances. Amplification shall be allowed in appropriate circumstances. 
e.  The granting of a permit by the city shall not be construed to be an endorsement of the actions, ideas, or message of any such individual or group. No permitted event shall, in reliance upon having been permitted, be exempt, by application of the provisions of section 2-16(c) [now section 16-99(c)], from the noise control ordinance. 
f.  Portions of city property which carry out special functions, which are intrinsically unsuited for speech activities, such as flower beds, swimming facilities, etc., shall not be available for such use. 
g.  No charge shall be made for police protection at otherwise permitted events, when no admission or revenue is otherwise generated. 
h.  Use of the city hall environs shall not interfere with the effective use of the facility for government purposes, [and] to that end no permitted individual or group shall block or otherwise impede the passage of individuals or otherwise harass, threaten, or coerce individuals seeking entry or exit during the business hours or city hall. 
i.  Permits may be denied on the following grounds: 
(1)  Where the sole purpose of the activity is the advertising of any product or event, or is designed to be held for private profit. 
(2)  Where the activity is of such a size or nature that it will require the diversion of such a number of police officers to properly police the activity that allowing the activity would deny reasonable police protection to the rest of the city. 
j.  Permits may be modified where a request for a parade or other event during times of high vehicular traffic shall reasonably place an intolerable strain on the essential flow of traffic. 
k.  Any permitted individual or group who does not comply with these regulations, or any event specific condition imposed hereunder, shall have their [or its] permit suspended by order of any of the department granting approval, including police, fire, public works and inspectional services, pending a determination pursuant to the grievance procedure contained in [section 1.14, subsection 1.14(a)7] the seventh requirement of this policy. 
l.  All permits granted shall contain a statement that the granting of the permit, or any authorization therein, is neither an assurance of health, fire or other public safety nor a guarantee of other assistance. 
1.  15 Board and commission administrative procedures. 
1.15.1  Definitions. 
    "Affected person" shall mean the person or persons directly benefited or injured by a proceeding of a board. In either licensing or permitting proceedings it shall mean the license or permit applicant or holder. The term ["affected person"] shall include any person named or admitted as a party or entitled by constitution or statutes to be so admitted. 
    "Board" shall mean any board, commission or other multiple-member body set out in the Administrative Code, or mandated by state law. 
    "Emergency" shall mean a sudden, generally unexpected occurrence or set of circumstances demanding immediate action. 
    "Individualized action" shall mean any proceeding before a board in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties (affected persons) are to be determined. It includes, but is not limited to, license applications, renewals, modifications, suspensions and revocations. It does not include rule-making procedure except where the proposed rule will affect fewer than six known parties. 
    "Interested person" shall mean any person with a significant interest in a proceeding. This interest need not be a property interest. 
    "Person" shall mean individual, partnership, corporation, association, public or private organization of any Charter, other then the board engaged in the particular rule-making, declaratory ruling or individualized action. 
    "Rule" shall mean and include the whole or any part of every rule, regulation, standard or other requirement of general application and future effect adopted by a board to implement or interpret the law enforced or administered by it, but shall not include: 
(1)  Advisory ruling(s) issued under the provision of these regulations; or rules concerning only the internal management or discipline of any board, and not directly affecting the rights of, or the procedures available to the public or that portion of the public affected the board's activities; or decisions issued in individualized actions; or interpretative statements and statements of general policy. 
1.15.2  Rule-making. 
    Prior to adoption or amendment of any rule as to which a hearing is required by any provision of the General Laws or by Charter, ordinance, or any other rule the violation of which is punishable by criminal or civil fine, or imprisonment, except a rule of board practice or procedure, a board shall comply with the following procedure: 
    The board shall, within the time specified by any provision of the General Law, Charter or ordinance, or, if no time is specified, then at least 14 days prior to the public hearing: publish notice of such hearing in such a manner as is specified by the requisite provision of the General Law or Charter or ordinance, or, if none is specified then posted at the city bulletin board, the public library, and published once in full on a newspaper of general circulation, unless such proposed rules are greater in length than eight single pages typed, then a published summary of such ruled should be deemed satisfactory; and notify any person specified by any provision of the General Laws or city Charter or ordinance. 
    The public hearing shall comply with any requisites imposed by the General Law or by Charter or ordinance. 
    For the purposes of this section, the notice shall: 
    Refer to the statutory authority which the action is proposed; 
    Give the time and place of the public hearing; 
    Either state the express terms or describe the substance of the proposed regulation or amendment, or state the subjects and issues involved; 
    Include any additional matter required by the requisite provision(s) of the General Law or Charter or ordinances. 
    The board shall afford interested persons an opportunity to present, orally or in writing, data, views, or arguments in regards to the proposed action. If the board finds that oral presentation is unnecessary, impracticable or disruptive, it may require that presentation be made in writing. 
    This section shall not relieve any board from compliance with any provision of the General Law requiring that its regulations be approved by designated persons or bodies before such rule or rules become effective. 
    The aforementioned administrative procedure shall not be applicable to regulations of the traffic and parking commission, or to temporary or emergency regulations of any board promulgated for less than 30 days duration. 
    Regulations of the traffic and parking commission shall not be promulgated under the provisions of this section. They shall be promulgated in accordance with the provisions of section 6-3(b) of the Charter. 
1.15.3  Recording regulations. 
    All boards shall file with the city clerk a certified copy of each rule adopted by it. 
    The city clerk shall keep copies of the rules which boards have adopted and filed. They shall be maintained in electronic form and in paper form, compiled and indexed to permit easy reference, as appendices to this administrative code. They shall be available for inspection by the public at the city clerk's office. Copies of these rules shall be provided to persons requesting such copies upon payment of reproduction costs. 
1.15.4  Individualized actions. 
    Upon receipt of a request for an individualized action the board shall conduct a preliminary investigation, including in that investigation material in application form, if one is involved, its files, and information known or determinable by it or its staff. 
    Evidence may be admitted and given probative effect only if it is the kind of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. They shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. They may exclude incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence. 
    The board shall prepare an official record, which shall, at a minimum include the exhibits and a summary of the testimony in each individualized action, but it shall not be necessary to transcribe stenographic or shorthand notes, or tapes, unless requested for purposed of rehearing or court review. 
    All evidence, including records and documents in the possession of the board of which it desires to avail itself, shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case, and no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the action. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts or by incorporation by reference. 
    Every party shall have the right of cross examination of witnesses who testify, and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence. 
1.15.5  Records of individualized proceedings. Each board shall transmit the original[s] of all elements, including exhibits, recording and electronic data, of the records of individualized proceedings before it to the city clerk, who shall keep them safely. The city clerk shall ensure that any person requesting the same shall promptly, upon payment of the costs of reproduction, be provided with a copy thereof, attested if so requested, but said originals shall not be yielded up upon request of the city solicitor pursuant to a legal necessity. Such records shall be maintained in a manner similar to that provided under section 1.15.3 of part IV of this administrative code. 
1.15.6  Emergency action. 
    In an emergency a board may validly take action and dispense with the Open Meeting Law public notice requirement: 
where such action is necessary for the public health or welfare; but subject to change after a hearing, if requested, to be held at the earliest convenient time but in no case more than 30 days after the action; or 
In other cases where delay would render the action useless, and where there are no substantial adverse interests affected, except that upon the timely good faith objection of an interested person the provisions of section 1.15.2 of part IV of this administrative code. 
    This aforementioned administrative procedure shall nor be applicable to regulations of the traffic and parking commission. Regulations in accordance with the provisions of section 6-3(b) of the Charter and the requirements of the open meeting law. 
1.16  Trust fund management. 
    It is the policy of the City of Chelsea that trust fund management be consistent with the legal requirements, and [the] spirit of each respective trust document and, to the maximum extent possible, realize the purposes the trusts were intended to achieve. 
    Trust fund management will be conducted with the primary objectives of: 
    Conformance to each trust document's specified purpose, legal requirements, and administrative guidelines: 
-  Preservation of capital; 
-  Maintenance of security of trust funds and investments; 
-  Maximization of total return for each trust fund; 
-  Efficient disbursement of funds on an equitable basis; and 
-  Effective collection of all due monies. 
1.17  Volunteers. 
    The City of Chelsea recognizes that volunteers are an integral part of the city's government. Their participation in the process of government contributes to the uniqueness of the city's quality of life. 
    Volunteers choose to act in recognition of social responsibility and without concern for monetary gain. A resident may choose to be a policy making volunteer or a service volunteer. 
    The City of Chelsea is committed to providing adequate support, training, leadership, and recognition for all its volunteers. It expects commitment and excellence from the volunteers. The city has the right to determine duties, authorities and appropriateness of volunteers. Following established volunteer management protocol, the city has the right to both select and remove volunteers. 
( Amended 6-14-2017 ) 
Sec. 2.00. - City manager implementation and reporting responsibilities. 
    The city manager shall develop and promulgate regulations and procedures for the efficient and effective implementation of the city council administrative policies. All such regulations or procedures shall be inconsistent with the provisions of these policies, the ordinances of the city, the Charter, state or federal law. 
    The publication of these regulations and procedures shall be a part of Part IV of the administrative code of the city. 
Sec. 3.00. - Administration of noncriminal citations. 
3.01  Generally. 
    Noncriminal citations are issued by various officers and employees of the City of Chelsea to protect the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community. These procedures promote an aggressive program for the insurance, adjudication and collection of these noncriminal citations. 
    Citations involving violations of city ordinances, rules or regulations are issued on a continuous basis by authorized officers and employees of the City of Chelsea, including, but not limited to, members of the police department, the department of municipal inspections and the animal control officer within the health and human services department. 
    The city clerk shall be generally responsible for the administration of this noncriminal disposition process, and for the collection and processing of fined associated with the issuance of such citations. 
3.02  Issuance. Department having issues noncriminal citations(s) shall forward the appropriate copy of the noncriminal citation to the city clerk's office daily. The city clerk's office shall timely process the information from this noncriminal citations. The city clerk's office shall furnish [the] department [with] the names of all individuals to who[m], they issued citations within three business days. 
3.03  Adjudication. 
    Twice monthly, the city clerk shall forward to each department a listing of all outstanding citations issued by that department which are beyond the 21-day limit allowed for by law for the payment of such violations. 
    Each department shall be responsible for filing the appropriate complaint application for all individuals who have not paid their fine[s] after the expiration of the 21-day period. Once completed these applications shall be forwarded to the prosecuting attorney for the scheduling of appropriate court proceedings. Upon receipt of the scheduled hearing date a copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the city clerk who, if deemed appropriate, shall send a notice to the violator of such state and the fines outstanding. 
    It will be the responsibility of the members of the issuing department to attend any and all hearings before the appropriate court. 
3.04  Collections. The city clerk's office shall be responsible for the processing of all citation fines associated with the issuance of noncriminal citations. The treasury/collecting department shall be responsible for the collections of all monies received from the issuance of noncriminal citations and shall furnish the city clerk with a list of all citations paid in a timely fashion. When necessary, the city clerk's office shall be responsible for notifying the appropriate court once payment has been made by individuals who are to appear before the court or who appeared before the court for a hearing and were thereby ordered to pay the fine. 
Sec. 4.00. - Citywide video surveillance system "Chelsea View." 
    The City of Chelsea has established and implemented a citywide video surveillance system, known as Chelsea View. Rules and regulations have been adopted for the access and use of the system. 
(Amended 10-25-2005) 
PART III - REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I - BOARD OF HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this part are the Board of Health Regulations of the City, as adopted on April 12, 2016 . The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - HEALTH REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
ARTICLE 1. - FOOD HEALTH AND SAFETY 

Section 1.1. - Sale and/or Distribution of Foods Containing Artificial Trans-Fat.[2] 
    WHEREAS, it is an essential function, duty and responsibility of the Chelsea Board of Health to adequately safeguard the health of all its residents; and 
    WHEREAS, scientific evidence demonstrates a clear association between increased trans fat intake and the risk of coronary heart disease; and 
    WHEREAS, given the scientific consensus on the relationship between trans fat intake and heart disease, the new Federal Dietary Guidelines recommend that trans fat intake be kept as low as possible; and 
    WHEREAS, artificial trans fat can be replaced with readily available heart-healthy oils (such as corn, canola, and soy), without changing the taste of foods; and 
    WHEREAS, federal regulations have led to widespread reformulation of packaged foods, demonstrating the feasibility of removing trans fat from virtually all foods; and 
    WHEREAS, many national chain restaurants and food and snacks companies have already made the switch to trans fat-free product lines; and 
    WHEREAS, many local restaurants now fry with trans fat-free oils; 
    THEREFORE, we, the undersigned members of the Board of Health, hereby promulgate this regulation by the entirety and replace all other prior version of this regulation as follows: 
Section I: Definitions. The terms used in this Regulation shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "Artificial Trans Fat" shall mean any ingredient or additive that is artificially partially-hydrogenated. Artificial trans fats are commonly found in vegetable oils, butter substitutes, shortening, margarine, cake mixes, and frosting. 
B.  "Food Service Establishment." Any entity that stores, prepares, packages, serves, sells, or otherwise provides food or beverage for consumption in the City of Chelsea. Food Service Establishments include, but are not limited to: bakeries; restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; grills; grocery stores; delis; convenience stores; tea rooms; sandwich shops; taverns; bars; cocktail lounges; night clubs; roadside stands; industrial feeding establishments; private, public or non-profit organizations or institutions routinely serving food; catering kitchens; commissaries; or similar places in which food is prepared for sale or service in the premises or elsewhere with or without charge. 
C.  "Entity" shall mean any natural person, individual, hospital, academic institution, corporation, unincorporated association, society, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association, or other entity or business organization of any kind. 
D.  "Vending Machine" shall mean any machine of device designed to dispense food or beverage automatically. 
E.  "Mobile Food Vendor" shall mean any entity that sells or provides food from a mobile food unit. This shall include, but not be limited to: sidewalk vendors, canteen trucks, and food trailers. 
F.  "Board of Health" shall mean the Chelsea Board of Health and its designated agent or agents. 
G.  "Location" shall mean single Food Service Establishment. 
Section II: Scope of Regulation. 
A.  Prohibition: No Food Service Establishment, vending, or mobile food vendor shall store, prepare, distribute, hold for service, or serve any food or beverage containing artificial trans fat in the City of Chelsea. 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  From the effective date of this regulation until January 1, 2015, the regulation shall not apply to food or beverage whose nutrition facts label or other suitable documentation lists the trans fat content of the item as less than 0.5 grams per serving. 
2.  The regulation does not apply to food or beverage that contains only naturally occurring trans fat such as meat and dairy products. 
3.  The regulation does not include the sale of any food or beverage containing artificial trans fat that is contained in a manufacturer's original sealed package and that bears a United States Federal Food and Drug Administration-compliant nutrition label. 
Section III: Labeling. All Food Service Establishments, vendors and operators of vending machines, and mobile food vendors shall maintain on-site original labels or other suitable documentation listing the ingredient and nutrient content of all food products such that the Board of Health may inspect and evaluate compliance with this regulation. 
Section IV: Promotion of Compliant Establishments. The Board of Health will approve a logo or symbol-and related policies for use and display of that logo or symbol-that Food Service Establishments may display at their location of business and/or on any advertising material that informs the public of their full compliance with this regulation. 
    Food Service Establishments that are found to be out of compliance with this regulation must remove the Board approved logo or symbol from their location of business and from all marketing material until subsequent inspection find the food service establishment to be in compliance with this regulation. 
Section V: Enforcement. Unless otherwise specified, these regulations shall be enforceable by members of the Board of Health, and agents of the Board of Health; the Director of Health and Human Services, and his or her agents; and/or the inspectors of the Department of Inspectional Services. 
Section VI: Penalties. 
A.  Within any single one (1) year period, any person or entity found to be in violation of these regulations shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200) for the second offense, and three hundred dollars ($300) for any third or subsequent offense. The one-year period shall be calculated by counting backwards from the date of the most recent offenses alleged. 
B.  Each calendar day an entity operates in violation of any provision of this regulation shall constitute a separate violation. 
C.  In accordance with City Ordinance Section 1-8(c) whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the non-criminal method of disposition as provided in the Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. 
D.  Any person cited for violation of this regulation may appeal such decision in written form to the Board of Health within fourteen (14) days from the date the citation was issued. 
Section VII: Variance. 
A.  The Board of Health may grant a variance to this regulation after a hearing if, when in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would be manifestly unjust, considering all the relevant facts and circumstances of the individual case; and the person or entity requesting the variance has established that an equivalent level of public health will otherwise be provided without strict application of this regulation. 
B.  Every variance request shall be in writing and shall contain a statement providing evidence of the conditions stated above. 
Section VII: Severability. It is hereby declared that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this regulation are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this regulation shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative by valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this regulation. 
Section IX: Effective date. 
A.  The effective date of this regulation is upon adoption. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Adopted and effective October 14, 2014. 

ARTICLE 2. - TOBACCO CONTROL 

Section 1.2. - Restricting the Sale of Tobacco and Nicotine Delivery Products.[3] 
A.  Statement of Purpose: Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoking causes cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes, irritations to the eyes, nose and throat; 1 [] 
    Whereas among the 15.7% of students nationwide who currently smoke cigarettes and were less than 18 years old, 14.1% usually obtained them by buying them in a store (i.e. convenience store, supermarket, or discount store) or gas station; 2 [] 
    Whereas the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has concluded that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin 3 and the Surgeon General found that nicotine exposure during adolescence, a critical window for brain development, may have lasting adverse consequences for brain development, 4 and that it is addiction to nicotine that keeps youth smoking past adolescence. 5 [] 
    Whereas a Federal District Court found that Phillip Morris, RJ Reynolds and other leading cigarette manufacturers "spent billions of dollars every year on their marketing activities in order to encourage young people to try and then continue purchasing their cigarette products in order to provide the replacement smokers they need to survive" and that these companies were likely to continue targeting underage smokers; 6 [] 
    Whereas more than 80 percent of all adult smokers begin smoking before the age of 18, more than 90 percent do so before leaving their teens, and more than 3.5 million middle and high school students smoke; 7 [] 
    Whereas the Institute of Medicine (IOM) concludes that raising the minimum age of legal access to tobacco products to 21 will reduce tobacco initiation, particularly among adolescents 15-17, and will improve health across the lifespan and save lives; 8 [] 
    Whereas sales of flavored little cigars increased by 23% between 2008 and 2010 9 and many non-cigarette tobacco products, such as cigars and cigarillos, can be sold in a single "dose;" enjoy a relatively low tax as compared to cigarettes; are available in fruit, candy and alcohol flavors; and are popular among youth; 10 [] 
    Whereas the federal Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (FSPTCA), enacted in 2009, prohibited candy- and fruit-flavored cigarettes, 11 largely because these flavored products were marketed to youth and young adults, 12 and younger smokers were more likely to have tried these products than older smokers, 13 [] neither federal nor Massachusetts laws restrict sales of flavored non-cigarette tobacco products, such as cigars, cigarillos, smokeless tobacco, hookah tobacco, and electronic devices and the nicotine solutions used in these devices; 
    Whereas the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Surgeon General have stated that flavored tobacco products are considered to be "starter" products that help establish smoking habits that can lead to longterm addiction; 14 [] 
    Whereas the U.S. Surgeon General recognized in his 2014 report that a complementary strategy to assist in eradicating tobacco related death and disease is for local governments to ban categories of products from retail sale; 15 [] 
    Whereas the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reported that current electronic cigarette use among middle and high school students tripled from 2013 to 2014; 16 [] 
    Whereas nicotine solutions, which are consumed via electronic or battery-operated delivery smoking devices such as electronic cigarettes, are sold in dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, such as cotton candy and bubble gum; 17 [] 
    Whereas the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection has classified liquid nicotine in any amount as an "acutely hazardous waste" (310 CMR 30.136); 
    Whereas in a lab analysis conducted by the FDA, electronic cigarette cartridges that were labeled as containing no nicotine actually had low levels of nicotine present in all cartridges tested, except for one; 18 [] 
    Whereas according to the CDC's youth risk behavior surveillance system, the percentage of high school students in Massachusetts who reported the use of cigars within the past 30 days is 10.8% in 2013; 19 [] 
    Whereas data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey indicate that more than two-fifths of U.S. middle and high school smokers report using flavored little cigars or flavored cigarettes; 20 [] 
    Whereas in Massachusetts, youth use of cigars and smokeless tobacco (12.3%) is higher than the rate of current cigarette use (10.7%) for 2013 and has remained elevated since 2009; 21 [] 
    Whereas research shows that increased cigar prices significantly decreased the probability of male adolescent cigar use and a 10% increase in cigar prices would reduce use by 3.4%; 22 [] 
    Whereas the sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of health care institutions because these products are detrimental to the public health and their presence in health care institutions undermine efforts to educate patients on the safe and effective use of medication, including cessation medication; 
    Whereas educational institutions sell tobacco products to a younger population, who is particularly at risk for becoming smokers and such sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of educational institutions that educate a younger population about social, environmental and health risks and harms; 
    Whereas the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that "... [t]he right to engage in business must yield to the paramount right of government to protect the public health by any rational means". 23 [] 
Now, therefore it is the intention of the Chelsea Board of Health to regulate the sale of tobacco products. 
B.  Authority: This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the Chelsea Board of Health by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 111, Section 31 which states "Boards of health may make reasonable health regulations". 
C.  Definitions: For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Blunt Wrap: Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed or intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers. 
    Business Agent: An individual who has been designated by the owner or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said establishment. 
    Cigar: Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not otherwise defined as a cigarette under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 64C, Section 1, Paragraph 1. 
    Characterizing Flavor: A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the product. 
    Component Part: Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent. 
    Constituent: Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke constituent. 
    Coupon: Any card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket or other issue distributed for commercial or promotional purposes to be later surrendered by the bearer so as to receive an article, service or accommodation without charge or at a discount price. 
    Distinguishable: Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste. 
    Educational Institution: Any public or private college, school, professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other institution furnishing a program of higher education. 
    Employee: Any individual who performs services for an employer. 
    Employer: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one (1) or more employees. 
    Flavored Tobacco Product: Any tobacco product or component part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product. 
    Health Care Institution: An individual, partnership, association, corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under M.G.L. c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health care institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers, pharmacies, drug stores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and dentist offices. 
    Liquid Nicotine Container: A bottle or other vessel which contains nicotine in liquid or gel form, whether or not combined with another substance or substances, for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein. The term does not include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein, if the cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not intended to be open by the consumer or retailer. 
    Listed or Non-discounted Price: The higher of the price listed for a tobacco product on its package or the price listed on any related shelving, posting, advertising or display at the place where the tobacco product is sold or offered for sale plus all applicable taxes if such taxes are not included in the state price, and before the application of any discounts or coupons. 
    Minimum Legal Sales Age (MLSA): The age an individual must be before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality. 
    Non-Residential Roll-Your-Own (RYO) Machine: A mechanical device made available for use (including to an individual who produces cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. RYO machines located in private homes used for solely personal consumption are not Non-Residential RYO machines. 
    Permit Holder: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales permit or any person who is required to apply for a Tobacco Product Sales Permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, including but not limited to, an owner, operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment, business or retail store. 
    Retail Tobacco Store: An establishment that is not required to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons under the minimum legal sales age is prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the Chelsea Board of Health. 
    Self-Service Display: Any display from which customers may select a tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or store personnel. 
    Smoke Constituent: Any chemical or chemical compound in mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the tobacco product. 
    Tobacco Product: Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose. 
    Vending Machine: Any automated or mechanical self-service device, which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined herein. 
D.  Tobacco Sales to Persons Under the Minimum Legal Sales Age Prohibited: 
1.  No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales age; or not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales age. The minimum legal sales age in Chelsea is 21. 
2.  Required Signage. 
a.  In conformance with and in addition to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 270, Section 7, a copy of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 270, Section 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available from the Chelsea Board of Health. The notice shall be at least 48 square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than 4 feet or greater than 9 feet from the floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. 
b.  The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall conspicuously post signage in English and Spanish provided by the Chelsea Board of Health that discloses current referral information about smoking cessation. 
c.  The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall conspicuously post a sign in English and Spanish stating that "The sale of tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner so that they may be readily seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than four (4) feet or greater than nine (9) feet from the floor. 
3.  Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as defined herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older. Verification is required for any person under the age of 27. 
4.  All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be face-to-face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted location. 
E.  Tobacco Product Sales Permit: 
1.  No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as defined herein, within the city of Chelsea without first obtaining a Tobacco Product Sales Permit issued annually by the Chelsea Board of Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, non-mobile location in Chelsea are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at the specified location in Chelsea. 
2.  As part of the Tobacco Product Sales Permit application process, the applicant will be provided with the Chelsea regulation. Each applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco product sales regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale of tobacco and this regulation. 
3.  Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof of a current Tobacco Retailer License issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a Tobacco Product Sales Permit can be issued. 
4.  The fee for a Tobacco Product Sales Permit shall be determined by the Chelsea Board of Health annually. 
5.  A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling tobacco products, as defined herein. 
6.  Each Tobacco Product Sales Permit shall be displayed at the retail establishment in a conspicuous place. 
7.  A Tobacco Product Sales Permit is non-transferable. A new owner of an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are satisfied in full. 
8.  Issuance of a Tobacco Product Sales Permit shall be conditioned on an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation. 
9.  A Tobacco Product Sales Permit will not be renewed if the permit holder has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding permit suspensions. 
10.  A Tobacco Product Sales Permit will not be renewed if the permit holder has sold a tobacco product to a person under the MLSA (§ D.1) three times within the previous permit year and the time period to appeal has expired. The violator may request a hearing in accordance with § P.4. 
11.  Maximum Number of Tobacco Product Sales Permits. 
(a)  At any given time, there shall be no more than 58 Tobacco Product Sales Permits issued in Chelsea. No permit renewal will be denied based on the requirements of this subsection except any permit holder who has failed to renew his or her permit within thirty (30) days of expiration will be treated as a first-time permit applicant. New applicants for permits who are applying at a time when the maximum number of permits have been issued will be placed on a waiting list and will be eligible to apply for a permit on a "first-come, first-served" basis as issued permits are either not renewed, revoked, or are returned to the Board of Health. 
(b)  Applicants who purchase an existing business that holds a current Tobacco Product Sales Permit at the time of the sale of said business must apply within sixty (60) days of such sale for the permit held by the Seller if the Buyer intends to sell tobacco products, as defined herein. 
F.  Cigar Sales Regulated: 
1.  No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a single cigar. 
2.  No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any original factory-wrapped package of two or more cigars, unless such package is priced for retail sale at $5.00 or more. 
3.  This Section shall not apply to: 
a.  The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) or more. 
b.  A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside the boundaries of Chelsea. 
4.  The Chelsea Board of Health may adjust from time to time the amounts specified in this Section to reflect changes in the applicable Consumer Price Index by amendment of this regulation. 
G.  Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products Prohibited: No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any flavored tobacco product, except in retail tobacco stores. 
H.  Prohibition of the Sale of Blunt Wraps: No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in Chelsea. 
I.  Free Distribution and Coupon Redemption: No person shall: 
1.  Distribute or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco products, as defined herein; 
2.  Accept or redeem, offer to accept or redeem, or cause or hire any person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem any coupon that provides any tobacco product, as defined herein, without charge or for less than the listed or non-discounted price; or 
3.  Sell a tobacco product, as defined herein, to consumers through any multi-pack discounts (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or otherwise provide or distribute to consumers any tobacco product, as defined herein, without charge or for less than the listed or non-discounted price in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product. 
4.  Sections 2 and 3 shall not apply to products, such as cigarettes, for which there is a state law prohibiting them from being sold as loss leaders and for which a minimum retail price is required by state law. 
J.  Out-of-Package Sales: 
1.  The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited, including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product, as defined herein, for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that contains fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes, including single cigarettes. 
2.  A retailer of Liquid Nicotine Containers must comply with the provisions of 310 CMR 30.000, and must provide the Chelsea Board of Health with a written plan for disposal of said product, including disposal plans for any breakage, spillage or expiration of the product. 
3.  All retailers must comply with 940 CMR 21.05 which reads: "It shall be an unfair or deceptive act or practice for any person to sell or distribute nicotine in a liquid or gel substance in Massachusetts after March 15, 2016 unless the liquid or gel product is contained in a child-resistant package that, at a minimum, meets the standard for special packaging as set forth in 15 U.S.C. §§ 1471 through 1476 and 16 CFR § 1700 et seq." 
K.  Self-Service Displays: All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are prohibited. All humidors including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors must be locked. 
L.  Vending Machines: All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are prohibited. 
M.  Non-Residential Roll-Your-Own Machines: All Non-Residential Roll-Your-Own machines are prohibited. 
N.  Prohibition of the Sale of Tobacco Products by Health Care Institutions: No health care institution located in Chelsea shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that operates or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy, optician/optometrist or drug store, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as defined herein. 
O.  Prohibition of the Sale of Tobacco Products by Educational Institutions: No educational institution located in Chelsea shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property of an educational institution. 
P.  Incorporation of Attorney General Regulation 940 CMR 21.00: The sale or distribution to tobacco products, as defined herein, must comply with those provisions found at 940 CMR 21.00 ("Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes, Smokeless Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking Devices in Massachusetts"). 
Q.  Violations: 
1.  It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this regulation. The violator shall receive: 
a.  In the case of a first violation, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
b.  In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the date of the current violation, a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and the Tobacco Product Sales Permit shall be suspended for seven (7) consecutive business days. 
c.  In the case of three or more violations within a 24-month period, a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and the Tobacco Product Sales Permit shall be suspended for thirty (30) consecutive business days. 
d.  In the case of four violations or repeated, egregious violations of this regulation within a 24-month period, the Board of Health shall hold a hearing in accordance with § P.4 and may permanently revoke a Tobacco Product Sales Permit. 
2.  Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall result in the suspension of the Tobacco Product Sales Permit for thirty (30) consecutive business days. 
3.  In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her permit is suspended shall be subject to the suspension of all Board of Health issued permits for thirty (30) consecutive business days. 
4.  The Chelsea Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to suspend or revoke a Tobacco Product Sales Permit, which notice shall contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a hearing which date shall be no earlier than seven (7) days after the date of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing. After a hearing, the Chelsea Board of Health shall suspend or revoke the Tobacco Product Sales Permit if the Board of Health finds that a violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions or revocations, the Board shall make the determination notwithstanding any separate criminal or non-criminal proceedings brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation of the Tobacco Product Sales Permit. Failure to remove all tobacco products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this regulation. 
R.  Non-Criminal Disposition: Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the non-criminal method of disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. 
S.  Separate Violations: Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
T.  Enforcement: Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Chelsea Board of Health or its designated agent(s). 
    Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the regulation may do so by contacting the Chelsea Board of Health or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate. 
U.  Severability: If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force and effect. 
V.  Effective Date: This regulation shall take effect on January 15, 2016, with the exception of Section J(3) which shall take effect on March 15, 2016. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Approved Nov. 12, 2013 and effective Jan. 15, 2014. 

--- () --- 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, (CDC) (2012), Health Effects of Cigarette Smoking Fact Sheet. Retrieved from : http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistice/fact_sheets/health_effects/effects_cig_smoking/index.htm. 

--- () --- 
CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 2010: 59, 11 (No. SS-55)) Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/index.htm. 

--- () --- 
CDC (2010), How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-Attributable Disease. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/sgr/2010/. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking - 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 122. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/full-report.pdf. 
Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking-50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2014 U.S. Surgeon General's Report Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, Executive Summary p. 13. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/exec-summary.pdf 

--- () --- 
United States v. Phillip Morris, Inc., RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co., et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C. 2006) at Par. 3301 and Pp. 1605-07. 

--- () --- 
SAMHSA, Calculated based on data in 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health and U. S. Department of Health and Human services (HHA). The Health Consequences of Smoking-50 Years of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General, 2014. 

--- () --- 
IOM (Institute of Medicine) 2015. Public Health Implications of Raising the Minimum Age of Legal Access to Tobacco Products. Washington DC: The National Academies Press, 2015. 

--- () --- 
Delnevo, C., Flavored Little Cigars memo, September 21, 2011, from Neilson market scanner data. 
CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2010: 59, 12, note 5). Retrieved from: http:www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss5905.pdf. 

--- () --- 
21 U.S.C. § 387g. 
Carpenter CM, Wayne GF, Pauly JL, et al. 2005. "New Cigarette Brands with Flavors that Appeal to Youth: Tobacco Marketing Strategies." Health Affairs. 24(6): 1601-1610; Lewis M and Wackowski O. 2006. "Dealing with an Innovative Industry: A Look at Flavored Cigarettes Promoted by Mainstream Brands." American Journal of Public Health. 96(2): 244-251; Connolly GN. 2004. "Sweet and Spicy Flavours: New Brands for Minorities and Youth." Tobacco Control. 13(3): 211-212; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 537, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf. 

--- () --- 
Food and Drug Administration. 2011. Fact Sheet: Flavored Tobacco Products, www.fda.gov/downloads/TobaccoProducts/ProtectingKidsfromTobacco/FlavoredTobacco/UCM183214.pdf ; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf. 

--- () --- 
Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking-50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2014 Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 85. 

--- () --- 
Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. 2015. "Tobacco Use Among Middle and High School Students - United States, 2011-2014," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 64(14): 381-385. 

--- () --- 
Cameron JM, Howell DN, White JR, et al. 2013. "Variable and Potentially Fatal Amounts of Nicotine in E-cigarette Nicotine Solutions." Tobacco Control. [Electronic publication ahead of print], http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2013/02/12/tobaccocontrol-2012-050604.full ; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 549, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf. 

--- () --- 
Food and Drug Administration, Summary of Results: Laboratory Analysis of Electronic Cigarettes Conducted by FDA, available at: http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/publichealthfocus/ucm173146.htm. 

--- () --- 
CDC (2013) Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2014: 63 (No SS-04)). Retrieved from: www.cdc.gov. 

--- () --- 
King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, et al. 2013. "Flavored-Little-Cigar and Flavored-Cigarette Use Among U.S. Middle and High School Students." Journal of Adolescent Health. [Article in press], www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X%2813%2900415-1/abstract. 

--- () --- 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Data Brief, Youth Tobacco Use in Massachusetts: Survey Results from 1993 to 2013. 

--- () --- 
Ringel, J., Wasserman, J., & Andreyeva, T. (2005) Effects of Public Policy on Adolescents' Cigar Use: Evidence from the National Youth Tobacco Survey. American Journal of Public Health, 95(6), 995-998, doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2003.030411 and cited in Cigar, Cigarillo and Little Cigar Use among Canadian Youth: Are We Underestimating the Magnitude of this Problem?, J. Prim. P. 2011, Aug: 32(3-4):161-70. Retrieved from: www.nebi.nim.gov/pubmed/21809109. 

--- () --- 
Druzik et al v. Board of Health of Haverhill, 324 Mass.129 (1949). 

Section 1.3 - Regulations prohibiting smoking in workplaces and public places.[22] 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to protect the health of the employees and public in the City of Chelsea. 
B.  Authority. This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the Chelsea Board of Health pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 111; Section 31 that "[b]oards of health may make reasonable health regulations." It is also promulgated pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 270, Section 22(j) which states in part that "[n]othing in this section shall permit smoking in an area in which smoking is or may hereafter be prohibited by law including, without limitation: any other law or...health...regulation. Nothing in this section shall preempt further limitation of smoking by the commonwealth...or political subdivision of the commonwealth." 
C.  Definitions. As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Adult-Only Retail tobacco store: an establishment that-is not required to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons under the age of 21 is prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the Chelsea Board of Health. 
    Compensation: money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from an employer in return for work performed or services rendered. 
    E-Cigarette: Any electronic device, not approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that provides a vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of any liquid or solid nicotine. This term shall include such devices whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, e-hookah or under any other product name. 
    Employee: an individual or person who performs a service for compensation for an employer at the employer's workplace, including a contract employee, temporary employee, and independent contractor who performs a service in the employer's workplace for more than a de minimus amount of time. 
    Employer: an individual, person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, organization, school, college, university or other educational institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasi-public, private, or non-profit which uses the services of one (1) or more employees at one (1) or more workplaces, at any one (1) time, including the City of Chelsea. 
    Enclosed: a space bounded by walls, with or without windows or fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one (1) or more doors, including but not limited to an office, function room or hallway. 
    Membership association (also known as a private club): A not-for-profit entity that has been established and operates, for a charitable, philanthropic, civic, social, benevolent, educational, religious, athletic, recreation or similar purpose, and is comprised of members who collectively belong to: (i) a society, organization or association of a fraternal nature that operates under the lodge system, and having one or more affiliated chapters or branches incorporated in any state; or (ii) a corporation organized under chapter 180; or (iii) an established religious place of worship or instruction in the commonwealth whose real or personal property is exempt from taxation; or (iv) a veterans' organization incorporated or chartered by the Congress of the United States, or otherwise, having one or more affiliated chapters or branches incorporated in any state. Except for a religious place of worship or instruction, an entity shall not be a membership association for the purposes of this definition, unless individual membership containing not less than full membership costs and benefits is required for all members of the association for a period of not less than 90 days. 
    Municipal Building: Any building or facility owned, operated, leased or occupied by the municipality. 
    Outdoor space: an outdoor area, open to the air at all times and cannot be enclosed by a wall or side covering. 
    Smoking (or smoke): the lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled. 
    Smoking bar: an establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises and is required by Massachusetts General Law Ch. 270, §22 to maintain a valid permit to operate a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue. "Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that are commonly known as "cigar bars", "hookah bars" and "vape bars". 
    Workplace: an indoor area, structure or facility or a portion thereof, at which one (1) or more employees perform a service for compensation for an employer; other enclosed spaces rented to or otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has the right or authority to exercise control over the space. 
    Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 270, §22 and/or 105 CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions herein conflict with M.G.L. Ch. 270, § 22 or 105 CMR 661, the definition contained in this regulation shall control. 
D.  Smoking prohibited. 
a)  It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace as well as those workplaces listed in subsection (c) below. 
b)  Smoking is hereby prohibited in Chelsea in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 270, §22 (commonly known as the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law"). 
c)  Pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 270, §22(j) smoking is also hereby prohibited in: 
1.  Smoking Bars 
2.  Adult-Only Retail Tobacco Stores. 
3.  The area within fifty (50) feet of any municipal building entranceway accessible to the public. 
4.  Municipal-owned parks and playgrounds. 
5.  Municipal-owned athletic fields. 
6.  Municipal-owned beaches and other swimming areas. 
7.  Membership associations (private clubs). 
8.  Nursing homes. 
9.  Hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts and lodging homes. 
10.  All outdoor areas of restaurants, bars, and taverns where food and/or beverages are sold, served or otherwise consumed or carried. 
11.  Public transportation, bus and taxi waiting areas. 
d)  The use of e-cigarettes is prohibited wherever smoking is prohibited per Massachusetts law and Section 4(c) of this regulation. 
E.  Enforcement. 
a)  An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or vessel who violates this section, in a manner other than by smoking in a place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of: 
1.  $100 for the first violation; 
2.  $200 for a second violation occurring within two (2) years of the date of the first offense; and 
3.  $300 for a third or subsequent violation occurring within two (2) years of the second violation. 
b)  Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
c)  This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its designees. 
d)  Violations of Section 4(b) shall be disposed of by a civil penalty using the non-criminal method of disposition procedures contained in Section 21D of Chapter 40 of Massachusetts General Law without an enabling ordinance or by-law. The disposition of fines assessed shall be subject to Section 188 of Chapter 111. 
e)  Violations of Sections 4(a), 4(c) and 4(d) may be disposed of by a civil penalty using the non-criminal method of disposition procedures contained in Section 21D of Chapter 40 of Massachusetts General Law. 
f)  If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend any Board of Health-issued permit to operate and shall send notice of the revocation or suspension to the Department of Public Health. 
g)  Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department or the equivalent. 
F.  Severability. If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of any remaining paragraphs or provisions. 
G.  Conflict with other laws or regulations. Notwithstanding the provisons of Section 4 of this regulation nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or other regulations to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or other regulations. 
H.  Effective Date. This regulation shall be effective as of June 12, 2018 . 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 10, 2018 , amended § 1.3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 1.3, pertained to workplace smoking restrictions and adopted by Chelsea Board of Health, Feb. 2003, effective Sept. 1, 2003. 

CHAPTER 2. - ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE 

Section 2.1. - Mercury-Containing Devices.[23] 
Section 1: Findings. Be it ordained by the Board of Health of Chelsea, in accordance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 111, Section 31, and any other applicable law as follows: 
(a)  Mercury is a persistent and toxic pollutant that bio-accumulates in the environment and the food chain. 
(b)  Incineration of medical and municipal waste that contains mercury is a major source of atmospheric deposition of mercury in the Northeast resulting in mercury contamination of air and water. 
(c)  Mercury can also directly enter the environment through vaporization and/or spillage when devices such as a thermometer or mercury containing thermostat device breaks during use, transportation or disposal. 
(d)  Due to the bio-accumulation of mercury in fish, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health has issued a statewide native fish advisory, warning pregnant women, women of childbearing age and children not to consume any fish. 
(e)  Mercury is readily used in many common products including thermometers, thermostats, button batteries and mercury containing switches. 
(f)  The "Massachusetts Zero Mercury Strategy" adopted in the summer of 2000 by the Secretary of Environmental Affairs, calls for the elimination of the use and discharge of mercury. 
(g)  There are accurate and safe alternatives to many mercury-containing devices that are readily available and comparable in cost. 
(h)  As new, accurate, safe and cost effective alternatives to mercury-containing devices arrive, the Board of Health will continue to look at the regulations to expand the control of mercury containing devices in the City of Chelsea. 
Section 1.2: Minimum Standards. The mercury-containing products shall be sold in accordance with the requirements of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 21H Section 6b-6m: The Massachusetts Mercury Management Act, which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
Section 2: Definitions. 
(a)  City means the city of Chelsea. 
(b)  Mercury-containing device means a device, device instrument, or equipment into which elemental mercury or mercury compounds are intentionally added during its formulation or manufacture and in which the continued presence of mercury is desired to provide a specific characteristic or to permit a specific function. 
(c)  Mercury fever thermometer means a mercury-containing device that is used to measure body temperature. 
(d)  Mercury thermostat means a mercury-containing device that is used to automatically respond to temperature changes and activates switches to control equipment. 
(e)  Mercury switch means a switching device containing mercury. 
(f)  Mercury button battery means a button battery containing mercury. 
(g)  Health care facility means any hospital, nursing home, extended care facility, long-term facility, clinic or medical laboratory, state or private health or mental institution, clinic, physician's office or health maintenance organization. 
(h)  Manufacturer means any person, firm association partnership, corporation; governmental entity, organization, combination, or joint venture that produces a product. If the product is produced in a foreign country, the manufacturer is the importer or domestic distributor. 
(i)  Individuals means any person, or persons that are removing or replacing any Mercury-containing device from a property. The individual may be the property owner, resident or hired contractor such as but not limited to a carpenter, plumber or electrician. 
(j)  Building means any residential, commercial, industrial or recreational buildings or facilities. 
Section 3: Ban on the Sale of Mercury Fever Thermometers. 
Section 3.1. Retail Sale Prohibited. Three months after the adoption of this regulation, a person shall not sell, make available for sale, or supply (including via internet) mercury fever thermometers to consumers and patients, except by prescription. The manufacturers of mercury fever thermometers shall supply clear instructions on the careful handling of the thermometer to avoid breakage and proper cleanup should a breakage occur with all mercury thermometers sold through prescriptions. 
Section 3.2. Manufacturing Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture a mercury fever thermometer in the City. 
Section 3.3. Importation Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any facility to import, or distribute a mercury fever thermometer in the City, except in the case of a medical necessity as determined by a licensed physician or are ordered by prescription. 
Section 4: Ban on the Sale of Mercury Thermostats. 
Section 4.1. Retail Sale. It is the intent of the Board of Health to ban the sale of mercury thermostats within three months of widespread commercial sale and distribution of effective substitutions for current mercury thermostats. The Board supports the research and development of alternative devices for the monitoring and measurement of household heating temperature control that will replace mercury containing thermostats. Such time period will be determined by amendment to these regulations. 
Section 4.2. Manufacturing Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture a mercury thermostat in the City. 
Section 4.3. Importation Prohibited. It is the intent of the Board of Health to prohibit importing, or distributing mercury thermostats within three months of widespread commercial sale and distribution of effective substitutions for current mercury containing thermostats. Such time period will be determined by amendment to these regulations. 
Section 5: Mercury Disposal Regulations. 
Section 5.1. Regulations. 
(a)  Mercury-containing devices such as switches and button batteries shall not be disposed of through any waste stream that results in their incineration, land filling, discharge into the general environment or any other method of disposal not approved by the Department of Environmental Protection and local board of health. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the individual(s) removing or replacing such mercury-containing device to properly dispose of this mercury-containing device in accordance with these regulations and any state regulation regarding proper mercury disposal. 
(c)  Used mercury-containing devices must be disposed of through an approved Board of Health recycling program. Approved programs shall at a minimum document how they will accept, store, recycle and/or transfer each device. In addition, the programs yearly approval will be contingent on providing evidence to the Board, through properly documented manifests, that all devices have had their Mercury successfully recycled. 
Section 5.2. Effective Date and Enforcement. The effective date of this regulation is the date posted on the front page of this regulation, which shall be identical to the date of adoption of these regulations. 
1.  As of the effective date of this regulation any individual that removes, replaces, or engages any activity that would result in the removal or replacement of a Mercury-containing device shall comply with the provisions of this regulation. 
Section 6: Penalty for Violation of This Regulation. 
(a)  In accordance with City Ordinance Sec. 1-8(c) any person, business, or other entity of whatever nature, who violates a provision of this regulation, or any hereafter enacted, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, be liable for a penalty as set forth in subsection (b) of this regulation for each offense. However, if a higher penalty is permitted under Federal or State Law, such higher penalty shall be the maximum penalty for each offense, and providing that this section shall not preclude the City from proceedings to restrain the violation of any provision of this regulation by injunction or other method, where such proceeding is appropriate. 
(b)  First Offense: $50.00 
Second Offense: $150.00 
Third Offense: $300.00 
Section 7: Severability. If any provision of these Regulations is declared invalid or not enforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full force and effect. 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Adopted Feb. 4, 2003 and effective March 4, 2003. 

Section 2.2. - Bulk Storage Liquid Asphalt Facilities.[24] 
    Whereas, the Board of Health ("Board") has held a public hearing, accepted evidence, considered such evidence and determined that bulk petroleum distillate storage facilities are a noisome trade, all of which is incorporated herein by reference, and 
    Whereas, the Board of Health issued an Order on September 9, 1997, prohibiting the bulk storage of liquid asphalt in the City of Chelsea and affirming its right to further regulate bulk petroleum distillate storage facilities, and 
    Whereas, the Board of Health has retained the services of an environmental consultant to review and recommend regulations for the bulk petroleum distillate storage facilities, 
    Whereas, the Board of Health has the authority to enact regulations for bulk petroleum distillate storage facilities, pursuant to its authority under section 31 and section 143 et seq. of chapter 111 of the General Laws. 
    Now, therefore, the Board of Health, with an intent to ameliorate the impacts on the immediate surrounding community, hereby exercises its jurisdiction and determines that the bulk storage of liquid asphalt is subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The bulk storage of liquid asphalt is hereby prohibited within the City of Chelsea. Existing bulk storage liquid asphalt facilities operating within the City of Chelsea as of September 9, 1997 are "grandfathered" and not subject to the Board's prohibition. 
2.  Any entity storing liquid asphalt in bulk within the City of Chelsea (hereinafter referred to as "entity") shall be required to install and maintain an on-site odor/emission control system that shall strive to meet or exceed standards and specifications for the best management practices/best available control technology for the control of fugitive and particulate emissions emanating from said product. All such odor/emission control systems are subject to review and approval by the Board of Health. Representatives from the Board of Health shall be granted reasonable access to bulk storage liquid asphalt storage facilities to inspect the on-site odor/emission control system and air sampling collection procedures. 
3.  Any entity storing liquid asphalt in bulk within the City of Chelsea shall be required to provide the Board with sampling aimed at measuring H2S destruction efficiency through initial and routine air sampling, as follows: 
i.  Initial sampling shall be conducted within 60 days of control device installation and no later than the second filling operation, whichever occurs first. The Entity must submit a sampling report to the Board of Health within 45 days of initial sampling. The report shall provide a copy of field sampling notes (including but not limited to the volume of air sampled, sampling equipment type and model, field observations and calibration information), a copy of all laboratory results including chain-of-custody documentation, and a calculation of the control system destruction efficiency, calculated on a concentration basis. 
ii.  Routine sampling shall be conducted once per quarter by the 15th day of March, June, September, and December during tank filling operations. Sampling reports shall be submitted to the Board of Health no later than the 30th day of the month following quarterly sampling. If the facility is shut down during the winter quarter, no sampling shall be required; however, the Entity must notify the Board of Health in writing by the 30th day of January as to such. 
iii.  All samples shall be submitted to a Massachusetts-certified analytical laboratory via chain-of-custody documentation and shall be analyzed for organic and inorganic sulfur compounds and volatile organic compounds by standard EPA methods. All samples shall be collected on AC tank vents prior to and after H2S destruction. Sampling shall be conducted at each control point (e.g. tank vent) that is considered "active" during the sampling round. Sampling procedures shall be conducted in accordance with standard EPA methods corresponding to laboratory analyses required below. 
4.  The Board hereby affirms its right to further regulate bulk liquid asphalt storage facilities as a noisome trade if and when it is determined to be in the best interests of the public and for the protection of the public health. 
5.  The provisions of this regulation are severable in the event that any of its provisions may be found, for any lawful reason, inoperative. 
Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Adopted Feb. 5, 2002. 

Section 2.3. - Bulk Petroleum Storage Facilities, No. 6 Fuel Oil or Blend Containing No. 6 Oil.[25] 
    Whereas, the Board of Health has held a public hearing, accepted evidence, considered such evidence and determined that bulk petroleum storage facilities are a noisome trade, all of which is incorporated herein by reference, 
    Whereas, the Board of Health issued an Order and Regulation on September 9, 1997 relative to the adoption of specific regulations for bulk petroleum storage facilities, 
    Whereas, on August 22, 2001, the Board of Health adopted a regulation requiring any entity storing Number 6 fuel oil in bulk within the City of Chelsea to install odor neutralization systems, and 
    Whereas, since that regulation has been adopted, the Board has received additional commentary and complaints from residents regarding odors emanating from entities storing Number 6 fuel oil in bulk, 
    Whereas in response to that commentary, the City of Chelsea, through the Board of Health, has retained the services of an environmental consultant to review and recommend regulations for the control of odors emanating from Number 6 fuel oil bulk storage and loading facilities, 
    Whereas, the Board, the owners of Number 6 fuel oil storage facilities, and the environmental consultant retained by the City have reviewed potential odor control systems, 
    Whereas, the Board of Health has the authority to enact regulations for bulk petroleum storage facilities, pursuant to its authority under Section 31 and Section 143 Chapter 111 of the General Laws. 
    Now, therefore, the Board of Health, with an intent to ameliorate the impacts on the immediate surrounding community, hereby exercises its jurisdiction and determines that bulk petroleum storage facilities, commonly storing Number 6 fuel oil or a blend containing No. 6 oil, are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Any entity storing Number 6 fuel oil or a blend containing No. 6 oil in bulk within the City of Chelsea (hereinafter referred to as "entity") shall be required to install and maintain an on-site odor control system that shall meet or exceed standards and specifications, as established by the Board of Health, that provides the best available technology for containment, collection and treatment of odor emissions emanating from said entity. All such odor control systems are subject to review and approval by the Board of Health. 
2.  Any entity storing Number 6 fuel oil in bulk within the City of Chelsea shall be required to maintain a separate, complaint in-take telephone line, which shall be staffed by personnel on a 24 hour basis. The entity shall keep a log of the number, time and description of complaints received and responses to same. The entity shall provide the Board of Health with a copy of the complaint in-take log on a quarterly basis. In addition, the entity shall promote the availability of the complaint in-take telephone number by reasonable means, including publishing advertisements in the local newspaper and distributing flyers in adjoining residential neighborhoods. 
3.  Any entity utilizing an odor control device shall conduct proof-of-concept testing of the system within 60 days of start-up for the following functional parameters: 
a)  Air flow rate through the system in cubic feet per minute (cfm). 
b)  Inlet and outlet concentration of sulfur compounds in accordance with ASTM D5504-98. 
c)  Inlet and outlet odor concentration (dilutions to threshold) in accordance with ASTM E679-04. 
d)  Inlet and outlet hydrogen sulfide, and total mercaptans via gas detection. 
Such proof-of-concept shall be conducted by an independent firm. 
4.  Results of testing shall be submitted to the Board of Health within 30 days testing for review by the Board of Health with comments on system efficiency manufacturer's expected results using the following as a minimum criterion: 
Hydrogen Sulfide Removal Efficiency - 95% 
Odor Removal Efficiency - For information only 
5.  Monthly testing shall be conducted by the entity of the inlet and outlet pursuant to the control system manufacturer's guidelines to ensure adequate maintenance and specified control efficiency. Measurement will be made for the following parameters 
a.  Air flow rate through the system in cubic feet per minute (cfm). 
b.  Inlet and outlet hydrogen sulfide via gas detection tubes. 
6.  The City of Chelsea Board of Health, or their designee, shall be responsible for enforcement of this regulation. Any entity found to be in violation of the provisions of this regulation shall, after notice and an opportunity to correct any such non-compliance, be subject to further order and or sanctions as deemed reasonable by the Board of Health. 
7.  The provisions of this regulation are severable in the event that any of its provisions may be found, for any lawful reason, inoperative. 
Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Received by city clerk's office May 6, 2005. 

Section 2.4. - Solid Waste Regulations. 
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 
    WHEREAS, municipalities, acting through their boards of health, possesses authority to rectify public health hazards under the authority of M.G.L. ch. 111, § 31A and M.G.L. ch. 111, § 31B; and 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to the 1996 and 2011 Solid Waste Regulations of the City of Chelsea Board of Health; and, 
    WHEREAS, under the provisions of section 10.0 of Part III of the Administrative Code of the City of Chelsea, as amended in 2009, the Board of Health has been delegated the authority to regulate in this area; and 
    THEREFORE, we, the undersigned members of the Board of Health, hereby promulgate this amendment by the entirety to the 1996 and 2011 Solid Waste Regulations of the City of Chelsea Board of Health, as previously promulgated by the Board of Health, hereafter to be known as the 2016 Solid Waste Regulations of the City of Chelsea Board of Health. Furthermore, we hereby order the publication of these amendments according to the provisions of M.G.L. ch. 111, § 31, and direct that these regulations be filed with the Department of Environmental Protection, also according to the provisions of M.G.L. ch. 111, § 31. 
1.0.  Citation. These regulations shall constitute and be designated as "The 2016 Solid Waste Regulations of the City of Chelsea Board of Health" and shall be so cited. 
2.0.  Definitions. 
    Community wastes. The words "community wastes" shall mean all solid wastes generated by the noncommercial and nonindustrial activities of private individuals, including solid wastes from households, yards, streets, sidewalks and alleys. 
    Board of health. The words "board of health" shall mean the members of the City of Chelsea Board of Health, and their agent/secretary, the director of the division of health. 
    Department of inspectional services. The words "department of inspectional services" shall mean the director of municipal inspections and the inspectors of the department of inspectional services. 
    Hazardous waste. The words "hazardous waste" mean any solid waste that is dangerous or potentially harmful to our health or the environment. Hazardous wastes can be liquids, solids, gases, or sludge. They may be infectious, corrosive, flammable, poisonous, or radioactive, as per the definition of hazardous wastes in M.G.L. ch. 21, § 1. They can be discarded commercial products, like cleaning fluids or pesticides, or the by-products of manufacturing processes. 
    Household waste. The words "household waste" mean any solid waste generated by households, including single and multiple residences. 
    Municipal solid waste. The words "municipal solid waste" mean solid waste from household, community, commercial, and industrial sources, that does not contain hazardous wastes as defined in M.G.L. ch. 21, § 1. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or parcel of land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, businesses, corporations, firms, partnerships, committees, unions, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Prohibited waste. The words "prohibited waste" shall mean all material not suitable for disposal as part of the household waste collected for disposal under the auspices of the City of Chelsea, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  demolition debris 
b.  stumps, regardless of size, and limbs or branches exceeding six inches (6") in diameter or four feet (4') in length. 
c.  tires 
d.  automobile parts, whole or in part 
e.  petroleum products and wastes 
f.  hazardous wastes 
g.  contaminated soil 
h.  batteries 
i.  industrial wastes 
j.  chemical wastes 
k.  human wastes 
1.  other waste prohibited by municipal, state or federal law or regulation. 
m.  any waste prohibited for disposal under the City of Chelsea Contract for Disposal of Solid Waste. 
    Recyclables. The word "recyclables" shall mean those items as laid out in rule 9.1 of these regulations. 
    Solid waste. The words "solid waste" shall mean garbage, swill, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, and other discarded materials, which may be generated from the normal activities of residences, households, municipal buildings, institutions, industries, hospitals, organizations, schools and commercial enterprises. 
Storage.  The word "storage" shall mean the holding or containment of waste for a temporary period of time prior to the waste being disposed of and/or collected. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
3.0  Rules of Construction. In the construction of these regulations, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Health or the context of the regulation clearly requires otherwise: 
a.  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last calendar day, and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation. 
b.  Conflicting provisions. If any provisions of these regulations conflict with one another, accepted rules of statutory construction shall be applied to resolve the conflict. 
c.  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of these regulations appears requiring the head of a department or some other officer of the City of Chelsea to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right to such official, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
d.  Gender. A word importing only the male gender shall extend and be construed as to apply to the female gender and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. A word importing the female gender only shall extend and be construed as to apply to the male gender and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to females. 
e.  Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
f.  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future, as well as the past and present, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
g.  Time. Words stating a time or hour of a day shall mean the official time of the city. 
4.0.  Minimum Standards. The storage and disposal of municipal solid waste shall be in accordance with the requirements of 105 CMR 410.000: The State Sanitary Code, Minimum Standards of Fitness for Human Habitation, which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
5.0.  Storage. 
5.1.  Storage Receptacles. All municipal solid waste shall be stored entirely inside covered, watertight and rodent-proof receptacles. Such receptacles and covers shall be made of metal or other durable material. 
5.2.  Dumpsters. Dumpsters may be used to store municipal solid waste in accordance with zoning regulations and must be constructed of non-flammable material and must be covered at all times. Said covers may be constructed of fiberglass, but in no instance shall dumpster container bodies be constructed of fiberglass materials. 
    Municipal solid waste must be entirely contained within the dumpster and covered. Overflowing dumpsters or wasted placed outside of dumpsters shall be considered a violation. 
6.0.  Collection. 
6.1.  Collection. All municipal solid waste to be collected by the City of Chelsea or by private haulers shall be placed inside receptacles designed for the collection of solid waste or dumpsters as regulated in section 5.0 of this document. Covers are not required for receptacles placed for waste collection, but garbage in receptacles shall be in bags. The receptacle should only contain bags to the height that would allow for a cover to be placed onto the receptacle. Such receptacles shall be made of metal or other durable material and may not exceed thirty (30) gallons in capacity and shall not contain more than fifty (50) pounds of waste for collection. 
The department of public works may establish and maintain a program allowing the collection of solid waste that is contained entirely within specially designed bags in lieu of a metal or durable receptacle. Such bags must be of suitable durability and thickness to be watertight, rodent-proof and able to prevent small animals from gaining access to the contents thereof. Bags shall be clearly marked and readily identifiable as eligible for use in this program and must be used in accordance with the manufacturer instructions. Contents of such bag shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Bags may not be used in lieu of covered, metal or durable receptacles for commercial establishments or dwellings that contain more than three (3) units. 
Municipal solid waste may not be placed out for collection earlier than 5:00 PM the day prior to scheduled collection. 
Municipal solid waste placed out for collection may not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk or pathway by narrowing the passage to less than three (3) feet in width. 
6.2.  Collection Within the City Limits; Permit Required for Each Vehicle. No person shall remove or transport through the streets of the City of Chelsea any solid waste or recyclable items, collected within the city limits, without a permit issued for each vehicle by the director of the inspectional services, and approved by the director of public works; except that the department of public works, its' authorized agents or the originator of the waste may remove or transport such materials without a permit, provided they otherwise comply with the regulations, and ordinances of the City of Chelsea. 
Application for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the director of inspectional services, shall contain such information as the director of inspectional services may require, and shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars per vehicle. Permits shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which issued, but may be renewed annually on application as provided above. Permits may be suspended, modified or revoked, by the director of inspectional services for failure to comply with the requirements of this section. Persons aggrieved by a decision of the director of inspectional services made pursuant to this rule (6.2) may appeal within fourteen (14) days to the Board of Health. 
6.3.  Collection Outside the City Limits, Registration Required. No person shall transport through the streets of the City of Chelsea any solid waste or recyclables, not collected within the city, without first registering with the director of inspectional services, a copy of which the director of inspectional services shall forward to the director of public works. Transportation of such materials shall be in compliance with all regulations, and ordinances of the City of Chelsea. 
Motor vehicles owned by, or under contract with the Commonwealth, or one of its political sub-divisions, or the originator of the waste may remove or transport such materials without registering with the director of inspectional services, provided they otherwise comply with the regulations, and ordinances of the City of Chelsea. 
6.4.  City Collection Routes. Municipal solid waste shall be collected in accordance with a schedule published by the department of public works. 
6.5.  City Collection Rules. The director of public works may make such rules as are necessary to provide for the safe and efficient operation of the municipal collection system. The director of public works or his/her designee may refuse to collect any material placed for collection in violation of these rules, or the ordinances of the City of Chelsea. 
6.6.  Collection by Permitted Hauler. 
a.  Collection by permitted haulers shall be on a regular basis, no less than twice per month, unless protection of the public health requires more frequent collection. 
b.  Solid waste for collection by privately contracted and permitted haulers shall be placed in suitable containers on any sidewalk that is immediately contiguous to the property line of the owner or occupant, not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection, and not earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day of scheduled collection. Owners or occupants may apply to the director of inspectional services for an alternate location. Authorization for an alternate location shall be granted by the director of inspectional services if (i) sufficient reason is shown why the authorized location is hazardous to the public health or safety, or (ii) is impractical for collection purposes, as determined by the director of public works. No more than one petition for an alternate location shall be submitted within a single calendar year, except upon a showing of changed circumstances. Such containers shall not obstruct the flow of traffic on the sidewalk or roadways. Solid waste containers shall be removed from the sidewalk or roadway as soon as possible after collection but in no case later than 12:00 midnight of the day of scheduled collection. Persons aggrieved by a decision of the director of inspectional services made pursuant to this rule (6.6) may appeal within fourteen (14) days to the Board of Health. 
6.7.  Collection Lists . Permitted private haulers shall submit a list of their Chelsea clients, their names, addresses and the weekly schedule of collection (week day and approximate time) on a quarterly basis (being January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st of each year) to the following city departments: department of inspectional services, the department of public works, and the treasurer's office. Such submission may be made by regular mail, addressed to each department at Chelsea City Hall, 500 Broadway, Chelsea, MA 02150. 
7.0.  Solid Waste. 
7.1.  Tree Waste. The owner or agent of any premises shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of all trees, tree trunks, and stumps originating thereon. 
7.2.  Construction Waste. The owner or agent of any premises shall be responsible for the removal of all construction waste originating thereon within seven (7) days of the completion of the construction work or within such shorter time as determined necessary by the department of inspectional services. 
7.3.  Landscaping Waste. The owner or agent of the premises shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of all excess materials resulting from landscaping operations. Until otherwise affected by state law or regulation, leaves and grass clippings shall not be construed to be prohibited waste. If and when leaves and grass clippings are collected under the auspices of the City of Chelsea, they shall be separately packaged for collection. No other material or debris shall be packaged with the leaves or grass clippings for such collection. 
7.4.  Manufacturing or Trade Wastes. The owner or operator of any establishment producing manufacturing or trade wastes shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
7.5.  Hospital, Convalescent Home, Boarding House, Etc. Waste. All waste resulting from the usual routine of domestic housekeeping may be placed for collection on the regular collection day. All hazardous (infectious) waste, as defined by M.G.L. ch. 21 § 1, and subject to further regulation by the Board of Health, will not be accepted by the City for collection, or disposal. All such waste must be disposed of in a manner approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as outlined 310 CMR 30,000 is intended to protect public health, safety, and welfare, and the environment, by comprehensively regulating the generation, storage, collection, transport, treatment, disposal, use, reuse, and recycling of hazardous waste in Massachusetts. 310 CMR 30.000 should be read together with M.G.L. ch. 21C and ch. 21E, § 6 and by St. 1987, ch. 584, § 47, each of which has many important substantive requirements not repeated in 310 CMR 30.000. 
7.6.  Littering or Dumping. No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any quantity of un-containerized paper, metal, glass, plastic or miscellaneous solid waste which may be classified as trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage or junk upon a street, park, or other public or private way, or upon any premises or vacant lot, or store or keep the same except in receptacles as authorized pursuant to regulation or ordinance of the City of Chelsea, or in an area approved for disposal by an inspector of the department of inspectional services. 
Property owners, occupants of dwellings with fewer than 3 units, and commercial establishments must keep their property and adjacent sidewalks free of litter and improperly stored solid waste material. Accumulations of litter the presence of improperly stored solid waste will constitute a violation of these regulations. 
7.7.  Scavenging. No person, except for those person(s) engaged by the City of Chelsea, or City of Chelsea permitted private collectors in the business of solid waste collection, shall overhaul, pick over, sort or remove the contents of containers of waste set out for collection. 
7.8.  Removal of Waste. When ordered by the department of inspectional services, the owner, agent or occupant/tenant of a lot or premises shall remove any improper accumulation or storage of garbage, rubbish, or other waste or offensive material, within such time as the department of inspectional services may deem necessary. 
8.  0. Private Collections. 
8.1.  Transport. The transportation through the streets of the City of Chelsea of any solid waste which may be classified as garbage, trash, debris, refuse, rubbish, junk, or other offensive material shall be conducted, including every aspect of the collection process, in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance. 
8.2.  Vehicles. Permitted vehicles conveying waste shall be of such construction and, so operated, and waste so collected, that any contents will not spill, leak, fall or be blown from the vehicle, or otherwise create a public nuisance. Owners, and operators of such vehicles must comply with the noise ordinances of the City of Chelsea. Permitted vehicles used for conveying through Chelsea any solid waste which may be classified as garbage, grease, bones or other offensive materials shall be fully enclosed unless the material is transported in watertight containers equipped with tight-fitting covers. Each permitted vehicle must carry a broom. Each permitted vehicle must clearly display in letters not less than four inches the company name. The City of Chelsea approval decal shall be clearly displayed on the driver's side vent window. 
9.0.  Recycling. 
9.1.  Recycling Collection. All residents and commercial establishments in the City of Chelsea are required to separate the following recyclables from all other waste: 
a)  glass bottles and jars 
b)  plastic containers labeled 1-7 
c)  aluminum, tin and steel cans and lids 
d)  corrugated cardboard 
e)  aluminum foil 
f)  all newspapers 
g)  magazines, phone books, junk mail, paper bags, white or colored office paper, envelopes, cereal boxes, shoe boxes, etc. 
The City reserves the right, with adequate notice to amend this list. 
9.2.  Paper Collection. Paper products must be properly bundled in either plain brown paper shopping bags, placed in corrugated boxes or securely tied in flat and compact bundles so that they cannot be readily blown about or scattered, none of which shall be more than fifty (50) pounds in weight or one and one-half (11/2) feet in maximum dimension. 
9.3.  Corrugated Cardboard Collection. Boxes and cartons shall be collapsed or broken up to reduce volume. Corrugated cardboard must be properly bundled in standard grocery or paper shopping bags, placed in corrugated boxes or securely tied in flat and compact bundles so that they cannot be readily blown about or scattered, none of which shall be more than fifty (50) pounds in weight or three (3) foot by three (3) feet in maximum dimension. 
10.0.  Enforcement. 
10.1.  Action. Unless otherwise specified, these regulations shall be enforceable by the Board of Health; the Director of Health and Human Services, and his agents; the inspectors of the department of inspectional services; and the director of public works, and his agents. 
10.2.  Penalty. 
a.  Whoever violates any provision of these regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each day's offense shall constitute a separate violation of these regulations. 
b.  In accordance with the provisions of section 1-7 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Chelsea, these regulations shall be enforceable in non-criminal proceedings according to M.G.L. ch. 40. § 21D. 
c.  Any person, permitted under these regulations, who is found, after a hearing held before the director of inspectional services, to have violated these regulations, shall be subject to disciplinary sanctions up to and including revocation of any and all licenses held under these regulations by the person. Notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit no less than seven days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing, shall specify the grounds of complaint, the time and place of the hearing, and the possible sanctions. 
d.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of inspectional services may appeal such decision to the Board of Health within fourteen (14) days from the date of the hearing. 
11.0.  Severability. It is hereby declared that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of these solid waste control regulations are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of these solid waste control regulations shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative by valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of these solid waste control regulations. 
( Ord. of 9-13-2016(1) ) 
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS 

Section 3.1. - Operation of Public and Semi-Public Swimming Pools.[26] 
1.0.  Purpose. The Chelsea Board of Health is responsible for the protection of the public and environmental health and welfare within the City of Chelsea. In an effort to protect the public, the following regulations are promulgated to supplement those set forth in 105 CMR 435.00, et seq. 
2.0.  Authority. These regulations are adopted under the authority of M.G.L. ch. 111, § 31. 
3.0.  Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all public and semi-public pools regulated under 105 CMR 435.00. 
4.0.  Citation. These regulations may be cited as "Swimming Pool Regulations". 
5.0.  Definitions. 
5.1.  Public Pool means every swimming, wading or special purpose pool, admission to which may be gained by the general public with or without the payment of a fee. 
5.2.  Semi-Public Pool means a swimming, wading or special purpose pool on the premises of, or used in connection with a country club, youth club, school, camp, or similar establishment where the primary purpose of the establishment is not the operation of the swimming facilities, and where admission to the use of the pool is included in the fee or consideration paid or given for the primary use of the premises. Semi-public pool shall also mean a pool constructed and maintained by groups for the purposes of providing bathing facilities for members and guests only. 
6.0.  General. 
6.1.  Chapter V of the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR 435.00, is adopted as a local regulation in its entirety. 
6.2.  These regulations shall take effect May 20, 2003. 
6.3.  Amendments to these regulations shall take effect upon publication of a notice of their adoption in a local newspaper. 
7.0.  Lifeguards. 
7.1.  All "Public Pools" and "semi-public pools" as defined in 105 CMR 435.01, shall have a trained, certified lifeguard in attendance in the pool area at all times the pool is in use. Said lifeguards shall be trained and certified as required by 105 CMR 435.23. 
7.2.  The number of required lifeguards shall be determined as follows: 
A.  One lifeguard per 25 people in the pool. 
B.  Size, shape, and capacity of pool or wading area. 
C.  The Board of Health may require more lifeguards when it deems it necessary. 
7.3.  Pools located in residential condominiums or apartment complexes, or hotels or motels; either indoors or in a locked, fenced area, with access limited to residents and a limited number of their personal guests when accompanied by a resident, are exempt from 7.1. 
7.4.  Any semi-public pool which is not required by the Board of Health to have a lifeguard, must, in the alternative comply with 105 CMR 435.23, and at the minimum, abide by the following safety regulations: 
A.  No children under sixteen years old shall be allowed at the pool area without the supervision of an adult 21 years old or older who can safely swim, and who is physically capable of assisting a child in the pool and physically present in the pool area; 
B.  No alcohol shall be allowed on the pool grounds, unless sold by permit at the same establishment; 
C.  No glass containers shall be allowed on the pool grounds; 
D.  A written emergency protocol plan must be adopted, and made available to the Board of Health and to all who use the pool; 
E.  A system of monitoring and enforcement of the regulation must be in place and must be reported in writing to the Board of Health. 
F.  A person must be designated as responsible for the monitoring and enforcement system described in 7.4.E, and the Board must be notified who that person is. 
G.  A telephone must be available for emergency purposes in the pool area, and said telephone must be available for use to staff and to the public during all hours of operation without any fee. 
H.  No wheeled vehicles shall be allowed in the pool area, including but not limited to roller blades, bicycles, scooters, skate boards or children's riding toys. Baby carriages are allowed when under the immediate control of an adult 18 years or older who is physically present in the pool area. No running, wrestling, boisterous or rough play, or excessive noise shall be allowed in the pool area. 
[8.0]-19.0.  Reserved. 
20.1.  Permit. 
20.2.  No Public or Semi-Public Swimming or Special Purpose Pools shall be used without the benefit of a permit for operation being issued by the Board of Health. 
20.3.  Any permit issued for the operation of a pool under these regulations shall be subject to the conditions of permitting outlined in 105 CMR 435.21. 
20.4.  Said Operating Permit may not be issued unless the pool being permitted meets all applicable local and state regulations. Said Permit may be revoked or suspended for failing to comply with applicable local and state regulations. 
20.5.  The Board or its Agents shall have the authority to place special conditions on any permit issued under these regulations. 
21.1.  Variance. 
21.2.  These regulations may be varied by the Board of Health upon written application for such, and the completion of a public hearing. Notice of said variance request shall be published at the applicant's expense in a local newspaper at least 7 days prior to the hearing date. 
22.2.  In order for the variance to be approved, the applicant must: 
A.  Demonstrate that the enforcement of the applicable provision or regulation would do manifest injustice and 
B.  Demonstrate that the same degree of protection required under 105 CMR 435.00 can be achieved without strict application of the particular regulation. 
22.3.  Another aspect of 105 CMR 435.46 shall be met when seeking a variance, except that when a variance is sought only from the local regulations, no approval from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health is required. 
22.4.  The Board may place special conditions on any variance approval issued. 
23.0.  Penalties. 
23.1.  Any one found in violation of these regulations, including any provisions of 105 CMR 435.000 may be fined no less than Fifty Dollars and no more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300) for each violation and each successive day each violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
23.2.  Anyone found to operate or maintain a swimming, wading or special purpose pool without the unexpired and unrevoked written permission of the board of health shall be fined not less than Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250) and not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300). 
23.3.  Any Operating Permit may be revoked or suspended for failing to comply with applicable local and state regulations. 
23.4.  There Regulations may be enforced through the use of Non-Criminal Citations as put forth in Chelsea City Ordinance Sec. 1-8(c) and M.G.L c. 40 § 21D. 
24.0.  Severability. 
24.1.  If any provision of these Regulations is declared invalid or not enforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall continue in full force and effect. 
Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Adopted Nov. 2002 and effective May 20, 2003. 

Section 3.2. - Body Art Establishments.[27] 
1.  Purpose and Scope. The purpose of the City of Chelsea Regulations for Body Art Establishments is to set forth adequate and reasonable health standards for the practice of body art within the city's jurisdiction. 
    The Chelsea Board of Health body art regulations are authorized under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 111, section 31. 
2.  Definitions. 
    Aftercare means written instructions given to the client, specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if necessary. 
    Applicant means any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a body art Establishment permit or practitioner permit. 
    Autoclave means apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a specific temperature over a period of time. 
    Autoclaving means a process which results in the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclave for a minimum of thirty minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a temperature of 200 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Bloodborne Pathogens Standard means OSHA Guidelines contained in 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens." 
    Board of Health or Board means the Board of Health that has jurisdiction in the community in which a body art establishment is located including the Board of officer having like powers and duties in towns where there is no Board of Health. 
    Body Art means the practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as implants under the skin, which procedures are prohibited. 
    Body Art Establishments or Establishment means a location, place, or business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for profit. 
    Body Art Practitioner or Practitioner means a specifically identified individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board. 
    Body Piercing means puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with presterilized single-use needles and insertion of presterilized jewelry or other adornment into the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured exclusively for ear piercing. 
    Branding means inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material (usually metal) to the skin, making a serious bum, which eventually becomes a scar. 
    Client means a member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a body art establishment 
    Contaminated Waste means waste as defined in I 05 CMR 480.000: Storage and Disposal of infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII. 
    Department means the Department of Public Health or its authorized representatives. Disinfectant means a product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
    Disinfectant means a product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
    Disinfection means the destruction of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's instructions. 
    Ear Piercing means the puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's instruction. 
    Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment. 
    Hand Sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. 
    Hot Water means water that attains and maintains a temperature 110-130 F. 
    Instrument Used for Body Art means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure. Invasive means entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa. 
    Jewelry means any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been properly sterilized prior to use. 
    Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Operator means any person who individually, or jointly or severally with others, owns, or controls and establishment, but is not a body art practitioner. 
    Permit means Board approval in writing to either (1) operate a body art establishment or (2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of body art pursuant to City of Chelsea Body Art regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements that may exist within community or political subdivision comprising the Board's jurisdiction. 
    Person means an individual, any form of business or social organization or any other non-governmental legal entity, including but not limited to corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts or unincorporated organizations. 
    Physician means an individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board of Registration in Medicine pursuant to M.G.L c. 112 & 2. 
    Procedure Surface means any surface of an inanimate object that contacts the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent w and including the body art procedure, or any associated work area which may require sanitizing. 
    Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
    Sanitize means the application of a U .S. EPA registered sanitizer on a cleaned surface in accordance with the label instructions. 
    Scarification means altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result in permanently raised wheals or bumps know as keloids. 
    Sharps means any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass. 
    Sharps Container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol. 
    Single-Use Items means products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalper blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. 
    Sterilize means the use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microbial life including highly resistant bacterial endospores. 
    Tattoo means the indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the skin. 
    Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
    Three Dimensional "3D" Body Art or Beading or Implantation means the form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection or insertion of an object, device or other thing made of matters such as steel, titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials, beneath the surface of the skin of a person. This "term" does not include Body Piercing. 
    Ultrasonic Cleaning Unit means a unit approved by the Board, physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of high frequency oscillations transmitted through the contained liquid. 
    Universal Precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38 No. S-6, and as "[r]ecommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedure" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention; and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid-contaminated products. 
3.  Exemptions. 
(A)  Physicians licensed in accordance with M.G.L. c. 112 § 2 who perform body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these regulations. 
(B)  Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these regulations. 
4.  Restrictions. 
(A)  No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, breasts or nipples, branding, or scarification shall be performed on a person under the age of 18. 
(B)  Body piercing, other than piercing of the genitalia, breasts, or nipples, may be performed on a person under the age of 18 but over the age of 14 provided that the person is accompanied by a properly identified legal custodial parent or legal guardian who has signed a form consenting to such procedure. 
(C)  No body art may be performed on a person under the age of 14 except for piercing the lobe of the ear. 
(D)  No body art shall be performed upon an animal. 
(E)  The following body piercing are hereby prohibited: piercing of the uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck, piercing of the ankle, piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the web area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenulum (tongue web); piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings, excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus: piercing of an eyelid, whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skewering of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis - meaning piercing through the shaft of the penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any area from the corona glandes to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing of the scrotum - meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal" piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina. 
(F)  The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: tongue splitting; braiding; three dimensional body art/beading/implementation tooth filing/fracturing/removal/tattooing; cartilage modification; amputation; genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquid. 
5.  Operation of Body Art Establishments. Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the following minimum requirements: 
(A)  Physical Plant. 
1.  Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, and in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceiling shall be maintained in a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client. 
2.  Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall separate the establishment's space from any other room used for human habitation, any food establishment or where food is prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. 
3.  The establishment shall take all measure necessary to ensure against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents within the establishment. 
4.  Each body art station shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an area that may be screened from public view for clients requesting privacy. 
Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a dividers or partition at a minimum. 
5.  The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 foot candles 3 feet off the floor, except that at least 100 foot candles shall be provided at the level where the body art procedure is being performed, and where instrument and sharps are assembled. 
6.  A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or foot-operated controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable paper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible within the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand sink. 
7.  There shall be a minimum of one "toilet room" containing a toilet and sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquid hand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. 
8.  At least one covered, foot operated waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be stored in covered, leak proof, rodent-resistant containers and shall be removed from the premises at least weekly. 
9.  At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper disposal of non-contaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all applicable Federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of adequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and any equipment used for cleaning. 
10.  All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and supplies. 
11.  The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area shall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other sterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from the required ultrasonic cleaning unit. 
12.  The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive and separate from any workstation, instrument storage area, cleaning area or any other area in the body art establishment used for body art activity. 
13.  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment except service animals used by person with disabilities (e.g. Seeing Eye Dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting rooms and nonprocedural areas. 
14.  Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body art is performed, with the exception of fluids being offered to a client during or after a body art procedure. 
(B)  Requirements for Single-Use Items Including Inks, Dyes and Pigments. 
(1)  Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR 480.000. 
(2)  All product applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single use and disposable. 
(3)  Hollow bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused. 
(4)  All inks, dyes, pigments, solid core needles, and equipment shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(5)  Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted with water from an approved potable source. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded. 
(C)  Sanitation and Sterilization Measures and Procedures. 
(1)  All non-disposable instruments used for body art, including all reusable solid core needles, pins and styles, shall be cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot water, (to remove blood and tissue residue), and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
(2)  After being cleaned, all non-disposable instruments used for body an shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently sterilized in a steam autoclave. All sterilizer packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Sterilizer packs must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed six (6) months. 
(3)  The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instructions. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must be available for inspection by Board. Autoclaves shall be located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public. 
(4)  Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability to destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three (3) years and made available to the Board upon request. 
(5)  All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body art procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments. 
(6)  Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and resterilizing. 
(7)  If the body art establishment used only single-use, disposable instruments and products, and used sterile supplies, an autoclave shall not be required. 
(8)  When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments are not contaminated. 
(9)  Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored in a dry, clean environment until used. 
(D)  Posting Requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed: 
(1)  A disclosure Statement, a model of which shall be available from the Department. A Disclosure Statement shall also be given to each client, advising him/her of the risk and possible consequences of body art procedures. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the local Board of Health that has jurisdiction and the procedure for filing a complaint. 
(3)  An Emergency Plan, including: 
(a)  a plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency medical services in the event of an emergency; 
(b)  a telephone in good working order shall be easily available and accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of operation; and 
(c)  a sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct emergency telephone numbers. 
(4)  An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building official. 
(5)  A current establishments permit. 
(6)  Each practitioner's permit. 
(E)  Establishment Record-Keeping. The establishment shall maintain the following records in a secure place for a minimum of three (3) years, and such record shall be made available to the Board upon request: 
(1)  Establishment information, which shall include: 
(a)  establishment name; 
(b)  hours of operation; 
(c)  owner's name and address; 
(d)  a complete description of all body art procedures performed; 
(e)  an inventory of all instruments and body art procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or packing slips shall satisfy this requirement; 
(f)  A material Safety Data Sheet, when available, for each ink and dye used by the establishment; and 
(g)  A copy of these regulations. 
(2)  Employee information, which shall include: 
(a)  Full names and exact duties; 
(b)  Date of birth; 
(c)  Home address; 
(d)  Home/work phone numbers; and 
(3)  Client information, which shall include: 
(a)  Name; 
(b)  Date of birth; 
(c)  Address of the client; 
(d)  Date of the procedure; 
(e)  Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s); 
(f)  Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on the body; 
(g)  A signed consent form as specified by 6(D)(2); and, 
(h)  If the client is a person under the age of 18, proof of parental or guardian identification, presence and consent including a copy of the photographic identification of the parent or guardian. 
Client information shall be kept confidential at all times. 
(F)  The establishment shall require that all body art practitioners have either completed, or were offered and declined, in writing, the hepatitis B vaccination series. Records documenting compliance with this requirement hall be provided to the Board upon request. 
6.  Standards of Practice. Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health standards: 
(A)  A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with Universal Precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(B)  A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(C)  Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the manufacturers directions for use. and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear piercing system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear. 
(D)  Health History and Client Informed Consent. Prior to performing a body art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall: 
(1)  Inform the client, verbally an in writing that the following health conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a body art procedure: 
(a)  history of diabetes; 
(b)  history of hemophilia (bleeding); 
(c)  history of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soaps, disinfectants etc.; 
(d)  history of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other sensitivities; 
(e)  history of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy; 
(f)  use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and 
(g)  any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV. 
(2)  Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above information was provided, that the client does not have a condition-that prevents them from receiving body art, that the client consents to the performance of the body art procedure and that the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required by section 6(K). 
(E)  A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness, conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash their hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(F)  In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded, at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with section (E) before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for hand washing procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program. 
(G)  The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood that person could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(H)  Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the procedure resumes. 
(I)  Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the following: 
(1)  Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be free of rash or any visible infection. 
(2)  Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area and the areas of skin surrounding where body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use. 
(3)  In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding or to absorb blood shall be single use, and discarded immediately after use in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of in accordance with 105 CMR 480.000. 
(J)  Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator or gauze shall be used once and then discarded. 
(K)  The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written instructions on the aftercare of the body art site. The written instructions shall advise the client: 
(1)  on the proper cleansing of the area which received the body art; 
(2)  to consult a health care provider for: 
(a)  unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of the body art procedure; 
(b)  any rash; 
(c)  unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body art procedure; or 
(d)  a fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and 
(3)  of the address, and phone number of the establishment. 
(L)  Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in accordance with I 05 CMR 480.000. Storage and Disposal of infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waster, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII. 
7.  Injury Reports. A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as a result of a body art procedure or complain of injury, infection complication or disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued the permit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include: 
(A)  The name of the affected client; 
(B)  The name and location of the body art establishment involved; 
(C)  The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease; 
(D)  The name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if any; 
(E)  Any other information considered relevant to the situation. 
8.  Complaints. 
(A)  The Board shall investigate complaint received about an establishment or practitioner's practices or acts, which may violate any provision of the Board's regulations. 
(B)  If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the reasons on which it is based. 
(C)  If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the alleged act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Board shall investigate and if a finding is made that at the act or practice is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and shall notify the complainant of its action in this manner. 
9.  Application for Body Art Establishment Permit. 
(A)  No person may operate a body art establishment except with a valid permit from the Board. 
(B)  Applications for a permit shall be made on form prescribed by and available from the Board. An applicant shall submit all information required by the form and accompanying instructions. The term "application" as used herein shall include the original and renewal applications. 
(C)  An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire on one (1) year from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the Board. 
(D)  The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, the following information in order to be issued an establishment permit. 
(1)  Name address, and telephone number of: 
(a)  the body art establishment; 
(b)  the operator of the establishment; and 
(c)  the body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment; 
(2)  The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number, where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment; 
(3)  A signed and dated acknowledgement that the applicant has received, read and understood the requirements of Board's body art regulations; 
(4)  A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment to scale for a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application process; and, 
(5)  Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require. 
(E)  The Board shall set a reasonable fee for such permit. 
(F)  A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one place or person to another. 
10.  Application for Body Art Practitioner Permit. 
(A)  No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedure without first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board. The Board shall set a reasonable fee for such permits. 
(B)  A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age. 
(C)  A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in two (2) years from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the Board. 
(D)  Application for a practitioner permit shall include: 
(1)  name; 
(2)  date of birth; 
(3)  residence address; 
(4)  mailing address; 
(5)  phone number; 
(6)  place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and 
(7)  training and/or experience as set out in (E) below. 
(E)  Practitioner Training and Experience. 
(1)  In reviewing and application for a practitioner permit, the Board may consider experience, training and /or certification acquired in other stated that regulate body art. 
(2)  Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Board and, at a minimum, shall include the following: 
(a)  blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent) which include infectious disease control; waste disposal; hand washing techniques; sterilization equipment operation and method; and sanitation, disinfection and sterilization methods and techniques; and 
(b)  First Aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
(3)  Examples of courses approved by the Board include "Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and "Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted to the Board for approval. 
[(4)]  The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he completed a course on anatomy, completed an examination on anatomy, or possesses an equivalent combination of training and experience deemed acceptable to the Board. 
[(5)]  The applicant for a tattoo practitioner permit shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he completed a course on skin diseases, disorders and conditions, including diabetes, or completed an examination on skin diseases, disorders and conditions, including diabetes, or possesses a combination of training and experience deemed acceptable to the Board. 
(F)  A practitioner's permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with all applicable provisions of these regulations. 
11.  Grounds for Denial of Permit, Revocation of Permit, or Refusal to Renew Permit. 
(A)  The Board may deny a permit, revoke a permit or refuse to renew a permit on the following grounds, each of which, in and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for revocation or refusal to renew: 
(1)  any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of the public would be at risk; 
(2)  fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or its renewal; 
(3)  criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedings resulting in conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or an admission of sufficient facts; 
(4)  any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governing the practice of body art; 
(5)  practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired by alcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability; 
(6)  being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or habitual user of. narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs having similar effects; 
(7)  knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person to perform activities requiring a permit; 
(8)  continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended, or revoked, and; 
(9)  having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by the proper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same as those set forth in the Board's regulations; 
(10)  other just and sufficient cause which the Board might determine would render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to practice body art; 
(B)  The board shall notified an applicant, establishment or practitioner in writing of any violation of the Board's regulations, for which the Board intends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant, establishment or practitioner shall have seven (7) days after receipt of such written notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations. The Board may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit, if the applicant, establishment or practitioner fails to comply after said seven (7) days. 
[(C)]  Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial. 
11.  Grounds for Suspension of Permit. The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence before it, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is an immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice of such suspension by the Board. 
[12.]  Procedure for Hearings. 
(A)  Suspension of a Permit. 
(1)  After a Board suspension of a permit, a hearing shall be initiated pursuant to 801 CMR 1.00 et seq. (Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure), no later than twenty-one (21) calendar days after the effective date of the suspension. 
(2)  Upon written request to the Board of Health, the establishment of practitioner shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard concerning the suspension of the permit by the Board. 
(3)  In cases of suspension of a permit, the hearing officer shall determine whether the Board has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that there existed immediately prior to or at the time of the suspension an immediate, and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, which contains a summary of the testimony and evidence considered and the reasons for the decision. 
[(B)]  Denial, Revocation or Refusal to Renew a Permit. 
(1)  If the Board determines that a permit shall be denied, revoked, or not renewed pursuant to the Board's regulations, the Board shall initiate a hearing in accordance with 801 CMR 1.00 et seq. 
(2)  Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision that contains a summary of the testimony and evidence considered and the reasons for the decision. 
[13.]  Unauthorized Practice of Body Art. The Board shall refer to the appropriate District Attorney, Attorney General, or other law enforcement official any incidents of unauthorized practice of body art. 
[14.]  Severability. If any provision contained in these regulations is deemed invalid for any reason, it shall be severed and shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. 
Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Adopted April 23, 2002. 

CHAPTER 4. - BOARD OF HEALTH ORDERS 
ARTICLE 1. - HEALTH AND SAFETY ORDERS 

Section 4.1. - Consent Order.[28] 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
CITY OF CHELSEA 
BOARD OF HEALTH 
In the matter of 
Boston Hides and Furs, Ltd. 
CONSENT ORDER 
I.  PARTIES 
1.  The Chelsea Board of Health (the "Board") is a duly constituted municipal agency of the City of Chelsea, with offices at 500 Broadway, Chelsea, Massachusetts. 
2.  Boston Hides and Furs, Ltd. ("Respondent") is a Massachusetts corporation that owns and operates a facility located at or in the vicinity of 150 Marginal Street, Chelsea, Massachusetts (the "Facility"). 
3.  Miguel and Neris Amaya, Daysi Perdomo and Nelson Martinez, Amy Gomez, Brenda and Henry Lewis, Carol Brown, Molly Dunn and Marilyn Vega Torres, et al. (the "Citizens") are Chelsea residents who currently or formerly lived in the vicinity of the Facility and are represented by the undersigned counsel. 
II.  STATEMENT OF INTENT 
1.  The purpose of this Consent Order is to ensure that Respondent abates and prevents nuisance conditions at and in the vicinity of the Facility, protect the health and welfare of the Citizens and the community and to establish legally enforceable deadlines and requirements with which Respondent and the Facility must comply. 
2.  The Board, Respondent and the Citizens are entering into the Consent Order in order to expedite the resolution of this matter, facilitate prompt improvement of conditions at the Facility and to avoid the costs and delays associated with potential litigation. 
3.  This Consent Order and Respondent's consent hereto shall not constitute or be construed as an admission of liability or any fact or allegation set forth herein, except that Respondent consents to the jurisdiction, issuance and enforcement of this Consent Order by the Board and/or the Citizens. 
4.  The Respondent consents to the authority of the Board to issue this Consent Order and waives any rights to further administrative or judicial review of the issuance of this Consent Order. 
5.  This Consent Order does not constitute a permit, approval or site assignment by the Board with respect to the Facility. 
III.  BOARD'S FINDINGS OF FACTS AND LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1.  Consent Order is issued by the Board pursuant to its authorities under M.G.L. c. 111, §§ 122 and 123 (Public Nuisances); M.G.L. c. 111, §§ 143 and 146 (Noisome Trades); and M.G.L. c. 111, §§ 31C and 142B and 310 CMR §§ 7.09 and 7.52 (Air Pollution Control). 
2.  Respondent has operated the Facility at 150 Marginal Street, Chelsea since approximately 1980. The Facility receives, handles, sorts, trims, salts and ships animal hides, which arrive at the Facility by truck. 
3.  The Board is authorized by and responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the above-referenced Public Nuisance statute, Noisome Trades statute and Air Pollution Control statute and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The Board has the authority under the above-referenced statutes to issue this Order. 
4.  As documented by records of the City of Chelsea and the statements of the Citizens and other persons before the Board at its meeting on January 17, 2006; at various times over the last twenty years the Facility has caused and created public nuisance conditions, including, without limitation, offensive odors, the discharge of solid and liquid waste materials onto the streets surrounding the Facility, insect problems and noise from night time operations. 
5.  The above-referenced nuisance conditions have adversely affected the quality of life of the Citizens and unreasonably interfered with the use and enjoyment of their property in the vicinity of the Facility, and with the rights of the public to a clean and healthful environment. 
6.  The Citizens allege and the Board finds that the above-referenced conditions at and in the vicinity of the Facility have constituted a public nuisance and a condition of air pollution in violation of M.G.L. c. 111, § 122; M.G.L. c. 111, § 143 and M.G.L. c. 111, § 31C, which must be promptly abated by the Respondent. 
IV.  DISPOSITION AND ORDER 
1.  For the reasons set forth above and pursuant to the statutory authority granted to the Board, the Board hereby issues and enters into this Consent Order with the Respondent and the Citizens. 
2.  This Consent Order is issued under the authority granted to the Board pursuant to M.G.L. c. 111, § 123, M.G.L. c. 111, § 146 and M.G.L. c. 111, § 33C. 
3.  Within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Consent Order, or in the case of any control equipment or containment equipment or structures as soon as feasible thereafter not to exceed ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof, Respondent shall take all necessary measures and install any facilities and equipment necessary to do the following: 
a.  Abate and prevent offensive odors from leaving its property by containing and collecting to the extent possible and treating (via an exhaust ventilation and treatment system recommended and approved by a qualified consultant approved by the Board) all odor-containing emissions from its operations; 
b.  Cease and refrain from any outdoor unloading, storage, movement or handling of hides and any open outdoor storage of wastes or debris; 
c.  Keep all doors and other openings to the Facility closed at all times, except for limited temporary openings of doors only as necessary to load and unload hides and to remove waste material from the building, and for personnel to enter and exit the building; 
d.  Contain any waste materials from its operations in covered, closed, secure containers; 
e.  Prevent any pieces of hides or other wastes or materials from Respondent's operations from being deposited on or discharged onto City streets, sidewalks or other outdoor areas on or surrounding the Facility; 
f.  Abate and prevent any conditions that attract or support flies, fleas or other insects at or in the vicinity of the Facility; and retain an exterminator to identify any such conditions and to implement an effective prevention and eradication plan; 
g.  Abate and prevent any conditions that may attract or support rodents on and in the vicinity of the Facility and any other adjacent properties owned or operated by Respondent (including residential properties) and retain an exterminator to identify any such conditions and to implement an effective prevention and eradication plan; 
h.  Prohibit and prevent the arrival and unloading of trucks or other activities that cause noise audible beyond Respondent's property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and 
i.  Prevent any other conditions relating to the Facility and Respondent's operations that adversely affect or interfere with the use and enjoyment of the residential properties in the vicinity of the Facility. 
4.  Respondent shall submit bi-weekly written progress reports to the Board with copies to the Citizens' counsel regarding the measures being taken to implement this Consent Order and the progress and schedule thereof. Respondent consents to reasonable inspections by authorized representatives of the Board at any time during the Facility's operating hours to verify compliance with this Consent Order. 
V.  STIPULATED PENALTIES 
1.  For any violations of the provisions of this Consent Order, Respondent shall pay to the City within thirty (30) days upon written demand by the Board stipulated penalties in the following amounts: 
1 to 7 days of violation $250 per day 8 to 14 days of violation $500 per day 15 to 30 days of violation $1,000 per day 31 or more days of violation $2,000 per day  
VI.  OTHER PROVISIONS 
1.  The Board reserves all of its rights to seek penalties or take other enforcement action in response to any violations of this Consent Order, or any other violations of applicable law with respect to which the Board has jurisdiction. 
2.  The Citizens reserve all of their rights to seek penalties or to bring actions in response to any violation of this Consent Order or any other violation of applicable law by Respondent. 
3.  The parties agree and stipulate that in the event Respondent violates the provisions of this Order, the Board may bring an action to enforce this Order in the Superior Court pursuant to M.G.L. c. 111 § 187 and that Respondent may be assessed fines and penalties by the court of up to $10,000 per day of violation of this Order pursuant to M.G.L. c. 111 §§ 23, 31C and 146. 
4.  Respondent agrees to comply with this Consent Order and shall not allow or permit its employees, agents or contractors to violate this Consent Order. This Consent Order shall apply to and be binding upon Respondent, its officers, directors, agents, successors and assigns. 
5.  The undersigned signatory represents that he has the authority to bind Respondent to this Consent Order. 
6.  This Consent Order shall become effective on [February 21, 2006]. 
Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Effective Feb. 21, 2006. 

Section 4.2. - Accidental Injury, Crime and Death Scene Cleanup Policy.[29] 
    In the event of a serious crime, accident or death the following protocol shall be followed by all parties involved. This policy is in place to: 1) protect city employees, police officers, fire department personnel and the general public from harm, 2) to decrease the emotional trauma inflicted by cleaning a tragic scene and 3) to assure proper safety procedures. 
  In the vent of an accident, crime or death in a public space or city owned building, responding police personnel shall secure the site as a crime scene. Once police personnel have completed processing the scene, the on scene officers shall notify the Commanding Officer who will notify the Health Department and explain the clean up procedure that will be followed. 
  In the event of a crime or death on private property, the Commanding Officer or his/her designee shall make an attempt to notify the owner of the property to contact a professional cleaning firm (most are listed in yellow pages). The Health Department shall be notified to assure that proper clean up and disposal of all bio-hazardous waste. 
Definitions: 
    Type of scene: Any crime or death where there are blood products, body fluids or tissue present. These have to be disposed as bio-hazardous waste. If the collected body fluids and/or tissues are not properly disposed of, the state sanitary code has provisions of fines up to $25,000.00 (105 CMR 480.000 - Storage and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste). 
    Cleaning firm: A firm that specialized in biohazard cleanup such as "Crime and Death Scene Cleaning" and others found on telephone directory. 
    Non-hazard cleanup: (such as small amount of blood on a street as a result of a traffic accident) can be cleaned up by standard methods of cleaning using WATER and BLEACH. 
Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Revised June 2005. 

ARTICLE II - TRAFFIC AND PARKING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this part are the Traffic and Parking Regulations of the city, as adopted on October 24, 2017 . The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - DEFINTIONS AND GENERAL 

Section 1-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these Regulations, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Section 1-2. - Bus stop. 
    An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or alighting from and the parking of buses. 
Section 1-3. - Crosswalk. 
    That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of curb lines and property lines at intersections, or at any portion of a roadway indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines on the road surface or by other marking or signs. 
Section 1-4. - Curb marking, official. 
    That portion of a curbing, the painting of which has been authorized by the Traffic and Traffic Commission of the City of Chelsea (hereinafter Traffic Commission), and which has the written approval of the Massachusetts Highway Department. 
Section 1-5. - Emergency vehicle. 
    Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state, and municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are responding to an emergency. 
Section 1-6. - Funeral. 
    Any procession of mourners properly identified as such accompanying the remains of a human body. 
Section 1-7. - Intersection. 
    The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of intersecting as defined in M.G.L. c. 90, § 1, including divided ways. 
    The rules and regulations herein contained governing and restricting the movement of vehicles at and near intersecting ways shall apply at any place along any way at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals whether or not such place is an intersection as herein defined. 
Section 1-8. - Lane. 
    A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles. 
Section 1-9. - Live parking. 
    The stopping or standing of a vehicle, while the same is in direct charge of a driver, on a roadway otherwise than temporarily in obedience to traffic rules, regulations, signs, or signals. 
Section 1-10. - Commercial loading zone. 
    An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation of commercial and transient vehicular traffic. 
Section 1-11. - Officer. 
    Any officer of the Chelsea Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for the violation of traffic regulations. 
Section 1-12. - Parking. 
    The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs and signals, or while making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being made to move such vehicle. 
Section 1-13. - Parking Enforcement Officer. 
    Any officer authorized by the Traffic and Parking Commission to regulate parking or make citations for the violation of parking regulations. 
Section 1-14. - Parking meter. 
    Any device which accepts payment, not inconsistent with the provisions of this regulation, and placed or erected on any public way or municipal off-street parking area within the City of Chelsea for the regulations of parking. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by this regulation and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time permitted and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
Section 1-15. - Parking meter space. 
    Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted on the surface of the street or municipal off-street parking area adjacent to or adjoining each parking meter. 
Section 1-16. - Parking meter zone. 
    Any street or portion thereof or municipal off-street parking area upon which parking of vehicles is permitted for a limited time subject to compliance with the further provisions of this regulation. 
Section 1-17. - Pedestrian. 
    Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by human muscular power, except bicycles or tricycles, as defined in M.G.L. c. 90, § 18A. 
Section 1-18. - Person. 
    Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or similar entity. 
Section 1-19. - Railroad crossing. 
    Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-of-way. 
Section 1-20. - Roadway. 
    That portion of a street or highway between regularly established curb lines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and intended to be used for vehicular traffic. 
Section 1-21. - Rotary traffic. 
    The counter clockwise operation of a vehicle around an object or structure. 
Section 1-22. - Safety zone. 
    Any area or space set aside within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or markings, having the written approval of the Massachusetts Highway Department. 
Section 1-23. - Sidewalk. 
    That portion of a street or highway, other than a crosswalk, set aside for pedestrian travel. 
Section 1-24. - Street or highway. 
    The entire width between property lines of every way open to the public for purposes for travel. 
Section 1-25. - Street marking, official. 
    Any painted line, legend, marking or marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports to direct and regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Massachusetts Highway Department. 
Section 1-26. - Taxicab stands. 
    An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are authorized and required to park while waiting to be engaged. 
Section 1-27. - Through way. 
    A public way enjoying priority right-of-way under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 89, § 9. 
Section 1-28. - Traffic. 
    Pedestrians, ridden animals, vehicles, streetcars, or other conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway for the purpose of travel. 
Section 1-29. - Traffic control area. 
    Any area along any way, other than an intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals. 
Section 1-30. - Traffic control signal. 
    Any device using colored lights which conforms to the standards prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Section 1-31. - Traffic island. 
    Any area or space set aside within a roadway, which is not intended for use by vehicular traffic. 
Section 1-32. - Traffic signs, official. 
    All signs, markings, and devices, other than signals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, and which conform to the standards prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic. 
Section 1-33. - Traffic signals, official. 
    All signals, conforming to the standards as prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and placed or erected by authority of a public body having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing or warning traffic. 
Section 1-34. - U-turn. 
    The turning of a vehicle by means of a continuous turn whereby the direction of such vehicle is reversed. 
Section 1-35. - Vehicle. 
    Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles when the provisions of these rules are applicable to them, except other devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and devices which derive their power for operation from stationary overhead wires. 
Section 1-36. - Vehicle, commercial. 
    A vehicle displaying commercial vehicle license plates or used primarily for commercial purposes as declared on the application for insurance of said vehicle or any vehicle displaying, words, numbers, or symbols, that name or call attention to a business enterprise, except that of a vehicle manufacturer. 
Section 1-37. - Vehicle, heavy commercial. 
    Any commercial vehicle of two and one-half (21/2) tons capacity or over. 
Section 1-38. - Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
    A publication of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) of the United States Department of Transportation, which is incorporated by reference in 23 CFR Part 655. The MUTCD promulgates standards for the installation of traffic control devices in the United States. 
ARTICLE 2. - AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF POLICE AND OTHER DEPARTMENTS 

Section 2-1. - Police to direct traffic. 
    It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of these Regulations. Parking Enforcement Officers designated by the Director of Traffic and Parking shall enforce the parking provisions only. Such officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of these Regulations. In the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Departments may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of these Regulations. 
Section 2-2. - Police may temporarily close streets. 
    The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close temporarily any street or highway in an impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration, or procession. 
Section 2-3. - Police may temporarily prohibit parking. 
    The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing emergency or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration, or procession. Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved under the direction of a police officer. 
Section 2-4. - Annual traffic report. 
    The Chief of Police shall include in his report to the City Council: 
(a)  The number of operators reported to the registrar of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Pertinent data on safety activities accompanied by his recommendations. 
(c)  Plans and recommendations for future traffic safety activities. 
Section 2-5. - Traffic and Parking Commission. 
    The Traffic and Parking Commission established under the Charter of the City of Chelsea will study possible rules and regulations relating to traffic, such as one-way streets, parking, traffic lights, traffic hazard prevention, traffic signs and the like; all matters pertaining to transit and transportation; necessary changes in having a proper flow of traffic and prevention of bottlenecks in congested areas. 
Section 2-6. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of these Regulations shall not apply to police officers when engaged in the performance of public duties or to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any of these necessitates a departure from any part of these Regulations. These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
Section 2-7. - City-owned vehicles. 
    The titles of all city-owned motor vehicles shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk on or before January fifteenth, in each year, or within fifteen (15) days after the purchase and registration of a motor vehicle by the City. 
ARTICLE 3. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, AND ZONES 

Section 3-1. - Bus stops, taxicab stands, and service zones, location of. 
    The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be specified by the Traffic and Parking Commission and in the case of taxicab stands, the Licensing Commission, who with the approval of the Traffic and Parking Commission, shall designate who may use them as such. 
Section 3-2. - Interference with signs, signals, and markings prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs, or interferes with any official traffic signs, signals, or marking shall be in violation of City Ordinance as prescribed in Chapter 16, Article III. Destruction of Property, 16-48. 
(b)  Any sign that has been defaced by the affixing of adhesive stickers to the sign bearing the name of a person will be a violation of any provisions of these rules and regulations. If the identity of the person affixing the sticker cannot be determined, the person whose name such sticker bears shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of the City of Chelsea Code of Ordinances. 
Section 3-3. - Obedience to traffic signs, signals, and markings. 
    No driver of any vehicle, or of any street car, shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
Section 3-4. - Traffic signs and signals. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and signals required hereunder it shall be his duty, to place or maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs, signals, markings, and safety zones. All signs, markings, and safety zones shall conform to the standards as prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Laws of the Commonwealth. 
(b)  Section 2-2, Sections 5-1(k), (q) and (r), 5-2, 5-3, 5-6, 5-10, and 5-11, relating to parking and Sections 7-10, 7-12, 7-15, and 7-16 concerning exclusion shall be effective only during such times as official signs are erected and maintained in each block designating the provisions of such sections and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers. 
(c)  Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained at each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance of at least seventy-five (75) feet to drivers approaching such an exit. 
(d)  The enforcement of a regulatory sign, posted within a city block, classified by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as the Parking Series, shall be implemented 100 linear feet before the sign placement and 100 linear feet after sign placement. In no case shall a restricted zone be longer than 200 linear feet without additional postings. 
Section 3-5. - Signs, signals, and markings prohibited, display of unauthorized. 
    No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street, any unofficial device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view of any official sign or signal, marking or device. The Chief of Police and Director of Public Works or their designee are hereby authorized to remove any such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be removed without notice. 
Section 3-6. - Authority to make experimental or temporary rules. 
    For emergency or experimental purposes, the Traffic and Parking Commission may make temporary rules regulating traffic and parking, or test under actual conditions, traffic signs, signals, markings, or other devices. No such emergency or experimental rule regulating traffic or parking shall remain in effect for a period of time longer than one hundred eighty (180) days. Regulations of the Traffic and Parking Commission promulgated for 30 days or longer become effective upon the next meeting of the City Council provided those regulations are not rejected by the City Council as provided in the Charter of the City of Chelsea. 
ARTICLE 4. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Section 4-1. - General prohibitions. 
    No person operating a motor vehicle on any way shall run it at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard to traffic and the use of the way and the safety of the public. Unless it is otherwise posted in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 18 and Section 4-2 below, it shall be prima facie evidence of a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper as aforesaid (1.) if a motor vehicle is operated a rate of speed in excess of twenty-five miles per hour for a distance of one-eighth of a mile, or (2.) within a school zone established under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 85, § 2 at a rate of speed exceeding twenty miles per hour. 
Section 4-2. - Specific prohibitions. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of a speed limit posted in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 18. 
    The Traffic and Parking Commission, having adopted special speed regulations in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 18 hereby promulgates said regulations. The location of all speed zones shall be as indicated by traffic signs. 
ARTICLE 5. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 

Section 5-1. - General prohibitions. 
    No driver shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the City of Chelsea in violation of any of the Parking and Traffic Regulations adopted by the Traffic Commission and in particular in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign or signal. 
(a)  Within any intersection. 
(b)  Upon any sidewalk. 
(c)  Upon any crosswalk. 
(d)  Upon any roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district. 
(e)  Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the right side of the vehicle are within twelve (12) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as one-way streets. On such one-way streets vehicles shall be parked in the direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels within twelve (12) inches of the curb. This is not to apply to streets or parts of streets where angle parking is required by these regulations. 
(f)  Upon any roadway where the parking vehicle will not leave a clear and unobstructed lane at least twelve (12) feet wide for passing traffic. 
(g)  Upon a street or highway within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(h)  In front of any driveway, including 2 feet in either direction from the driveway. 
(i)  Upon any street or highway within twenty (20) feet of an intersecting way, except alleys. 
(j)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the street from such fire station provided signs are erected acquainting the driver of such restriction. 
(k)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(l)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing when there are no gates at such crossing, or otherwise within five (5) feet from the gate. 
(m)  On a bridge and the approach thereto. 
(n)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a roadway. 
(o)  On both sides of any street, alley or private way, when the width does not exceed eighteen (18) feet or upon one side of a street, alley or private way, when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty-six (26) feet. 
(p)  When the official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets authorized herein, no person shall park upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(q)  Upon any street or part thereof where signs have been erected by order of the Director of Public Works for the purpose of facilitating the cleaning of streets, no person shall stand or park a vehicle on the days and during the hours indicated. 
(r)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at a metered space in any City owned parking lot unless parked with the front of the vehicle facing the meter. This will be referred to as "Head On" parking. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be enforced by the City of Chelsea in accordance with the provisions of the M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A and shall be fined as a "Wrong Direction" violation. 
(s)  Upon any way for a period of time exceeding 24 consecutive hours, whether the vehicle is disabled or not and preparations are being made by the owner or operator for its removal. 
(t)  So as to obstruct any curb ramp designated for the use of handicapped persons. 
Section 5-2. - Commercial loading zones. 
(a)  Commercial Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle other than a commercial vehicle upon any street in a commercial loading zone. No person shall park a commercial vehicle upon any street in any commercial loading zone for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes and except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(b)  Commercial Loading and 15-Minute Parking Zone Policy. 
a.  Application Process. 
Application: All property owners and businesses seeking a commercial loading zone or 15-minute parking zone shall complete and submit an application to the Parking Clerk. Applications are available at the Parking Clerk's office during normal City Hall business hours and also available online. Applicants shall delineate if they are applying for a Commercial Loading Zone or a 15-minute Parking Zone. 
Field Visit and Data Collection: Upon receipt of a written application, the Parking Clerk shall disseminate the request to all members of the Traffic and Parking Commission and relevant City departments, including, but not limited to, the Department of Public Works, the Fire Department, the Police Department, and the Department of Planning and Development. Once an application is reviewed, City staff shall conduct a site visit during regular business hours to assess the proposed location's conditions and feasibility for zone conversion. Additional data collection, such as parking survey information, traffic data, and historic crash data, may be ordered by the Commission. 
Abutting Properties: As parking modifications may affect abutting property owners, tenants, and the general public, notices will be disseminated to abutting property owners and respective tenants when the Commission receives a request. When the location of a requested zone is in a place other than the requestor's property frontage, the request will not be considered without first receiving the affected property owner's signature on the application form. 
Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be scheduled and conducted for all requests, with notice of the public hearing advertised in advance. All public hearings shall be held during regular Commission meetings. 
Review and Decision: Following a comprehensive review of an application and all pertinent data, including citizen input, the Commission shall make a determination regarding the feasibility of the requested zone. The Commission will promptly notify the applicant of the determination, as well as the need for any further requisite information. The City shall notify the general public of a new or altered zone following the Commission's decision. 
b.  Evaluation Criteria. To ensure conformance with existing regulations and to reduce potential public impact, the Commission shall consider the following criteria while evaluating a request: 
 The anticipated size, dimensions, and net on-street parking impact of the proposed zone; 
 The width, depth, condition, and configuration of the public right-of-way, including existing on-street parking and travel lanes; 
 The existing parking regulations governing the location of the request and its general vicinity; 
 The location, utilization rate, and operating hours of existing any zones in the general vicinity; 
 The surrounding area's current and planned land use; 
 For the establishment(s) served by a proposed zone, the use, volume of business, trip generation, and general site design, including egress locations and off-street parking availability; 
 For 15-minute zones, the total number, frequency, and timing of incoming and departing vehicle trips that will be served by the proposed zone; 
 For commercial loading zones, the total number, frequency, and timing of commercial deliveries that will be served by the proposed zone; 
 The potential impact on abutting properties, neighborhood character, public safety, and traffic operations; and 
 The potential impact on pedestrian and bicycle sight-lines, path of travel, and usage of the public right-of-way. 
Section 5-3. - Diagonal parking. 
(a)  Diagonal parking shall be permitted on the streets so designated by appropriate signs. The Director of Public Works shall cause said streets to be designated by sign and the surface thereof to be marked. 
(b)  Where such diagonal parking is permitted, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within twelve (12) inches of the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by official marks and signs. The vehicle shall be parked so that all four wheels of the vehicle shall be placed wholly within the area indicated for parking, and headed to the curb. 
[Sections 5-4, 5-5. - Reserved.] 
Section 5-6. - Parking limitations and prohibitions. 
    Parking is prohibited, restricted or limited as to time, space, streets in accordance signs so designating them. No operator shall park a vehicle in the designated prohibited locations or in the restricted locations for a period longer than is designated by sign except as otherwise provided. 
Section 5-7. - Use of parking at off-street parking facility at City Hall restricted. 
    The parking spaces established at the off-street parking facility at City Hall shall be restricted to the following uses: 
(a)  Spaces numbered 1-6 and 14-48, inclusive shall be reserved exclusively for City Hall business between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 pm daily Monday, Wednesday and Thursday; 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Tuesday; and 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Friday. 
(b)  Spaces 7-13 inclusive shall be limited to 30 minutes' use for City Hall business. 
(c)  The entire parking facility may be used for public parking when City Hall is closed. 
[Section 5-8. - Reserved.] 
Section 5-9.1. - Parking meter locations and regulations. 
    Parking is restricted or limited as to time, space, streets and municipal off-street parking area on the streets and municipal off-street parking areas designated by sign. No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours or ten hours as indicated by sign or as hereinafter indicated, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in all municipal parking lots. This restriction shall not apply on Sundays or during the hours of legal holidays during which business establishments are required by law to remain closed. 
    In accordance with foregoing, parking meter zones are hereby established in the streets, parts of streets or municipal off-street parking areas as indicated by appropriate signs. 
Section 5-9.2. - [Parking meter acquisition, installation, maintenance.] 
    The Parking Clerk is hereby empowered, with the approval of the Traffic and Parking commission and the City Manager, to contract for the acquisition and installation of parking meters provided for by this Regulation and to maintain said meters in good workable condition. 
Section 5-9.3. - [Parking meter installation and placement.] 
    The Parking Clerk, with the approval of the Traffic and Parking Commission, is hereby authorized and directed to install parking meters within the areas described in this Regulation or cause the same to be so installed. The meters shall be placed at intervals of not less than 20 feet apart, except that beginning and ending spaces may be 18 feet, and not less than 12 inches nor more than 24 inches from the face of the curb adjacent to individual meter spaces. Meters shall be so constructed as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit therein of the proper coin or coins of the United States or other approved transfer of funds as indicated by instructions on said meters and for such period of time as is or shall be indicated by Regulation or meter legend. Said signal shall remain in evidence until expiration of the parking period designated at which time a dropping of a signal automatically or some other mechanical operation shall indicate expiration of said parking period. 
Section 5-9.4. - [Parking meter spaces.] 
    The Parking Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to establish parking meter spaces, in such parking meter zones with approval of the Parking and Traffic Commission, as are herein specified, or as may be hereafter fixed by Regulation, and to indicate the same by white markings upon the surface of the highway. 
Section 5-9.5. - [Parking meter coin deposit.] 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be parked adjacent to a parking meter, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall park within the space designated by pavement marking lines and, upon entering such space shall immediately deposit in said meter the required coin or coins of the United States or other approved payment for the maximum legal parking period as indicated or shown on the meter and if so required set the mechanism in motion. 
    The fee for parking meters shall be twenty-five (25) cents for 30 minutes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin for the purpose of permitting the vehicle of which he is in charge to remain in a parking space beyond the maximum period of time allowed in a particular zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within a parking meter space unless such vehicle is wholly within the painted lines adjacent to such meter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, tamper with, break, injure or destroy any parking meter or to deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter any slugs, device, or metallic substance or any other substitute for the coin or coins required. 
Section 5-9.6. - [Operators of commercial vehicles.] 
    Operators of commercial vehicles may park in a metered space without depositing a coin for a period not to exceed 30 minutes for purposes of loading or unloading. Parking in excess of this time limit without depositing the proper coin or coins shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this Regulation. 
Section 5-9.7. - [Collection and deposit of parking meter monies.] 
    The Parking Clerk is hereby designated as the person authorized to maintain parking meters installed in accordance with this Regulation and to collect therefrom or cause to be collected all monies deposited in said meters. Such monies shall be deposited forthwith by the city treasurer, and the City Treasurer shall deposit such monies in a separate account to be known as the City of Chelsea Parking Meter Revenue Account. 
Section 5-9.8. - [Fees received by the Treasurer of the City.] 
    All fees received by the Treasurer of the City of Chelsea from the operation and use of parking meters shall be used by said Treasurer as authorized by Chapter 442, Acts of the Legislature, 1947, and any and all other provisions in the General Laws, and particularly, as mentioned in 24R[sic] , in accordance with requirements issued by the Director of Accounts of the Commonwealth. 
Section 5-9.9. - [Enforcement.] 
    It shall be the duty of the Traffic and Parking Clerk and the Chief of Police of the City of Chelsea, and all officers of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this section. 
Section 5-9.10. - [Provisions for bus stops, taxicab stands, and service zones.] 
    Nothing in this Parking Meter Regulation shall be constructed to prohibit the Traffic Commission from making provisions for bus stops, taxicab stands, and service zones, as authorized by statutes or Regulations on any street or portion thereof which has been or may hereafter be designated herein as a parking meter zone. 
Section 5-9.11. - [Penalties.] 
    Any person who violates any parking provision of this Regulation shall be subject to the penalties provided by M.G.L. c. 90, § 20a and any other violation shall be punishable as may be provided by law. 
Section 5-9.12. - [City-owned vehicle.] 
    No driver, while operating any vehicle owned and bearing indicia of ownership by the City of Chelsea, State or Federal governments, shall be required to deposit any fee in a parking meter as provided in this section. 
Section 5-10. - Prohibited at safety zones. 
    No driver shall park a vehicle within a safety zone which has been properly posted and designated by the Traffic Commission. Safety zones, for the purposes of this Regulation, shall include fire lanes and crosswalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park any vehicle in any fire lane, such fire lane to be designated by the Traffic Commission upon the recommendation of the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department (or his/her designee), and marked as such. The Traffic Commission shall designate specific areas as fire lanes when it determines that the safety and welfare of the general public will best be served by the implementation of a fire lane. 
(b)  On public ways within the jurisdiction of the Traffic Commission, fire lines shall be established after due consideration of the effects of such fire lane on public safety and welfare as well as parking supply and engineering judgment. The locations of all safety zones are indicated by appropriate signs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block a private way with a motor vehicle or other means so as to prevent access by fire department apparatus or equipment to any building. 
(d)  The Traffic Commission hereby establishes fire lanes on private property in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign or signal. The building owner of record shall provide, install, and maintain signs and striping to designate said fire lanes in conformance with the specifications of these regulations. Such signage and striping shall meet with the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
1.  Where there is a sidewalk and curbing in front of a building, the area within twelve feet from the curbing along the building front of a shopping center, hotel, theatre, school, church, hospital, or assembly hall. 
2.  Where there are no sidewalks with curbing in front of a building, the area eighteen feet from the building front of a shopping center, hotel, within theatre, school, church, hospital, or assembly hall. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle under the cantilever of fire escapes or in such a manner as to block exits or passageways to the street or sidewalks, nor to interfere with the means of egress from buildings. 
(f)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provisions of these rules and regulations and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations. 
(g)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall be enforced by the City of Chelsea in accordance with the provisions of the M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A1/2, except where uniformed security officers are employed by the owners of buildings on private property, in issuing violations in accordance with the provisions of the M.G.L. c. #147, § 10F and charged with enforcement of this regulation. 
Section 5-11. - Bus stops. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, other than a bus under the control of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, within a Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority bus stop, when such stop is designated by signs bearing the legend, "Bus Stop, No Stopping" 
(b)  No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at any other place other than a bus stop when a nearby bus stop is available for use. 
(c)  The locations of all bus stops are indicated by appropriate signs.. 
[Section 5-12. - Reserved.] 
Section 5-13. - No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
    The Traffic Commission is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
    When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, a copy of which is placed on file in the office of the Director of Public Works, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated area. 
Section 5-14. - Commercial vehicles may back to curb or edge of roadway. 
    Subject to the provisions of Sections 12 through 17 commercial vehicles may be parked with both rear wheels to the curb or edge of the roadway while loading or unloading materials, provided such parking leaves a clear and obstructed lane at least ten (10) feet wide for the passage of traffic. 
Section 5-15. - Residential handicapped parking program-Approval procedure. 
(a)  The City of Chelsea Traffic and Parking Commission shall have the authority to approve the installation of Handicapped Permit Parking spaces on various City streets. The approval program will be referred to as the Residential Handicapped Parking Program ("the Program"). 
(b)  The purpose of the Program is to facilitate parking for disabled persons in close proximity to their home. The Traffic and Parking Commission undertakes this Program voluntarily and makes no guarantee that it will continue in perpetuity. 
(c)  The Traffic and Parking Commission will consider requests from disabled residents of the City of Chelsea to designate a handicapped parking space on their street. If approved, the space will be designated through signage within a responsible proximity to the applicant's home. However, the applicant will be advised that the space is not for their exclusive use and any person with a handicapped plate or placard may use this space in accordance with applicable laws and regulations governing parking in handicapped spaces. 
(d)  The approval of the application will be subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
1.  The applicant must have been issued a handicapped plate or handicapped placard by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles or other duly authorized agency acting under the authority of the Commonwealth. 
2.  The applicant must have a valid driver's license issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles. 
3.  The applicant must be the registered owner of the vehicle to be parked in the space. In addition, if the applicant is applying for an HP space with a placard, they must be the individual to whom the placard was issued. The applicant must also demonstrate residency at the location for which handicapped parking is requested. The Traffic and Parking Commission may consider applications for members of a disabled person's household, such as the parents of disabled children or children of disabled senior adults. The applicant must complete an application from the City of Chelsea and submitted to the Traffic and Parking Department for review and recommendations to the Traffic Commission. 
4.  The application must include written from a licensed health care provider that the applicant's disability limits ambulatory movement. The application must also include verification from the applicant or the applicant's landlord (if applicable) regarding the availability of appropriate off-street parking. 
5.  An engineering study will be performed at the direction of the Director of Public Works to evaluate the feasibility of designating a handicapped parking space in accordance with the applicant's request. The review will consider the most appropriate location for the installation, and safety concerns which might arise from the installation, impacts on traffic operations, and the number of existing handicapped parking spaces in the 2,000-foot grid shown on the Official City of Chelsea Map. Only after an engineering study determines that the installation can proceed will the Traffic and Parking Commission act favorably on an application. 
6.  The Traffic and Parking Commission will not approve the installation of handicapped parking spaces when the number of handicapped parking spaces will exceed two percent (2%) of the available parking inventory in each two thousand square foot grid. 
7.  The Traffic and Parking Commission will consider correspondence and recommendations from the City of Chelsea Commission on Disabilities and/or their designee. 
(e)  The Traffic and Parking Commission will not consider an application until a report is received from the Director of Public Works and until an application is complete. 
(f)  Factors which may result in unfavorable action by the Traffic and Parking Commission include, but are not limited to: unsafe conditions; existence of adequate off-street parking; false application; inadequate documentation from applicant; unreasonable impacts to neighbors and/or traffic operations. This list of possible factors for disapproval is not intended to limit the Commission's ability to disapprove an application, and reasons for denial may include reasons not listed above. 
(g)  If any individual applicant fails to meet the above stated criteria, s/he may request a waiver in writing setting forth all of the reasons why s/he believes that a waiver should be granted. The Traffic and Parking Commission may request additional information or grant or deny the waiver request. The Traffic and Parking Commission shall only grant a waiver when it finds extraordinary circumstances. The Traffic and Parking Commission may not grant a waiver when it determines that public safety will be adversely affected. 
(h)  If the Traffic and Parking Commission acts favorably on an application, a new traffic regulation for the designated handicapped parking space will be adopted and advertised in accordance with applicable local and state requirements. 
(i)  Once the advertising period for a new traffic regulation has passed, the designated handicapped parking space will be installed and enforced by the Parking Clerk and any other agency having jurisdiction to enforce such regulation. 
(j)  The Traffic and Parking Commission, through the Parking Clerk, will periodically review the continued need for a designated handicapped parking space. Every two years, the applicant will be required to verify that they continue to reside at the location where the handicapped parking space has been designated. In addition, they will be required to verify that the conditions that led to the Traffic and Parking Commission's previous approval of a designated space are still in existence. For applicants with handicapped placards, the applicant must submit a photocopy of a valid placard issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles. A new health care provider's verification may be required if the condition which led to approval was not a permanent condition. Applicants will be notified by the Department of Traffic and Parking when renewal is required and will be advised as to what documentation must be submitted for renewal. 
(k)  In the case of renewal applications, if the Parking Clerk finds that the designated space is still required, then no action is required on the part of the Traffic and Parking Commission and the designated space will remain. If the Parking Clerk determines that a space is no longer required, the Director of Public Works will recommend that the Traffic Commission strike the previously adopted traffic regulation which corresponds with the designated handicapped parking space. If the Traffic and Parking Commission votes to strike the traffic regulation pertaining to a designated handicapped parking space, the Department of Public Works will remove the traffic control devices designated the space as soon as the advertising period has elapsed. 
(l)  In the event of the applicant's death, or if the applicant relocates from the residence where the designated handicapped parking space has been provided, the traffic regulation will automatically expire. In such a case, the Department of Public Works will remove the traffic control devices designating the parking space as soon as they are notified of the change in status. 
Section 5-16. - Parking for handicapped persons in parking lots. 
(a)  Any person that has lawful control of a public or private way or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings, or for any other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, shall reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license plate authorized by M.G.L. c. 90, § 2, according to the following formula: 
(b)  If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than fifteen but not more than twenty-five, one parking space; more than twenty-five but not more than forty, five percent of such spaces but not less than two; more than forty but not more than one hundred, four percent of such spaces but not less than three; more than one hundred but not more than two hundred, three percent of such spaces but not less than four; more than two hundred but not more than one thousand, one and one-half percent of such spaces but not less than ten; more than fifteen; more than two thousand but less than five thousand, three-fourths of one percent of such space but not less than twenty; and more than five thousand, one-half of one percent of such space but not less than thirty. 
(c)  Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of paragraph (a) shall be identified by the use of above grade signs with white lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking: Special Plate Required. Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed at Owner's Expense"; shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway; shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and shall be twelve feet wide or two eight-foot wide areas with four feet of cross hatch between them. 
(d)  The leaving of unauthorized vehicles within parking spaces designated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as authorized by paragraph (a) or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way is hereby prohibited. 
(e)  Section C of this regulation may be enforceable by the City of Chelsea under the Provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A. 
(f)  The person who has lawful control of such way or property is authorized to tow or otherwise remove vehicles parked in violation of this regulation consistent with M.G.L. c. 90, § 20D. 
Section 5-17. - Parking and standing of authorized emergency vehicles. 
    The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as herein defined, while the same are being used in the performance of a public duty. 
Section 5-18. - Parking on snow emergency arteries and interference with snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, whenever snow or ice accumulates to a depth of two (2) inches or more, or whenever a snow emergency exists due to impending or existing snow or ice conditions, no person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name to park upon the ways or parts thereof designated by sign as "Emergency Arteries" until the way or portion thereof used for vehicular traffic has been cleared of snow or ice by the city snow removal forces to within twelve (12) inches of the curb-line within such public way or part thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be effective only during such time that official traffic signs are erected to notify operators of the provisions of this section. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be liable for the removal and storage of the vehicles as well as subject to punishment by fine. 
(c)  The owner of a vehicle, or person in whose name it is registered, shall not allow, permit, or suffer such vehicle to stand or park in any street, way, highway, or parkway under the control of the city in such a manner as to interfere with the work of removing or plowing snow or removing ice. 
Section 5-19. - Vehicles obstructing sweeping machines. 
    No person shall allow any vehicle under his charge or control to stand in any public street or place in the city in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of any street-sweeping machine belonging to the city and in use upon such street or place. 
Section 5-20. - Parking in taxicab stands. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street within a business district in any taxicab stand. 
(b)  No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district at any place other than a taxicab stand or stands designated for the use of his taxicab or taxicabs. 
ARTICLE 6. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Section 6-1. - One-way streets. 
    The streets or portions thereof designated by sign are declared to be one-way streets and all vehicular traffic shall move on those streets or portions thereof in the directions designated by sign. 
Section 6-2. - Do not enter regulations. 
    No person operating a vehicle shall enter the streets designated by "Do Not Enter" signs to proceed in the indicated direction from the indicated intersecting streets at the indicated times. Official traffic signs shall be erected and maintained on the streets where entry is restricted facing the traffic which would enter in the restricted direction. 
ARTICLE 7. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 
(CHAPTER 89 OF THE GENERAL LAWS GOVERNS) 

Section 7-1. - Overtake only when there is a space ahead. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on the right side of the roadway except that on a one-way street drivers shall not be restricted to the use of the right half of the roadway, but may have access to the entire width thereof, to permit the overtaking to be completed without impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead. 
Section 7-2. - Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle. 
    The driver of a vehicle when about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and visible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
Section 7-3. - Obstructing traffic. 
(a)  No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily the normal movement of traffic on any street or highway. Officers are hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic as has been delayed has passed. 
(b)  No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, except that on a one-way street drivers shall not be restricted to the use of the right half of the roadway, but may have access to the entire width thereof, beyond the intersection or crosswalk, if such is available. 
Section 7-4. - Drive within marked lanes. 
    When any roadway has been divided into lanes, a driver of a vehicle shall drive so as to be entirely within a single lane and shall not move from the lane in which he is driving until he has first ascertained if such movement can be made with safety. 
Section 7-5. - Drive on right side of street. 
    Except on one-way streets, or where signs have been erected to the contrary, or when overtaking and passing another vehicle, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway and shall drive a slow-moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of street. 
Section 7-6. - Overtaking other vehicles. 
    A driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any intersection of streets, except that this provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by official traffic control signals or by police officers. 
Section 7-7. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway. 
Section 7-8. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon a bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving vehicle or streetcar upon any roadway. 
Section 7-9. - Care in starting, stopping, turning, or backing. 
    The driver of any vehicle before starting, stopping, turning from a direct line or backing shall first see that such movement can be made with safety. If such movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes unduly with the normal movement of other traffic, said driver shall wait for a more favorable opportunity to make such movement. 
    If the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning movement, the driver of such other vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal as required by state law. 
Section 7-10. - Prohibited turning movements. 
    Drivers shall not make turns on the streets where such prohibition is indicated by signs. 
Section 7-11. - Mandatory turning movements. 
    Drivers shall proceed only by making a turn at the locations so designated by sign. 
Section 7-12. - U-turns prohibited. 
    No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the direction opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or traveling on the streets posted with no U-turn signs. 
Section 7-13. - Backing around corners or into intersections prohibited. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall back such vehicle around a corner at an intersection, or into an intersection of streets. 
Section 7-14. - Dangerous vehicles. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle in such condition or so constructed or so loaded as to be likely to cause delay in traffic, or accident or injury to persons or property. 
Section 7-15. - Persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or animals to obey traffic regulations. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal on a public street shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations applicable to the driver of any vehicle. 
Section 7-16. - Emerging from a private driveway. 
    The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or a garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on to a sidewalk or on to the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway before proceeding. 
Section 7-17. - Unlawful riding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any reason to ride on any portion of a vehicle not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in the roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any motor vehicle. 
Section 7-18. - Obedience to traffic control signals. 
    Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the commands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings, and every driver of a vehicle, or other conveyance shall comply therewith except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign other than a "stop" sign, signal, or device or except as provided in (the section dealing with funerals in Section 7). 
    In no case shall a driver enter or proceed through an intersection without due regard for the safety of other persons within the intersection, regardless of what indications may be given by traffic control signals. 
(a)  Green indications shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Drivers facing a CIRCULAR GREEN signal may proceed through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Drivers turning right or left, however, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles, and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk, at the time such signal was exhibited. 
2.  Drivers facing a GREEN ARROW, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movements as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such drivers shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(b)  Steady yellow indications shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Drivers facing a steady CIRCULAR YELLOW or YELLOW ARROW signal are thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when drivers shall not enter the intersection. 
(c)  Steady red indications shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Drivers, facing a steady CIRCULAR RED signal and NO TURN ON RED SIGN shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in (b) below. 
2.  When no sign is in place prohibiting a right turn, or a left turn from a one-way street to another one-way street, drivers facing a steady CIRCULAR RED signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make the right turn, or left turn from a one-way street to another one-way street, after stopping as provided in (a) above. Such drivers shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
3.  Drivers, facing a steady RED ARROW indication may not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by such arrow, and unless entering the intersection to make such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to make the movement indicated by such arrow is shown. 
(d)  WALK and DON'T WALK indications (and/or the corresponding international symbols) have the following meaning: 
1.  While the steady WALK indication is illuminated, pedestrians may enter a crosswalk controlled by such indication. Drivers shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing when this indication is displayed. While the Flashing DON'T WALK indication is illuminated, pedestrians shall not leave the curb and enter the crosswalk, however, any pedestrian already in the crosswalk at the time that this indication is displayed may continue to cross to the opposing curb. While the steady DON'T WALK indication is illuminated, it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to enter an intersection controlled by such indication. The enforcement and penalty for violating this provision shall be as specified in M.G.L. c. 89, § 8. 
(e)  Flashing signal indications shall have the following meanings: 
1.  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the drivers has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions of M.G.L. 89, § 8. 
2.  Flashing Yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution. 
Section 7-19. - Stop signs, yield signs, through-ways. 
(a)  For Stop Signs. In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 89, § 9, streets posted with stop signs or flashing red signals are declared to be stop streets or flashing red signal intersections as the case may be. 
(b)  For Through-ways. In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 89, § 9, the following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through-ways: 
Broadway , for its entire length. 
Central Avenue , from Eastern Avenue to the junction of Hawthorne and Park Streets. 
Everett Avenue , from Broadway to the Everett line. 
Shurtleff Street , from Central Avenue to Broadway. 
Spruce Street , from Williams Street to Washington Avenue. 
Washington Avenue , from Broadway to the Revere line. 
(c)  For Yield Signs. In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. 89, § 9, intersections posted with yield signs are designated as yields. 
Section 7-20. - No driving on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
Section 7-21. - No driving through safety zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a police officer to drive the same over or through a safety zone. 
Section 7-22. - Keep to the right of roadway division. 
    Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway, grass plot, reservation, viaduct, or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep to the right of such a division except when otherwise directed by an officer, signs, signals, or markings. 
Section 7-23. - Operation of under- or overpasses at intersection with islands. 
    At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at any intersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings. 
Section 7-24. - Driving on road surfaces under construction or repair. 
    No operator shall enter upon a road surface of any street or highway or section thereof, when, by reason of construction, surface treatment, maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such road surface of the street or highway is not to be used or when so advised by an officer, watchman, member of a street or highway crew or employees of the city, either audibly or by signals. 
Section 7-25. - Funerals to be properly identified. 
    A funeral composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by means of black pennants bearing a purple symbol attached to both the first and last vehicles, or other suitable means. 
Section 7-26. - Right and duties of drivers in funerals and other processions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession to keep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow the vehicle ahead as closely as practicable and safe. 
(b)  At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating the driver of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop for a red and/or yellow indication. 
(c)  At an intersection where a lawful Stop sign exists, the driver of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop before proceeding through the intersection. 
Section 7-27. - Operation of heavy commercial vehicles. 
(a)  The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles having a carrying capacity of more than 21/2 tons, are hereby restricted on those streets or parts of streets described in this regulation, in the manner outlined, and during the period of time set forth. 
a.  Nichols Street, between Eustis Street and the Everett city line; 
b.  Spencer Avenue, between Cary Avenue and Eastern Avenue; 
c.  Second Street, between Arlington Street Extension (at Northeast Expressway) and Park Street; 
d.  Chestnut Street, between Williams Street and Everett Avenue; 
e.  Everett Avenue, between On-Ramp to Tobin Bridge and Broadway; 
f.  Park Street, between Williams Street and Central Avenue; 
g.  Pearl Street, between Williams Street and Park Street; 
h.  Cross Street, between Broadway and Park Street; 
i.  Broadway, between Gerrish Avenue and Williams Street; 
j.  Broadway, between Crescent Avenue and Eastern Avenue; 
k.  Webster Avenue, between Off-Ramp from Tobin Bridge and Eastern Avenue; 
l.  Stockton Street, between Eastern Avenue and Parkway Plaza; 
m.  Library Street, between Highland Avenue and Broadway; 
n.  Beacon Street, between Beacon Street off-ramp and Winnisimmet. 
o.  Medford Street, between Broadway and Tremont Street; 
p.  Tremont Street, between Medford Street and Williams Street; 
q.  Beacon Street, between Chestnut Street and Broadway, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
r.  Carter Street, between the Route 1 On/Off Ramp and Washington Avenue from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  The established truck route, excluding trucks hauling cargo defined as hazardous materials that are prohibited from utilizing the Tobin Bridge, for the City of Chelsea will be as follows: 
a.  Trucks going north over the Tobin Bridge and onto Route 1 north will utilize the following route: 
Trucks will be allowed to exit the Beacon Street off-ramp from the Tobin Bridge. Trucks will be allowed to proceed down Chestnut Street to Williams Street. Trucks exiting the Beacon Street off-ramp shall be limited to eight (8) tons. 
Truck traffic exiting the Fourth Street off-ramp shall be limited to ten (10) tons. 
Truck traffic exiting Webster Avenue shall turn left at the end of the off-ramp to reverse direction on Route 16 (west). Trucks will not be allowed to turn right onto route 16 (east) at the Webster off-ramp due to lack of room for maneuvering the right turn. 
Truck traffic shall be allowed to exit at off-ramp onto Route 16 (east) Revere Beach Parkway to the Chelsea/Broadway exit to Broadway, proceed to Eastern Avenue and Marginal Street. 
b.  Trucks going south over the Northeast Expressway and onto the Tobin Bridge will utilize the following route: 
Trucks will be allowed to exit the Route 16 (west) Revere Beach Parkway off-ramp but will not be allowed to make a left turn onto Webster Avenue. 
Trucks will be allowed to exit the Carter Street off-ramp onto Everett Avenue and the Revere Beach Parkway (Route 16 east and west). 
c.  Trucks leaving the Marginal Street/Eastern Avenue industrial area will proceed on Eastern Avenue northerly to Broadway and onto Route 16 east or west, or proceed on Marginal Street to Williams Street to Spruce Street and exit at Everett Avenue for the on-ramp to Tobin Bridge heading south, or proceed to the Sixth Street on-ramp to the Northeast Expressway heading north. 
d.  Trucks leaving the Produce Center and coming from Everett will be allowed to cross Broadway on Williams Street only to get to the Marginal Street/Eastern Avenue area. 
(c)  Exemptions. Parts a-d of this Section shall not apply to heavy commercial vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets for the purpose of making deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to or similar collections from abutting land or buildings or adjoining streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained; or to vehicles used in connection with the construction, maintenance, and repair of said streets or public utilities therein; or to Federal, State, Municipal or public service corporation owned vehicles. 
(d)  This section shall be effective only during such times that official traffic signs are in place at each entrance to the excluded streets and designated truck Route locations to give warning to operators of the provisions of this regulation. 
Section 7-28. - Dropping or leaking loads. 
    No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway nor shall any owner of any vehicle knowingly permit such vehicle to be driven or moved on any street or highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or so loaded as to prevent its contents from spilling, dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom. Vehicles loaded with any material which may be blown about by the wind shall be suitably covered to prevent the contents from being blown upon the streets or highways. 
Section 7-29. - Notice prior to transport of liquid natural gas product. 
    Any motor vehicle transporting liquid natural gas product in an amount of one hundred (100) gallons or more shall not be permitted on, over, or through any street unless written notice is given by the owner, seller, consignee, or consignor of said liquid natural gas at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the transportation setting forth in said notice the route to be traveled and the time of commencement of the transportation. Said notice shall be given to the chief of the fire department and the chief of the police department. 
ARTICLE 8. - TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL 

Section 8-1. - Authority. 
    The Traffic and Parking Commission delegates to the Director of Public Works (or his/her designee) sole authority to regulate, approve, and direct the implementation of traffic control devices for work zones and events on ways under the control of the Chelsea Traffic and Parking Commission. All work zones and temporary traffic control devices shall be established and maintained in accordance with 23 CFR Parts 630 and 655 - the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), most recent edition; and M.G.L. c. 85, including any and all amendments or errata issued by duly empowered officials; Title 454 CMR c. 10; and DTE Regulation 98.22. 
Section 8-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions of common terms apply to this Article: 
    Workzone. Any workspace established on a public way by an entity performing construction or related activities. The term workzone shall apply to those workspaces that are either legally or illegally conducted by all parties. 
    Event. Any activity approved by the City to be conducted within a public way, including block parties, charity events, road races, parades, and other activities not related to construction activities. 
    Traffic Control Plans. Any combination of engineered plans, typical drawings, specifications, and/or contract documents meeting the approval of the Director of Public Works and used for the purpose of implementing temporary traffic control requirements related to workzones and events as defined in this regulation. 
    Proponent. Any individual, agent, or entity that requires authorization to occupy all or portions of a public way on a temporary basis for the purpose of construction or for an event. 
    Workzone Traffic Inspector. Any individual designated by the Director of Public Works to inspect workzones for adherence to approved traffic management plans. The qualifications to be designated a Workzone Traffic Inspector include employment by the City and certification as a Work Zone Safety Specialist by the International Municipal Signal Association. 
    Temporary Parking Restrictions. Parking restrictions intended to be in effect for less than five working days that are required to perform emergency or scheduled work in a public way. 
Section 8-3. - Travel lane and sidewalk closures more than eight hours. 
(a)  Scope. Any proponent who requires authorization to close an entire street for any length of time, or a travel lane or a sidewalk for more than eight hours, on a public way on a temporary basis for the purpose of construction or for an event shall obtain the express approval of the Director of Public Works. For roadway closures requiring the City Manager's approval, the signature of the Director of Public Works (or designee) on the City Manager's "Public Property Occupancy Permit Application", as may be conditioned, shall suffice to satisfy this requirement. For work under this section arising under the authority of a street opening permit issued by the City of Chelsea Department of Public Works, the work shall be approved by the Director of Public Works prior to implementation in accordance with the terms prescribed on the back of the permit. All other work arising under this section shall be performed with the express approval of the Traffic Director as further described in this Article. Such approval shall only constitute an endorsement of the proponent's proposed traffic management plan and is not intended to replace the approval of other duly authorized bodies of the City, including the City Manager and the Department of Public Works. 
(b)  Procedure. The following procedure is required for proponents seeking approval of their workzones arising under this section. The Director of Public Works may waive all or part of this requirement. 
1.  For work lasting less than two days, the Director of Public Works shall be notified and the proponent shall utilize typical traffic management details unless a road closure is required. 
2.  Except in the case of emergencies, each proponent requiring the occupation of a travel lane (for more than two days) or the complete closure of a street, shall file a proposed traffic management plan required under this section with the Traffic and Parking Commission as soon as practical prior to the date of the proposed construction. 
3.  Once a traffic management plan has been implemented, it shall be the proponent's responsibility that the workzone or event area is maintained in accordance with the approved plan. Failure to maintain the plan as approved or in an unsafe manner shall result in the termination of approval to operate the plan. 
4.  Each proponent shall secure the services of Police Details as specified in the plan, if required. The Chief of Police (or his/her designee) shall direct the police details in a manner consistent with the approved traffic management plans and Article 2 of these Regulations. 
5.  Where conflicts arise between these regulations and DTE Regulation 98.22, the DTE regulations will govern. 
Section 8-4. - Routine work not arising under section 8-3. 
    Where work is proposed which will not require the expressed approval of the Director of Public Works as described in Section 8-3, typical traffic management plans issued by the Traffic and Parking Department shall govern the operation of workzones. The Traffic Management Plans will be made available at the Traffic and Parking Department, the Department of Public Works, and the Police Department. For street opening permits issued by the Department of Public Works, operation of the typical traffic management plans will serve to satisfy the terms prescribed on the back of the permit unless otherwise included in Section 8-3. 
Section 8-5. - Emergency work. 
    Emergencies arising under this section shall be reported to the Traffic Director as soon as possible after the emergency is declared. 
(a)  During emergencies requiring a response on the part of a utility regulated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy (DTE), pre-approved traffic management plans may be used in lieu of proposed traffic management plans. The authorized representative of affected utilities shall have the authority to declare such emergencies as required. 
(b)  Under emergency conditions, representatives of the City of Chelsea Departments of Public Works, Traffic and Parking, Police and Fire shall establish workzones consistent with typical traffic management plans provided by the Traffic and Parking Department to the extent possible under the circumstances. 
Section 8-6. - Technical requirements. 
    All workzones shall be designed to comply with the standards prescribed by 23 CFR Part 655 as specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), most recent edition, including all errata and amendments issued by the United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Highway Department. The following additional requirements apply. 
(a)  Traffic Management Plans submitted for the approval of a workzone arising under Section 8-3 must be stamped by a Professional Engineer registered in Traffic Engineering by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or a registered Civil Engineer with certification by the Institute of Transportation Engineers as a Professional Traffic Operations Engineer. The Director of Public Works may waive all or part of this requirement depending on the complexity of the proposed workzone. 
(b)  All signs and pavement markings used in conjunction with workzones must comply with the MUTCD. Specific attention is directed to the requirements set forth in [Article] 6 of this document. No waivers of this requirement are authorized. 
(c)  The Director of Public Works or other authorized designee must approve all temporary parking restrictions. Requests for temporary parking restrictions will be evaluated by the Department of Traffic and Parking based on their potential impact to commerce, traffic flow, and public safety. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to approve a request as submitted, alter the request and approve it, or deny the request outright. Temporary parking restrictions shall have the full force of law. 
(d)  Temporary parking restrictions in areas where parking meters are not in effect shall be implemented through the posting of signs provided by the Traffic and Parking Department. Such parking restrictions shall only be valid if they specify the dates and times the restrictions are in effect and are posted 24 hours in advance of the desired restrictions. The signs must be affixed to a public appurtenance such as a street sign or meter post, or a sawhorse or traffic barrel provided by the City or the proponent. The signs must be maintained in a completely legible fashion and must be free of debris, dirt or obstruction. 
(e)  Temporary parking restrictions at parking meters shall be implemented through the "bagging" of meters by Traffic and Parking staff. The bagging will be performed no earlier than one hour before the desired restrictions are to take effect. Requests must be received no later than 48 hours in advance of the requested bagging. 
(f)  A charge commensurate with the cost incurred by the City must be paid to the Department of Traffic and Parking for meter bagging and the provision of temporary parking restriction signs. 
(g)  Where appropriate, the Traffic and Parking Department may provide a proponent with "typical" traffic management plans to facilitate simple requests. The typical plans do not relieve the proponent from exercising good judgment in implementing the plan and applying the plan to specific situations. In these cases, the proponent may be required to sign an acknowledgement that they understand the use of the typical traffic management plan and can apply it to their situation. 
(h)  The design and operation of workzones under the provisions of this Article shall be the responsibility of the proponent. 
Section 8-7. - Enforcement. 
    The proponent for any workzone which is not operated in accordance with approved traffic management plan will be informed as soon as possible that the approval of the Director of Public Works has been revoked and that all work in the public way must cease and desist immediately. Spot corrections ordered by the Director of Public Works (or designee) shall be immediately implemented. Such action may be taken by the Director of Public Works, a Work Zone Traffic Inspector from the Traffic and Parking Department, Chief of Police (or his/her designee). The Director of Public Works may authorize the work to recommence after the proponent demonstrates compliance with the requirements set forth in the approved traffic management plan. 
ARTICLE 9. - ACCIDENT REPORTS 

Section 9-1. - Drivers must report accidents. 
    Every person operating a motor vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident in which any person is killed or injured or, in which there is damage in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to any one vehicle or other property, shall report such accident within five (5) days to the Registrar and to the Police Department in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 26. 
ARTICLE 10. - TOWING AND TOW ZONES 

Section 10-1. - In general. 
    In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D as most recently added by Chapter 322 of the Acts of 1961, the Traffic and Parking Commission of the City of Chelsea hereby enacts the following regulations authorizing the removal to a convenient place of vehicles parked or standing in any manner, or in such areas as are hereinafter described on any way under the control of the City of Chelsea. Vehicles specifically exempt by M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D shall not however by subject to such removal. 
Section 10-2. - Authorization of police. 
    The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this Article shall be at the direction of the Chief of Police or such other officers of the rank of sergeant or higher in the Police Department as he may from time to time designate. 
Section 10-3. - Fees. 
    The Traffic and Parking Commission hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved or towed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this Article, the following fees: 
(a)  Removal or Towing Fee: not to exceed that which is provided in or as authorized by Statute Law. 
(b)  Storage Fees: not to exceed that which is provided in or as authorized by State Law. 
Section 10-4. - Liability for damage during removal or storage. 
    The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out of negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal or storage. 
Section 10-5. - General prohibition tow zones. 
    No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places or in any way in violation of the provisions of section 5-1 (a) through (r). Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this Section or section 5-1 except those specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction of an officer of the Police Department and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in Section 10-3 of this Article. The owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this Section shall also be subject to the penalties provided as authorized by M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A. 
(a)  Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal or plowing of snow or ice except vehicles parked in accordance with approved regulations governing all night parking. 
(b)  Upon any sidewalk. 
(c)  Upon any crosswalk. 
(d)  Upon any way within twenty feet of an intersecting way except alleys. 
(e)  Upon any way within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
(f)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or the curb of the way. 
(g)  In front or within two (2) feet of a public or private driveway. 
(h)  Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and unobstructed lane at least twelve feet wide for passing traffic. 
(i)  Upon any way for a period of time exceeding twenty-four consecutive hours, whether the vehicle is disabled or not and preparations are being made by the owner of operator for its removal. 
(j)  Upon the roadway where the parking is permitted unless both wheels on the side of the vehicle adjacent to the curb are within one (1) foot of the curb or edge of the roadway and headed in the direction of traffic except where angle parking is permitted or commercial vehicles are backed to the curb. 
(k)  At a Bus Stop which is so designated by official traffic signs and official street markings. 
(l)  Upon any street or part thereof on the days and during the hours indicated where signs have been erected by order of the Superintendent of Highways for the purpose of facilitating the cleaning of streets. 
(m)  Occupying or obstructing any parking spaces designated as reserved for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or handicapped persons; any violation of this regulation shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. 
(n)  In such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way; any violation of this regulation shall be punished by a fine of $25.00. 
(o)  Loading zones which are properly designated by official traffic signs which state "Tow Zone". 
(p)  On or adjacent to a safety island, median island or safety zone. 
(q)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when parking obstructs traffic. 
(r)  On any railroad tracks. 
(s)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within a highway tunnel. 
(t)  Upon or within an alley or private way in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, or in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(u)  Hazardous or congested locations which are properly designated by official traffic signs which state "No Stopping Tow Zone". 
Section 10-6. - Posted prohibition towing zones-General. 
    No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or parts of ways designated by sign as "Tow Zone". Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this Section excerpt those specifically exempted by law shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction of an officer of the Police Department and the owner of the vehicle so removed, or towed away, shall be liable to the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in Section 10-3 of this Article. The owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this Section shall also be subject to the penalties provided in M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A. 
Section 10-7. - Official traffic signs. 
    The provisions of Section 10-6 shall be effective only during such time as a sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend TOW-AWAY ZONE are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above or incorporated into the legend of Parking Prohibition Signs. 
Section 10-8. - Police to keep record of towed vehicles. 
    The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed under the provisions of this Article. Such record shall be retained for one (1) year and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The registration of the vehicle. 
(b)  The location from which it was towed, and the time and date of the tow order. 
(c)  The location to which it was towed. 
(d)  The fee charged for towing. 
(e)  The name of the towing contractor. 
(f)  Name of the officer who authorized the towing. 
Section 10-9. - Vehicles exempted. 
(a)  Those owned by the Commonwealth or political subdivision of the Commonwealth. 
(b)  Those owned by the United States Government. 
(c)  Those registered to a member of a foreign diplomatic corps or by a foreign consular officer who is not a citizen of the United States provided that the vehicle bear a conspicuous number plate or is otherwise conspicuously marked as so owned of registered. 
Section 10-10. - Snow emergency tow zone. 
    Further subject to being towed or removed and other penalties, as set forth in Section 10-5 of this Article X, shall be any vehicle upon any way in violation of the following: 
    If it is the judgment of the Director of Public Works of this city, or in the absence by reason of illness the inability to act of said Director, then of the Assistant Director of Public Works of the city, that threatening or existing weather conditions may impair the free flow of vehicular traffic or that parked or standing vehicles may impede the removal or plowing snow and ice, then said the Assistant Director, if properly acting in his stead, may declare a state of emergency to be effective at the time designated by him and to be in effect for such time as in his judgment is necessary. 
    Whenever such an emergency is declared by the said Director or said Assistant Director and he shall have caused announcement thereof by the use of then available news and/or other mass communication media including snow emergency lighting, then during the existence of such emergency no motor vehicle shall be allowed to park or stand within the limits of any of the ways and parts thereof named below. 
a.  Beacon St., Broadway to Chestnut St. 
b.  Broadway, Revere line to Mystic River. 
c.  Central Ave., Hawthorne St. to Eastern Ave. 
d.  City Hall Ave., Broadway to Chestnut St. 
e.  Congress Ave., Pearl St to Broadway. 
f.  Eastern Ave., Louis St. to Broadway. 
g.  Everett Ave., Broadway to Everett line. 
h.  Fifth St., Broadway to Arlington St. 
i.  Fourth St., Chestnut St. to Pearl St. 
j.  Garfield Ave., R.B. Parkway to Washington Ave. 
k.  Hawthorn St., Central Ave. to Bellingham Square. 
l.  Locke St., Webster Ave. to Webster Ct. 
m.  Marginal St., Pearl St. to Eastern Ave. 
n.  Nichols St., Washington Ave. to Everett line. 
o.  Park St., Williams St. to Hawthorn St. 
p.  Pearl St., Congress Ave. to Boston line. 
q.  Sagamore Ave., Washington Ave. to Garfield Ave. 
r.  Second St., Park/Winnisimmet St. to Everett line. 
s.  Third St., Broadway to Everett Ave. 
t.  Washington Ave., Broadway to Revere line. 
u.  Webster Ave., R.B. Parkway to Eastern Ave. 
v.  Williams St., Pearl St. to Spruce St. 
    This Section 10-10 shall not apply to commercial vehicles stopped temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of materials. 
    While any such state of emergency is in effect, all other Regulations, rules and regulations governing the parking or standing of motor vehicles on the ways which are in conflict with this Section shall, during said state of emergency, be deemed suspended to the extent only that they permit parking or standing which would be in violation of this Section. 
    All other sections of this Article X relating to the towing or removal of vehicles shall be applicable to vehicles towed or removed under this Section. 
ARTICLE 11. - PENALTIES AND REPEALS 

Section 11-1. - Owner prima facie responsible for violations. 
    If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any provisions of these rules and regulations and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations. 
Section 11-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provisions of any rule, regulation or order regulating the parking of motor vehicles made by anybody authorized to make the same shall be dealt with as provided in M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A or any Acts in amendment thereof, or in addition thereto, and any person violating any of the rules and regulations applicable to State Highways made by the Massachusetts Highway Department, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, under authority of M.G.L. c. 85, § 2, and Acts in amendment thereof, and in addition thereto, shall be subject to the penalty provided in said rules and regulations. 
Violations of the Parking provisions of this regulation shall be subject to the following schedule of fines: Violation Fine Within 10 ft. of Hydrant $25.00 Crosswalk $25.00 Double Parking $25.00 Bus Stop $100.00 Obstructing Traffic $25.00 Within Intersection $25.00 Snow Emergency/Obstructing Plow $25.00 Less than 12 ft. Lane $25.00 Parking Not In a Designated Area $25.00 Sidewalk $25.00 Restricted Area $25.00 Wrong Direction $25.00 Within 20 ft. of intersection $25.00 Taxi Cab Stand $25.00 Obstructing Driveway $25.00 Over 1 ft. from Curb $25.00 Commercial Vehicles-Night Parking; Height and Weight $25.00 Meter Violation $15.00 Meter Overtime (Feeding) $15.00 Snow Emergency, Main Arteries $25.00 HP-V Plate $100.00 Fire Lane $50.00 Resident Permit Only-No Placard Visible $25.00 Street Sweeping $25.00 Blocking HP Ramp $100.00 Invalid Inspection Sticker $25.00 Invalid Plate Registration $25.00  
Section 11-3. - Additional penalties. 
    If a parking fine levied pursuant to Section 11-2 of this Code or M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A or § 20C, remains unpaid for twenty-one (21) days from the date of the offense, that parking fine shall be increased by an additional ten dollars ($10.00). If the parking fine so levied remains unpaid after the date that the Parking Clerk notifies the registrar of motor vehicles, as provided for under M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A, the parking fine originally assessed shall be increased by an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00). Any such increases shall be exclusive of any sums that might from time to time be assessed or added by the registrar of motor vehicles. 
Section 11-4. - Effect of regulations. 
    All existing rules and regulations governing the operation of vehicles or the use of ways by pedestrians which are inconsistent herewith are hereby expressly repealed. This repeal shall not, however, affect any punishment or penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution pending at the time of passage hereof any offense committed under any of the said rules and regulations hereby repealed. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and order is for any reason unconstitutional, void for vagueness, illegal, or enforceable, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these rules and orders. The City of Chelsea hereby declares that it would have passed these regulations and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
ARTICLE 12. - PEDESTRIAN CONTROL REGULATIONS 

Section 12-1. - Pedestrian crossing ways or roadways. 
    Pedestrians shall obey the directions of police officers directing traffic and whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic control signal or a marked crosswalk within three hundred (300) feet of a pedestrian, no such pedestrian shall cross a way or roadway expect within the limits of the marked crosswalk and as hereinafter provided in these regulations. For the purpose of these regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be constructed to be that area of a roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located between two solid white reflectorized 12-inch pavement markings in rural areas or markings not less than six inches wide in urban areas, said markings or lines being no less than six feet apart. 
Section 12-2. - Pedestrian actuation. 
(a)  At a traffic control signal location where pedestrian indications are provided but which are shown only upon actuation by means of a pedestrian push button, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless or until the pedestrian control signal push button has been actuated and then cross only on the proper pedestrian control signal indication. At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian indication is provided, pedestrians shall cross only on the green indication. If necessary, the green indication shall be actuated by the pedestrian by means of a push button. 
(b)  At a traffic control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles of a funeral or other procession or authorized emergency vehicle while in performance of emergency duties regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attempt to cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed at which time pedestrians shall then cross the roadway only as provided in these regulations. 
Section 12-3. - Pedestrian obedience to traffic control signals. 
    Traffic control signal color indications and legends shall have the commands ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and every pedestrian shall comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer. 
WALK and DON'T WALK indications (and/or the corresponding international symbols) have the following meaning: 
While the steady WALK indication is illuminated, pedestrians may enter a crosswalk controlled by such indication. Drivers shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing when this indication is displayed. 
While the Flashing DON'T WALK indication is illuminated, pedestrians shall not leave the curb and enter the crosswalk, however, any pedestrian already in the crosswalk at the time that this indication is displayed may continue to cross the opposing curb. While the steady DON'T WALK indication is illuminated, it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to enter an intersection controlled by such indication. The enforcement and penalty for violating this provision shall be as specified in M.G.L. c. 90, § 18A. 
Section 12-5. - Crossing at non-signalized locations. 
    When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if needed to so yield, to a pedestrian cross the roadway within a marked crosswalk if the pedestrian is on that half of the traveled part of the way on which the vehicle is traveling or if the pedestrian approaches from the opposite half of the traveled part of the way within five feet of that half of the traveled part of the way on which said vehicle is traveling. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. At a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overpass has been provided pedestrians shall cross the roadway only by the proper use of the tunnel or overpass. 
(M.G.L. c. 90, § 11) 
Section 12-6. - Operators to exercise due care. 
    The provisions of these regulations shall in no way abrogate the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 14 and § 14A which provide: "Precautions for Safety of Other Travelers" and for the "Protection of Blind Persons Crossing Ways". Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations every operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with a pedestrian upon the roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precautions which may become necessary for safe operation. 
[Section 12-7. - Reserved.] 
Section 12-8. - Officers to enforce pedestrian regulations. 
    These pedestrians control regulations shall be enforced by all officers of the City of Chelsea. 
Section 12-9. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the use of ways by pedestrians shall not apply to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a roadway closed to travel or under construction or repair, to municipal, state, federal or public service corporation employees while in the performance of their duties, to officers engaged in the performance of their public duties or to pedestrians acting in an emergency necessitates departure from any part of these rules and regulations. 
Section 12-10. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this Article, which deals with the proper use of ways by pedestrians, shall be punished as provided in M.G.L. c. 90, § 18A. 
ARTICLE 13. - CITYWIDE PARKING PROGRAM 

Section 13-1. - General. 
    The purpose of this regulation is to establish a residential parking program that allows for an effective and efficient system that maintains the availability of on-street parking within the city limits that is fair and equitable to all Chelsea residents and is enforced in a uniform and consistent manner each and every night. Enforcement of this regulation shall be the primary responsibility of the Parking Clerk and the contracted Parking Enforcement Officers (PEOs) with the assistance of the Chief of Police and the Chelsea Police Department. 
Section 13-1[2]. - Definitions. 
(a)  Caregiver. A caregiver is an individual who assists in the treatment or attends to the needs of a child or a dependent adult. Caregivers shall be registered by the City by providing a notarized letter to the Parking Clerk from the recipient of the care, or the recipient's parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Commercial Vehicle. A vehicle has more than six (6) wheels and is greater than nine (9) feet in total height excluding antennas. This definition applies regardless of how the vehicle is registered with the Registry of Motor Vehicles. 
(c)  Gathering Pass. A parking pass provided to residents only three times a year that allows for up to ten (10) vehicles to park between the hours of 8:00 a.m.-2:00 a.m. beginning on the marked date. The Parking Clerk has the discretion to reasonably waive the restrictions on the number of passes issued per event and/or number of permitted events per household. 
(d)  Good Standing. A property owner, resident, company or any other entity that is not in arrears to the City of Chelsea in respect to any municipal charges relating to the ownership of a vehicle (parking tickets, moving violations, excise tax or others). If a person or company is in a payment plan with the City, it must receive a letter from the City Treasurer or Law Department stating that they are in compliance with the payment plan on the date of their application for a permit, sticker or pass. 
(e)  Legally Registered Vehicle. A vehicle registered in Massachusetts pursuant to rules and regulations of the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles. 
(f)  Livery vehicle. A limousine, shuttle, or other vehicle-for-hire that carries up to 15 people (including the driver) and is available only for pre-arranged trips. Unlike a taxi, a livery vehicle may not be hailed from the street. 
(g)  Taxi. A vehicle licensed by a city or town to carry paying customers who do not have to pre-arrange the service. 
(h)  Trade/Craft Contractor. This definition shall include but not be limited to a plumber, electrician, carpenter, landscaper, roofer, floor-installer or other home service provider that is contracted to do work on an individual's residential or commercial property. 
Section 13-3. - General requirements. 
A.  In addition to any specified prohibition, at no time will a parking pass or sticker allow a motorist to violate any general parking rules, other than those that may be specifically described below. A pass or sticker will not be valid for parking in handicapped parking spaces, restricted areas, tow zones, bus stops, crosswalks, during street sweeping operations, snow emergencies, or other parking bans. 
B.  For passes which require only the coloring in of the date to be valid, a day shall consist of a 24-hour period beginning at 8:00 a.m. on one day and ending the following day at 7:59 a.m. 
C.  Only motorists or households that are in good standing and have a legally registered vehicle are eligible to receive a pass or sticker, pursuant to the regulations that follow. 
D.  The Parking Clerk has the discretion to reasonably waive any of the restrictions and any prohibitions outlined in these regulations on a written petition by any individual or entity. The Parking Clerk also has the discretion to deny any sticker or pass to any applicant. 
E.  Any restriction contained within these regulations is appealable exclusively to the Traffic and Parking Commission. 
F.  There will be no fees for any individual who is an honorably discharged veteran or for those who currently serve in any branch of the United States Armed Services including the Massachusetts Nation Guard. 
G.  No hitched or unhitched trailer may be parked on the public way within the City of Chelsea between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
( Ord. of 6-25-2018 ) 
Section 13-4. - Residential parking program. 
    This program applies only to non-commercial vehicles or vehicles affixed with a Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles commercial license plate that have six (6) wheels or less and are less than nine (9) feet in total height (excluding antennas) which are found parked or are standing on a public way, roadway, or any street under the control and direction of the City of Chelsea's Parking Clerk and pursuant to M.G.L. c. 90. This program shall be implemented citywide for all Chelsea residents and vehicle owners who are in good standing with the City and who have legally valid registered vehicles in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
    This program shall replace the prior residential placard system. A residential sticker shall exempt certain resident vehicles from metered parking requirements at specifically designated streets as defined in Section 5.23.4.3. 
Section 13-4.1. - Restricted parking zones. 
    The following parking restrictions shall be enforced year-round, except on holidays or as indicated below: 
A.  CITYWIDE. Sticker parking shall be required on all streets Citywide during the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. seven days a week, except for the following streets which are sticker parking only from the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
 Broadway 
 Central Avenue, from Shawmut Street to Hawthorn Street 
 Eastern Avenue 
 Fifth Street, from Broadway to Chestnut Street 
 Spencer Avenue, from Eastern Avenue to Stockton Street 
 Washington Avenue, from Fay Square (at Sixth Street) to Silk Street 
 Washington Avenue, from Revere Beach Parkway to Cheever Street 
 Williams Street Parking Lot, between Division Street and Winnisimmet Street 
 Winnisimmet Street Parking Lot at Marginal Street 
B.  UPPER CENTRAL AVENUE DISTRICT - Sticker parking shall be required on all streets within the Upper Central Avenue District during the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. seven days a week. The following streets have been designated as the Upper Central Avenue District: 
 110 to 170 Bellingham Street from Highland Street to its terminus at Eastern Avenue 
 147 to 255 Central Avenue from Highland Street to Willow Street 
 124 to 200 Chester Avenue from Highland Street through Willow Street to its dead end 
 250 Congress from Highland Street to Willow Street 
 83 to 165 Cottage Street from Highland Street to its terminus at Eastern Avenue 
 106 to 165 Grove Street from Highland Street to Willow Street 
 52 to 159 Highland Street from Grove Street to Marginal Street 
 118 to 174 Maverick Street from Highland Street to Willow Street 
 48 to 106 Watts Street from Highland Street through Willow Street to its dead end 
 72 to 127 Willow Street from Grove Street to Maverick Street 
C.  CHELSEA WATERFRONT DISTRICT (formerly the Lower Broadway District). Sticker parking shall be required on all streets within the Chelsea Waterfront District during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The following streets have been designated as the Chelsea Waterfront District: 
 Beacon Place 
 Beacon Street 
 1 to 120 Broadway from Williams Street to Medford Street 
 26 to 64 Cherry Street 
 21 to 62 Chestnut Street from Second Street westerly to its terminus at the Tobin Bridge 
 18 to 77 Division Street from Park Street to Williams Street 
 Eldridge Place 
 Ferry Street 
 Front Street 
 Howell Court 
 High Street 
 Medford Street 
 Mulberry Street 
 74 to 84 Park Street 
 1 to 100 Pearl Street from Park Street to the Waterfront 
 Pembroke Street 
 Pine Street 
 School Street 
 Tremont Street 
 Wharf Street 
 1 to 170 Williams Street 
 2 to 156 Williams Street from Mulberry Street to Pearl Street 
 1 to 177 Winnisimmet Street from Park Street to the Waterfront 
D.  COMMUTER RAIL DISTRICT. Sticker parking shall be required on all streets within the Commuter Rail District during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The following streets have been designated as the Commuter Rail District: 
 206 to 256 Arlington Street to Heard Street 
 8 to 62 Blossom Street, from Spruce Street to Washington Avenue 
 199 to 244 Chestnut Street, from Fifth Street to Fourth Street 
 2 to 14 Eden Street, from Heard Street to Blossom Street 
 82 to 138 Fourth Street, from Arlington Street to Walnut Street 
 11 to 74 Heard Street, from Spruce Street to Washington Avenue 
 9 to 97 Sixth Street, from Spruce Street to Washington Avenue 
 231 to 262 Spruce Street, from Sixth Street to Blossom Street 
 115 to 245 Walnut Street, from Sixth Street to Everett Avenue 
Section 13-4.2. - Residential parking stickers. 
A.  Annually, every owner of a legally registered vehicle in the City of Chelsea shall acquire a residential sticker from the City Clerk's Office at a fee to be determined by the City Clerk but not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00). All residents in good standing with the City of Chelsea shall be issued a sticker based on the following terms and conditions: 
1.  A current and valid certificate of registration issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles for the specific vehicle listing the residential or business address of the applicant indicating that the vehicle is garaged (e.g. where the vehicle is parked the majority of time) in Chelsea. 
2.  A current driver's license, other official identification issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, a utility bill dated within 60 days of the request, or any other official documentation which is deemed acceptable by the Parking Clerk which accurately lists the residential address of the applicant as residing within the City of Chelsea. 
3.  If vehicle is leased, a copy of the lease agreement must be presented and vehicle must be listed as garaged (e.g. where the vehicles parked the majority of time) in Chelsea. 
B.  Only one (1) sticker per vehicle. 
C.  A lost, stolen or damaged residential parking sticker will not be replaced without the holder responsible for the appropriate replacement cost as determined by the Parking Clerk. A new sticker must be requested following the procedure and submittal of fees for a new sticker as outlined in this section. 
D.  If the resident who is applying for a parking sticker is sixty-five (65) years or older or has a valid handicapped placard from the Commonwealth, the fee will be waived by the Parking Clerk. 
E.  There will be no fee charged for the residential sticker for any individual who is an honorably discharged veteran or for those who currently serve in any branch of the United States Armed Forces, including the Massachusetts National Guard. 
F.  New Resident Parking Pass - The New Resident Parking Pass is a temporary parking pass which shall be good for a period not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive days from the date establishing residence in the City of Chelsea. A new resident must submit a copy of their lease or deed (purchase and sale agreement shall suffice) in order to obtain a temporary parking pass. There is a no fee for the New Resident Parking Pass. 
Section 13-4.3. - Restrictive residential parking pass. 
A.  Any resident residing on the following streets: 
Central Avenue Hawthorne Street Chestnut Street Park Street Cross Street Pearl Street Congress Avenue Shurtleff Street Fifth Street Third Street Fourth Street Washington Avenue  
shall be granted unlimited parking privileges for two (2) non-commercial (passenger vehicle) vehicles in any metered parking space on the resident's street for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from each side of said resident's dwelling without cost for said parking. 
B.  Vehicles must be legally registered in Chelsea and owned or leased by the Chelsea resident who remains in good standing with the City. 
C.  The fee for acquiring restrictive residential parking pass is up to ten dollars ($10.00) annually or as determined by the Parking Clerk. 
D.  There will be no fee charged for the restrictive residential parking pass for any individual who is an honorably discharged veteran or for those who currently serve in any branch of the United States Armed Services including the Massachusetts National Guard. 
Section 13-4.4. - Resident visitor parking passes. 
A.  Two (2) visitor parking pass per household will be issued annually. 
B.  A visitor parking pass will allow a total of fifty-two (52) visits a year. A pass may only be used once a week. 
C.  The visitor parking pass must have the residential property address of the pass holder and require the user to color in the box corresponding to the date of use. It must be placed in the rear view mirror or the driver's side front windshield that is visible to a parking enforcement officer. 
D.  The visitor parking pass shall be valid in a loosely defined zone of approximately five (5) city blocks from the address listed on the pass. 
E.  Visitor passes are ten dollars ($10.00) per year. Only one (1) visitor pass can be renewed or replaced per year, per household. 
F.  The resident must provide a current driver's license, other official identification issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, and a utility bill within the last sixty (60) days of the application, or any other official documentation which is deemed acceptable by the Parking Clerk which accurately lists the residential address of the applicant as residing within the City of Chelsea. 
G.  There will be no fee charged for the Annual Visitor Parking Pass for any individual who is an honorably discharged veteran or for those who currently serve in any branch of the United States Armed Services, including Massachusetts National Guard. 
H.  Visitor passes are intended for the use of guests of that particular household. No person shall alter in any way, sell, offer for sale, or give a visitor permit to another household. Any violations shall result in immediate revocation of said visitor pass. 
I.  Gathering Passes shall be issued to each residential unit only three (3) times per year. All Gathering passes shall be valid on the date marked between 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. and are issued for the permit date marked only. A residential unit is allowed to have ten (10) vehicles park in the neighborhood when issued a Gathering Pass. The fee for a Gathering Pass is $10.00. 
J.  Temporary Parking Pass shall be issued to a residential unit for use of a rental vehicle which shall be good for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days from the date of issuance for use by a resident. The resident must provide a current driver's license, other official identification issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, utility bill dated within 60 days of the application, or any other official documentation which is deemed acceptable by the Parking Clerk which accurately lists the residential address of the applicant as residing within the City of Chelsea. There is no fee for the Temporary Parking Pass. 
( Ord. of 4-8-2019 ) 
Section 13-4.5. - Residential parking program prohibitions and penalties. 
A.  The Parking Clerk is authorized to revoke the residential parking sticker and/or the visitor parking pass issued to said resident found to be in violation(s) of any of the rules and regulations of the residential parking program. 
B.  A resident who has had their residential parking sticker revoked may appeal the revocation to the Traffic and Parking Commission by submitting a written request for reinstatement directly to the Parking Clerk. After the scheduled hearing, the Clerk will inform the applicant who filed the appeal of the decision within sixty (60) days. 
C.  If a visitor parking pass has been revoked for any reason, the resident shall not be eligible to receive a subsequent visitor parking pass until at least twelve (12) months have expired since the initial renovation. A request for reinstatement of the visitor parking pass shall be placed in writing and mailed directly to the Parking Clerk. The Parking Clerk will inform the applicant of the decision within sixty (60) days after receiving said request for reinstatement. 
Section 13-5. - Non-residential parking program. 
    All non-residential passes and stickers are valid for a period of not more than six (6) months for any entity that is in good standing with the City of Chelsea. They will be issued in January and July to become effective in February and August respectively. 
Section 13-5.1. - General non-residential parking sticker. 
A.  Non-commercial vehicles or vehicles with commercial license plates that have six (6) wheels or less and are less than nine (9) feet in total height excluding antennas, that are not registered in the City of Chelsea which are regularly parked in the City may purchase a non-residential parking sticker. The sticker must include the license plate number of the vehicle registered. 
B.  The fee for acquiring a non-residential sticker is three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a six (6) month period or any part thereof. 
C.  The fee for a General Non-Residential Parking Sticker shall be waived for the active military personnel and spouse who can demonstrate residency in Chelsea. 
Section 13-5.2. - Business parking sticker. 
A.  Businesses operating in the City may purchase non-residential parking stickers for company employees. The business must certify that the recipient of the sticker is a company employee. The employee's vehicle must be a legally registered vehicle and in good standing with the City. 
B.  The fee for a business acquiring a non-residential sticker is three hundred dollars ($300.00) per vehicle for a six (6) month period or any part thereof. 
Section 13-5.3. - Caregiver parking pass. 
A.  Caregivers are eligible for caregiver parking passes; however, they first must become registered caregivers in good standing with the City. Permits are for the explicit use of home visits and is not valid at the employer's address or periods of time when care is not being given. Registered caregivers shall provide a letter on letterhead from the employer verifying services to Chelsea resident. Caregivers that are unregistered shall be required to provide a letter on letterhead from the resident's doctor stating the applicant provides medical care for the resident. All caregiver passes shall state 'CAREGIVER' and provide a license plate number. 
B.  Caregiver passes will be valid for a six (6) month period or any part thereof. A used or lost pass may be replaced one time at the discretion of the Parking Clerk. 
C.  There is no fee for a caregiver parking pass. 
Section 13-5.4. - Landlord parking program. 
    A non-resident landlord is one who can reasonably identify in the judgment of the Clerk of the Traffic and Parking Commission that s/he is an owner of a residential or commercial property in the City, but does not reside within the City of Chelsea. In the case of the property being held in a trust or other form of ownership, a landlord may be designated upon the certified vote of the controlling ownership. A landlord may be the management company hired by the property owner for control and management of the site. Appeal of the denial of responsibility may be made to the Traffic and Parking Commission. 
Section 13-5.4.1. - Landlord parking stickers. 
    Landlords who are non-residents in good standing with the City and have a legally registered non-commercial vehicle will be provided a parking sticker. 
A.  In addition to the license plate number being written on the parking sticker, the Clerk of the Traffic and Parking Commission shall add the letter "L" to the end of the plate number to identify the sticker holder as a landlord. A substitute identification system may be utilized at the discretion of the Parking Clerk. 
B.  No more than one (1) landlord parking sticker will be issued to a landlord per property, unless that property is a condominium. In the case of a condominium within a property, only one (1) landlord parking sticker may be issued to each landlord. 
C.  The fee for acquiring a landlord parking sticker is fifty dollars ($50.00) for a six (6) month period or any part thereof. 
D.  The landlord shall provide a copy of a recent water or tax bill, dated within six (6) months of the application, for each property owned in the City of Chelsea. The landlord shall provide a copy of the bill of sale if the property is recently purchased. 
Section 13-5.4.2. - Landlord visitor parking passes. 
A.  The landlord visitor parking pass is valid for a six (6) month period. The pass will allow landlords to park within a five (5) block radius from the landlord's property. 
B.  Landlord Visitor passes are ten dollars ($10.00) for a six (6) month period or any part thereof. A lost, stolen or damaged landlord visitor parking pass may be replaced at the discretion of the Parking Clerk. 
C.  The landlord shall provide a copy of a recent water or tax bill, dated within six (6) months of the application, for each property owned in the City of Chelsea. The landlord shall provide a copy of the bill of sale if the property is recently purchased. 
Section 13-5.5. - Trade/craft contractor parking passes. 
A.  The trade/craft contractor parking pass will allow for trade/craft contractors to purchase a parking pass for regular working hours for parking near their site location. The pass will allow for trade/craft contractors to park within a five (5) block radius from their work site location. 
B.  The fee for acquiring a trade/craft contractor pass is five dollars ($5.00) a day for a daily pass, fifteen dollars ($15.00) a week for a weekly pass or sixty dollars ($30.00) a month for a monthly pass. 
C.  The trade/craft contractor shall provide a copy of their building permit, or their state license or an acceptable proof of work order and the Clerk of the Traffic and Parking Commission will issue a parking pass for a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
D.  The trade/craft contractor parking pass must have the property address of the work site and the eligible dates written on the pass. It must be placed in the driver's side front windshield that is visible to a parking enforcement officer. 
E.  A lost, stolen or damaged trade/craft contractor parking pass will not be replaced. A new pass must be requested following the procedure and submittal of fees for a new permit. 
Section 13-5.6. - Weekly visitor pass. 
A.  A resident in good standing may purchase a weekly visitor pass for $15.00. 
B.  The applicant must provide a copy of a current and valid certificate of registration issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles for the specific vehicle. 
C.  The applicant must provide a current driver's license, other official identification issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, utility bill dated within 60 days of the request, or any other official documentation which is deemed acceptable by the Parking Clerk. 
D.  The weekly visitor pass shall be effective for seven (7) consecutive days of which the applicant will indicate the desired start date. 
Section 13-5.7. - Non-residential parking program prohibitions and penalties. 
A.  The Parking Clerk is authorized to revoke the non-residential parking stickers/passes of any person found to be in violation(s) of any of the rules and regulations of the non-residential parking program. 
B.  A person who has had their non-residential parking sticker/pass revoked may appeal the revocation to the Traffic and Parking Commission by submitting a written request for reinstatement to the Parking Clerk. The Clerk will inform the applicant of the decision within sixty (60) days. 
Section 13-7. - Commercial parking program. 
    A vehicle with commercial license plate issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles that has six (6) wheels or less and under nine (9) feet in total height that is legally registered in the City of Chelsea and is in good standing will be eligible to purchase a residential sticker pursuant to all rules and regulations outlined in 5.23.4.2 (Residential Parking Stickers) 
A.  Only one (1) vehicle with a commercial license plate that is legally registered in the City of Chelsea shall be eligible for a parking sticker, per household, pursuant to the residential parking program. 
Section 13-7.1. - Commercial parking program prohibitions and penalties. 
A.  No commercial vehicle shall park or stand on a public way in the City of Chelsea from 7:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. unless otherwise specifically allowed pursuant to these regulations. 
B.  A one (1) month waiver of this prohibition shall be granted by the Traffic and Parking Commission for vehicles that are deemed to be integral to the work of the residents' property, such as overnight construction, emergency services and loading/unloading and for moving or relocating purposes. 
C.  No taxi or livery vehicle as defined in Section 5.23.2 shall park or stand on a public way in the City of Chelsea from 7:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. unless otherwise specifically allowed pursuant to these regulations. 
D.  If a commercial vehicle is found to be in violation of this regulation it shall be ticketed and towed by the Chelsea Police Department at sole cost of the registered owner. 
ARTICLE 14. - BICYCLE REGULATIONS 

Section 14-1. - Authority. 
    The Traffic and Parking Commission, pursuant to the provisions of the M.G.L. c. 85, § 11B and c. 90E, § 1, hereby adopts this section regulating the operation of bicycles and other non-motorized transportation (not including pedestrians). 
Section 14-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions of common terms apply to this Article. 
    Non-Motorized Transportation Conveyances. All non-motorized modes of transportation, which are human powered conveyances according to M.G.L. c. 90, § 18A. Such modes shall include bicycles, scooters, and all other wheeled conveyances meeting the definition of a human powered conveyance. 
    Traffic Controls. For the purposes of this article, traffic controls shall include all electrically displayed signals, signs, and pavement markings lawfully installed under the authority of this article. 
    Bike Path. A route for the exclusive use of bicycles separated by grade or other physical barrier from motor traffic. 
    Bike Lane. A lane on a street restricted to bicycles and so designated by appropriate traffic controls. 
    Bike Route. A roadway shared by both bicycles and other forms of transportation designated by the means of traffic controls. 
    Bikeway. Bike lanes, bike paths, and bike routes. 
    Bicycle Parking Facility. Any facility for the temporary storage of bicycles which allows the frame and both wheels of the bicycle to be locked so as to minimize the risk of theft and vandalism. Specifically, bicycle-parking facilities include designated bicycle racks and rings. 
Section 14-3. - Traffic controls for bikeways. 
    Traffic controls shall meet all of the requirements of Part 9 of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Controls (MUTCD), Traffic Controls for Bicycle Facilities, unless otherwise proscribed herein. 
Section 14-4. - Authority to operate on city streets and ways. 
    Non-motorized transportation conveyances may be operated in accordance with applicable state law on all streets and ways under the control of the Traffic and Parking Commission. Bicycles may be operated in general traffic or on sidewalks except as hereinafter proscribed. All other human powered conveyances must be operated on sidewalks except as hereinafter proscribed. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over bicycles on all sidewalks and in all crosswalks. 
Section 14-5. - Operation prohibited on certain sidewalks. 
    Non-motorized transportation conveyances are prohibited from operating on sidewalks and in parks in certain districts as hereinafter defined. Persons operating non-motorized transportation conveyances must dismount said conveyances and walk within districts indicated by sign. 
Section 14-6. - Exclusive operation in designated lanes and paths. 
    Non-motorized modes of transportation conveyances shall have exclusive use and right-of-way in designated bicycle lanes on ways controlled by the Traffic and Parking Commission. Non-motorized transportation conveyances shall have the right-of-way on designated bicycle paths under the control of the Traffic and Parking Commission. Motor vehicles are prohibited from operating in bicycle lanes and on bicycle paths. Pedestrians are prohibited from walking in bicycle lanes (except as necessary to cross said lanes in a properly marked crosswalk), but are permitted to use bicycle paths. (M.G.L. c. 90E). 
Section 14-7. - Lane use in designated bicycle lanes. 
    When making a left turn maneuver, bicyclists shall move to the center of the roadway and execute their maneuver in accordance with the rules of the road. Bicycles shall be operated consistent with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 85. 
Section 14-8. - Bicycle parking. 
    Bicycles may only be parked on a public way as hereinafter provided. Bicycles may be secured to existing public appurtenances, such as light poles, street signs, and parking meters. Where available, bicycles should be secured at bicycle parking facilities. Bicycles may not be secured to public shade trees or to other street furniture, such as benches or trash receptacles. Bicycles not secured properly are subject to impoundment at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Bicycles properly secured which have not been moved in fifteen days may also be impounded. Bicycles secured in violation of this provision shall be subject to a penalty of fifteen dollars and/or impoundment. 
Section 14-9. - Enforcement; citations and penalties. 
    Moving violations and parking violations arising under this Article shall be enforced by officers of the Police Department. Parking Enforcement Officers shall also enforce violations of the parking provisions of this Article. For any bicycle found upon any street or highway in violation of any provisions of these rules and regulations, if the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations. Violations of traffic laws are subject to a penalty of twenty dollars or impoundment of the conveyance if the operator is under the age of eighteen. An offender who refuses to state his or her name and address, or who states a false name and address, is subject to a penalty of fifty dollars. The provisions of the M.G.L. c. 85, § 11C, shall govern penalties for moving violations. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1994 Code, as supplement through May 10, 2004, that are included herein. 
1994 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-9 1-5 1-3 1-7-1-9 1-8 1-10 1-7 1-11-1-13 2-25-2-27 1-15 1-10 1-16 1-5 1-17, 1-18 2-1, 2-2 1-19 2-58 1-25 2-80 1-26 2-77 1-27-1-35 2-84-2-92 1-36 2-83 1-37, 1-38 2-78, 2-79 1-39, 1-40 2-81, 2-82 2-1 16-98 2-2, 2-3 16-48, 16-49 2-4 14-2 2-5 14-7 2-6, 2-7 14-4, 14-5 2-8 18-1 2-9 16-76 2-10 16-1 2-11 16-50 2-12, 2-13 16-127, 16-128 2-14 16-130 2-15 20-1 2-16 16-99 2-18 16-185 2-19, 2-20 16-21, 16-22 2-22 16-51 2-23 18-2 2-24 16-186 3-1, 3-2 2-191, 2-192 3-5 2-193 3-7-3-9 2-194-2-196 3-50-3-57 2-276-2-283 3-58 2-285 3-75-3-80 2-222-2-227 3-100-3-108 2-248-2-256 3-125, 3-126 2-197, 2-198 3-128 2-199 4-1 2-59 4-2 2-138 4-3 6-27 4-4, 4-5 10-1, 10-2 4-6 6-30 4-7 6-26 4-8 10-3 4-9, 4-10 6-31, 6-32 4-11, 4-12 6-28, 6-29 4-13 6-2 4-14 26-1 4-15 6-3 4-16 2-284 4-50 4-50 4-51, 4-52 24-151, 24-152 4-53-4-55 6-51-6-53 4-56, 4-57 6-55 4-58 6-54 4-59 24-150 4-60 24-152 4-61, 4-62 24-154, 24-155 4-75-4-77 32-1-32-3 4-100-4-102 22-1-22-3 4-103 22-2 4-115-4-125 22-24-22-34 4-150 22-57 4-151-4-154 22-59-22-62 4-155 22-58 4-156, 4-157 22-63, 22-64 4-175-4-178 22-88-22-91 4-179 22-87 4-185-4-191 22-111-22-117 4-193-4-198 22-118-22-123 4-200, 4-201 22-124, 22-125 5-1 28-25 5-2 28-2 5-3 28-80 5-4 28-3 5-5-5-7 28-56-28-58 5-10 28-59 5-11 28-1 6-1 24-1 30-1 6-2 30-4 6-3 30-8 6-4, 6-5 30-64, 30-65 6-7 30-66 6-8, 6-9 30-37, 30-38 6-10, 6-11 30-43, 30-44 6-12 30-9 6-13 30-194 6-14 30-45 6-15 30-67 6-16 30-39 6-17, 6-18 30-41, 30-42 6-19 30-3 6-22 30-2 6-22(a)-(c) 24-2 6-23, 6-24 30-5, 30-6 6-25 30-220 6-40 30-196 6-41-6-45 30-242-30-246 6-46 30-193 6-47 30-248 6-48-6-51 30-275-30-278 6-52 30-192 6-53 30-197 6-54 30-247 6-55, 6-56 30-218, 30-219 6-57 30-221 6-58, 6-59 30-223, 30-224 6-60 30-222 6-61 30-195 6-62 30-191 6-70 30-93 6-71-6-74 30-96-30-99 6-75-6-77 30-122-30-124 6-78 30-102 6-79 30-104 6-80 30-94 6-81 30-150 6-82-6-84 30-147-30-149 6-85-6-95 30-151-30-161 6-96, 6-97 30-100, 30-101 6-98 30-95 6-99 30-103 6-100 30-40 6-115 24-4 6-116 24-7 6-117 24-9 6-118 24-8 6-119, 6-120 24-10, 24-11 6-121, 6-122 24-11, 24-12 6-123 24-18 6-124, 6-125 24-21, 24-22 6-126, 6-127 24-19, 24-20 6-128, 6-129 28-109, 28-110 6-130 28-79 6-131 24-14 6-132, 6-133 24-23, 24-24 6-134 24-6 6-135-6-138 24-52-24-55 6-139-6-141 24-5 6-142 24-13 6-143-6-147 24-114-24-118 6-148, 6-149 24-84, 24-85 6-150 28-81 6-151 24-15 6-152 24-3 30-7 6-153 24-17 7-3 2-161 7-6 2-160 7-7 28-108 7-8 16-187 7-9, 7-10 16-183, 16-184 7-11 28-60 7-35 6-84 7-36, 7-37 6-87, 6-88 7-38 28-83 7-39 16-157 7-40 6-89 7-41 28-82 7-42, 7-43 6-90, 6-91 7-45-7-49 6-92-6-96 7-51-7-54 6-98-6-101 7-55 6-86 7-56 6-102 7-57 6-85 7-58-7-60 6-103-6-105 7-70 8-54 7-71-7-78 8-56-8-63 7-79 8-55 7-100-7-105 8-20-8-25 7-106 8-19 8-10 4-2, 4-3 4-9 8-11 4-1 8-12-8-14 4-4-4-6 8-16 4-8 8-25-8-27 4-47-4-49 8-29 4-43 8-29-8-31 4-50-4-52 8-32, 8-33 4-44, 4-45 8-34 4-41 8-35 4-53 8-36, 8-37 4-39, 4-40 8-38 4-46 8-50 12-2 8-51 12-1 8-52-8-54 12-23-12-25 8-56, 8-57 2-325, 2-326 8-58 26-2 8-150 4-7 8-396 4-42 9-1 14-31 14-33 9-2 14-32 9-3 14-3 9-4 14-1 9-5, 9-6 14-323, 14-324 9-8 14-6 9-25 14-354 9-26-9-35 14-386-14-395 9-36, 9-37 14-355, 14-356 9-50(a) 14-420 9-50(b) 14-418 9-51-9-54 14-447-14-450 9-54.1 14-451 9-55 14-452 9-56 14-423 9-57-9-59 14-453-14-455 9-60 14-419 9-61 14-422 9-62 14-424 9-63 14-421 9-70 14-55 9-71, 9-72 14-82, 14-83 9-73 14-58 9-74, 9-75 14-84, 14-85 9-76-9-78 14-59-14-61 9-80 14-89 9-81 14-86 9-82 14-88 9-83 14-81 9-84 14-56 9-85 14-87 9-86 14-57 9-100 14-260 9-101-9-105 14-296-14-300 9-106-9-108 14-263-14-265 9-109, 9-110 14-301, 14-302 9-112 14-262 9-113 14-261 9-115 14-266 9-125-9-134 14-108-14-117 9-135 14-107 9-150 14-231 9-151 14-233 9-152, 9-153 14-209, 14-210 9-154 14-232 9-155 14-211 9-156 14-208 9-170 14-148 9-171-9-174 14-169-14-172 9-174 14-173 9-176, 9-177 14-174, 14-175 9-178 14-149 9-178.1 14-150 9-179, 9-180 14-176, 14-177  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances that are included in the Code. 
Ordinance 
Adopted Section Section 
this Code 10-16-1995 1-8 22-33, 22-34 11- 6-1995 18-1  2- 5-1996 14-421, 14-422 14-424  6-10-1996 16-99  9-30-1996 4-1 4-3 4-8, 4-9 4-42, 4-43 4-47, 4-48 4-51-4-53  3-10-1997 1-2 1-5 2-193 2-223, 2-224 2-282 6-101 8-22 8-63 14-31 14-33 14-85 14-110 14-173 14-260-14-262 14-264 14-298 14-302 16-99 22-1 22-62-22-64 22-122 24-11 24-53 30-152  9- 8-1997 4-53  6- 8-1998 1-8 2-325, 2-326 6-2 26-1 10-19-1998 18-2 11-23-1998 16-51 12- 7-1998 22-64  6-28-1999 2-199  9-27-1999 16-185  3-20-2000 22-64  9-25-2000 16-50 12-18-2000 28-3  4- 9-2001 6-3  4-23-2001 2-276, 2-277 8-19 4-10  2-11-2002 6-105  6- 2-2002 16-187  1-27-2003 2-285  5-19-2003 34-300  6- 2-2003 16-183, 16-184 18-1  6-16-2003 28-60 1-4 2-284 10-20-2003 26-2  1-12-2004 34-300  2-23-2004 2-58  5- 5-2004 34-300  5-10-2004 16-187  6-20-2005 1.1 34-1 1.2 34-2 1.3 34-3 1.4 34-4 2.1 34-27 2.2 34-28 2.3.1 34-29 2.4 34-30 3.1 34-49 3.2 34-50 3.3 34-51 4.1 34-76 4.2 34-77 4.3 34-78 4.4 34-79 4.5 34-80 4.6 34-81 5.1 34-106 5.2 34-107 5.3 34-108 5.4 34-109 5.5 34-110 6.1 34-134 6.2 34-135 7.1 34-154 7.2 34-155 8.1 34-179 8.2 34-180 8.3 34-181 8.4 34-182 8.5 34-183 8.6 34-184 8.7 34-185 9.1.1, 9.1.2 34-209 9.1.3-9.1.5 34-210-34-212 9.2 34-213 9.3 34-214 9.4 34-215 9.5 34-216 10.0 34-241 app. A 34-262 app. B 34-283 app. C 34-300 12-19-2005 7-12 16-77  5- 8-2006 9-9 14-325  6- 5-2006 6-154 24-16  6-21-2007 3-130 6-4  9-22-2008 2-3 7-13 28-26 11-24-2008 2-24 6-1 10-19-2009 24-2 24-14 28-79 28-81 28-109, 28-110 30-1-30-9 30-37-30-45 30-64-30-67 30-93-30-104 30-122-30-124 30-147-30-161 30-191-30-197 30-218-30-224 30-242-30-248 30-275-30-278  1-25-2010 16-77  2-22-2010 6-84 6-105  9-27-2010(01) 1 34-300 2 34-78 3 34-283 4 34-155 5 34-241  9-27-2010(02) 34-241 34-283 34-300 11-22-2010 16-98(b)(3) 12- 6-2010 16-98 10-17-2011 34-180 34-241 12- 5-2011       Added 16-78  2-27-2012 1-6 Adopting ord., 
p. xi  3-12-2012 34-300  6-18-2012 1 34-185(a) 2 34-185(Tbl. A)  6-25-2012 1 34-241 2 34-300(Tbl. E)  3- 4-2013 1. 34-182(d)(1) 2.       Added 34-182(d)(3), (4) 3.       Added 34-182(e)       Rnbd 34-182(e)-(g)       as 34-182(f)-(h) 4. 34-182(g)(4), (5)  3-18-2013 I 34-241 II 34-300(Tbl. B) III       Added 34-215(a)(3)  5- 6-2013       Added 2-60  6- 3-2013(1)       Added 34-155(c)(3)       Rnbd 34-155(c)(3)-(11)       as 34-155(c)(4)-(12)  6- 3-2013(2) I 34-241 II 34-300(Tbl. E)  2-24-2014 26-2(a)(1)  3-24-2014 6-2  4- 6-2015(1) 1       Added 34-179(e)(16), (17) 2 34-300  4- 6-2015(2) 1 34-300  5- 4-2015(1) 1 34-185(a) 2 34-185(Tbl. A)  5- 4-2015(2) 1 34-241 2 34-50(e)(2) 3       Added 34-50(g)(4)   6-12-2015 App. A, §§ 11.03-C, 11.04-C   9-14-2015       Rpld 16-77 11-23-2015 I, II 1-8   1-14-2016(Adm. Ord.) App. A, § 8.01   4-12-2016(Regs.)       Added Pt. III, Art. I, Chs. 1-4   4-25-2016 1       Added 2-284A 2       Added 14-32A  9-13-2016(Regs.) Pt. III, Ch. 2, 
§ 2.4 10- 3-2016(1) 1 6-27(a) 11- 7-2016(1) 34-241 11-21-2016(1) 34-77(a) 11-21-2016(4)       Added 34-52 11-21-2016(5) 34-111 11-21-2016(6) 34-180(c)(5) 11-21-2016(7) 34-241 11-21-2016(8) 34-241 11-21-2016(9) 34-300 11-21-2016(10)       Added 34-181(e), (f) 11-21-2016(12) 34-241 12-19-2016(1)       Added 2-327-2-330 12-19-2016(2) 2-199(a)  5-10-2004       Added 16-79 12- 5-2016 
(Adm. Ord.) App. A, Pt. II, 
16.00-16.05  3-13-2017(1)       Added 6-2(b)(4)  3-13-2017(2) 34-156  6-14-2017 
(Adm. Ord.)       Added App. A, Pt. IV, 
1.12.02  6-19-2017(1) 34-24, Art. XIII, D.  6-19-2017(2) 14-5  6-19-2017(3) 16-79  6-19-2017(4)       Added 2-284B.  3- 7-2016 34-184  3-13-2017 34-241  9-11-2017       Added 34-136 11-20-2017       Added 26-3 12-18-2017 6-4 10-24-2017(Regs.)       Added Pt. III, Art. II, 
arts. 1-14  2- 8-2018 App. A, § 6.01  3-26-2018(1) 1       Added 34-157 2 34-300 3 34-215(a)(3) 4       Added 34-215(e)(1)g.  3-26-2018(2)       Added 26-4  4-23-2018 1       Added 14-90  5-10-2018 Pt. III, § 1.3  5-21-2018       Added 2-61  6- 4-2018(1) 14-422(a)(1)  6- 4-2018(2)       Added 24-25  6- 4-2018(3)       Added 6-33  6- 4-2018(4) 1-8(c)       Added 14-456-14-460  6- 5-2018 App. A, Pt. II, § 2.01  6-25-2018       Added Pt. III, 
§ 13-3.G 12- 3-2018 1, 2 34-262 3, 4 34-300 5 34-52 12-17-2018       Added 10-4  1- 7-2019       Rpld 2-61(c)  3-11-2019(1)       Added 34-186  3-11-2019(2) 26-2(a)(1)       Rpld 26-3(c)(3)  4- 8-2019 Pt. III, Art. II, 
§ 13-4.4  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Massachusetts General Laws. 
M.G.L. 
Chapter Section Section 
this Code 4 6 1-2 1-4 7 1-2 7(43) 26-3 6A 34-156 15D 1 34-241 21C Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-1 21C 1 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 21E 6 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 21G 30-42 30-100 21H 6b-6m Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.1 23 11I 2-284 11H 2-284 23B 34-156 29 15, 16 4-47 30 30-42 20 14-261 30A 30-5 30B 2-276, 2-277 4(c) 2-276 5-7 2-276 15(f) 2-285 39 4A et seq. 16-127, 16-128 40 8D Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 2-325 8H Ch. 22 13 App. A, Pt. IV, § 1.00 13A App. A, Pt. IV, § 1.00 20 16-127 16-185 30-2 21 1-8 6-87 14-56 14-61 14-324, 14-325 Ch. 16 16-99 18-1 20-1 22-32 22-87 28-109 21(5), (6) 30-42 21(7), (8) Ch. 30, Art. IV 21(10) 24-4 21(22) 16-99 21D 1-8 2-78 4-10 4-50 6-27-6-29 14-90 14-324, 14-325 16-98, 16-99 16-185, 16-186 18-1 24-16 28-1 30-100 34-212 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.1 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 22 Ch. 14, Art. VIII 14-325 Ch. 28 22D 10-1, 10-2 Ch. 28, Art. II, Div. 2 Pt. III, Art. II, § 10-1 22F 6-31 6-52 6-103 14-31 22-63 22-111 24-53 30-3 32-2, 32-3 38 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 39G 24-2 30-2 30-9 41A 30-39 30-99 41A-F 30-42 42A-F 24-1 30-1 30-38 30-65, 30-66 46 2-191 47 2-1 57 2-199 58 24-5 24-21 24-53 24-115 40A Ch. 34 34-1, 34-2 3 34-241 4 34-29 5 34-4 5, 6 34-51 7 34-211 7, 8 34-213 9 34-134 34-215 9A 34-136 34-241 9 et seq. 34-214 10 34-213 11 34-183 34-186 34-215 12 34-213 12 et seq. 34-213 15 34-213 17 34-214, 34-215 40B 20-30 34-156 34-213 20-23 34-213 40C 6 6-33 40D App. A, Pt. II, § 7.00 40R 34-183 34-186 11(a) 34-183 34-186 40U 1-8 6-2 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 41 34-213 35 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 3 42 2-194 48 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 74 24-4 81A App. A, Pt. II, § 14.00 81K-81GG 34-156 85 et seq. Ch. 32 96A et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 97A App. A, Pt. III, § 17.00 98 App. A, Pt. III, § 17.00 43B 13 App. A, Pt. III, § 13.00 43C 12 App. A, Pt. II, § 7.00 App. A, Pt. III, § 14.00 44 Ch. 2, Art. V 38 2-222 53 16-78 53A 2-193 53A et seq. 2-193 53G 34-134 55C 34-156 App. A, Pt. II, § 18.00 44B 2-327 45 Ch. 20 48 Ch. 6, Art. IV 13 2-199 50 21D 4-10 51 26 Char. § 10-5 29 Char. § 10-5 54 40 Char. § 10-5 59 Ch. 26 5(17c) 22-64 5(18) 22-64 5(22) 22-64 5(22A)-(22E) 22-64 5(37) 22-64 5(41C) 22-64 5(42), 5(43) 22-64 5K 26-2 57D 6-1 26-1 59 5N 26-3 5(41D) 26-3 60 16-98 Ch. 26 64 1 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.2 64N 3 26-4 76 1 16-184 82 Ch. 24 82A Ch. 24, Art. III 24-53 App. A, Pt. II, § 20.00 2 24-53 4 App. A, Pt. II, § 20.00 83 30-64 1 30-42 11 30-42 14-24 30-64 85 Ch. 24 Ch. 28 Pt. III, Art. II, § 8-1 Pt. III, Art. II, § 14-7 2 Pt. III, Art. II, § 4-1 Pt. III, Art. II, § 11-2 3 et seq. 24-4 5 24-7 5 et seq. 24-21 10 4-4 Ch. 24 11B Pt. III, Art. II, § 14-1 11C Pt. III, Art. II, § 14-9 18 28-80 36 22-26 87 App. A, Pt. II, § 19.00 89 Ch. 28 7A 28-82, 28-83 8 Pt. III, Art. II, § 7-18 9 Char. § 6-3 App. A, Pt. II, § 15.00 Pt. III, Art. II, § 1-27 Pt. III, Art. II, § 7-19 90 Ch. 28 Pt. III, Art. II, § 13-4 2 Pt. III, Art. II, § 5-16 11 Pt. III, Art. II, § 12-5 14 Pt. III, Art. II, § 12-6 14A Pt. III, Art. II, § 12-6 17B 16-78 18A Pt. III, Art. II, § 12-3 Pt. III, Art. II, § 12-10 Pt. III, Art. II, § 14-2 20A Pt. III, Art. II, § 5-9.11 Pt. III, Art. II, § 5-16 Pt. III, Art. II, §§ 10-5, 10-6 Pt. III, Art. II, §§ 11-2, 11-3 20C Pt. III, Art. II, § 11-3 22B 28-3 22C 28-3 28-58 24 28-60 24I 16-98 26 Pt. III, Art. II, § 9-1 90E Pt. III, Art. II, § 14-6 91 34-110 92 app. § 1-10 30-42 93 34-109 93A 14-260 14-264 94 295C 14-7 94C 1 12-1 16-98 16-183 32 28-60 32I 28-60 32A 28-60 32B 28-60 32C 28-60 32D 28-60 32E 28-60 32F 28-60 32G 28-60 32J 28-60 32L-32N 16-98 32M 16-98 40 28-60 94G 3(a)(2) 14-460 101 Ch. 14, Art. IX 14-420 1 14-354 3 14-386 12A 14-388 13 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 16 14-58 17 Ch. 14, Art. III, 
Div. 2 14-84 27 14-89 32 14-56 14-85 14-355 14-419 33 2-199 107 2-195 4 2-195 111 31 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.1 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 Pt. III, Art. I, § 3.1 Pt. III, Art. I, § 3.2 111 31A 22-61 Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 111 31B Pt. III, Art. I, § 2.4 111 71 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 111 122 Pt. III, Art. I, § 4.1 111 123 Pt. III, Art. I, § 4.1 111 143 Pt. III, Art. I, § 4.1 111 146 Pt. III, Art. I, § 4.1 159 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 111C 34-241 112 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.2 112 2 Pt. III, Art. I, § 3.2 112 12Z 4-40 114 et seq. Ch. 10 121A App. A, Pt. II, § 7.00 121B 34-241 App. A, Pt. II, § 7.00 3 App. A, Pt. III, § 14.00 121C App. A, Pt. II, § 7.00 129 39B 4-1 131 5 4-9 12 2-199 40 34-135 34-184 133 Ch. 4 134 Ch. 4 4-4 137 16-130 138 14-32A 15 14-459 16-98 16-128 16-130 16-183 1 16-98 12 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.2 34 16-183 16-186 34A 16-183 34C 16-183 34D 16-183 138A 6-1 139 Ch. 18 18-2 3A 18-2 140 14-32A 140 21E 2-199 22 6-2 25 6-2 22-31 6-2 6-3 54-56 Ch. 14, Art. IV 70 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VI 136A et seq. Ch. 4 137 2-199 4-47 151 4-1 151A 4-1 4-43 157 4-1 4-5 4-42, 4-43 4-51, 4-52 181 2-199 14-1 183A 14-1 202 Ch. 14, Art. IV Ch. 14, Art. VI 203 Ch. 14, Art. IV 205 Ch. 14, Art. IV 141 6-55 142 11 Ch. 6, Art. II 143 3 6-1 3 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 3L Ch. 6, Art. III 26-27 6-98 147 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 11 et seq. 2-161 41 et seq. 2-194 148 Ch. 6, Art. IV 6-84 34-241 4 6-90 24 6-102 26-27 6-96, 6-97 31 6-86 39 et seq. 6-92 148A 6-84 149 2-284 2-284A 14-32A 26 2-284 44A(2) 2-284 44F 2-284 148B 2-284 150E App. A, Pt. IV, § 1.00 151 2-284A 2-284A 14-32A 34-156 151B Ch. 12 1 12-1 152 2-284 156D 5.02 6-1 157B 6-4 165 11 30-124 166 Ch. 24, Art. V 39 28-80 180 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.2 183 6-4 183A 6-4 34-241 184 31-33 34-156 31 34-183 34-186 207 28 2-199 214 7B 16-99 244 1 6-1 17B 6-1 265 32 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 24-18, 24-19 35 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 24-18 44 16-183 16-187 266 30A 16-51 94 et seq. 18-1 98 16-48 98A 16-48 99 et seq. 16-49 104 16-48 114 16-48 120 20-1 126 16-48 126A 16-48 126B 16-48 127 16-48 132 4-10 142A Ch. 14, Art. VI 268 2-80 32 Ch. 8, Art. III 16-157 32A 6-89 268A Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 2-77 2-80 2-86 2-88 1 2-199 23 2-80 269 10(b) 16-76 12 16-76 12B 16-76 270 16 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 24-18 22 Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 22(j) Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 22(m)(2) Pt. III, Art. I, § 1.3 271 1 et seq. 16-130 46 22-33 272 28 16-129 53, 54 16-99 59 24-6 59, 60 30-9 77 et seq. Ch. 4 80F 4-7 105 16-22  
