TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BYLAW
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage, or possess an open container of any alcoholic
beverage, as defined in Chapter 138, §1 of the MGL, while in or upon any public way or any
way to which the public has a right of access, whether in or upon a vehicle, or on foot, or
while in or upon any public place or public building or playground, or while in or upon a
private parking lot, or a private way to which the public has access as invitees or licensees, or
in or upon any private land or place without the consent of the owner or authorized person
in control thereof. A police officer may arrest without a warrant any person who commits a
violation of this bylaw in the officer’s presence. All alcoholic beverages being used or
possessed in violation of this bylaw shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of
the charge against the person arrested or summonsed before the court.
Article 23, Town Meeting, May 1974
Article 47, Town Meeting, April 1981
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
ANIMAL BYLAWS
HORSES AND WAGONS BYLAW
No person shall leave for more than five minutes at a time any horse and wagon at right
angles to Main Street on that part of said street which lies between the grounds of the First
Parish in Concord and the Concord National Bank, and which is commonly called the Mill
Dam.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
HORSES ON SIDEWALKS BYLAW
Whoever rides or drives a horse along a sidewalk shall be punished by a fine as specified in
Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter
40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article
47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 22, Town Meeting, March 1924
Article 22, Town Meeting, March 1973
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 24, 2006
OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALK OR CROSSWALK BY HORSES OR
VEHICLES BYLAW
No person having charge of any horse or other animal, or any vehicle or other object, shall
allow it to stand so as to obstruct in any degree any sidewalk or street crossing in said Town,
or leave any horse untied or unguarded so that it may in any way do mischief.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
PASTURING OF ANIMALS IN PUBLIC WAYS BYLAW
No person shall pasture any animals upon any of the public places or ways in said Town,
either with or without a keeper, except within the limits of such ways adjoining his own
premises.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
CEMETERY OPERATION REVOLVING FUND BYLAW
VOTED: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule Amendment,
adopt the following bylaw regarding a cemetery operation revolving fund in the Town of
Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury, a Cemetery Operation Revolving
Fund (hereinafter called the “fund”) for its Cemetery Department. All receipts of the department
shall be credited to the fund. This fund shall be kept separate from any other monies or funds of
the Town and shall be expended only for those purposes outlined below.
Section 2.
There shall be a fixed schedule of prices established by the Cemetery Committee for the various services
provided by the Cemetery Department in the administration of the cemeteries under the
Town’s jurisdiction. The schedule of prices will cover such services as the sale of lots, the care of
lots, the opening of graves, the sale of grave liners and other similar services. Changes in prices will
be made only after a public hearing duly advertised in the newspapers published in the Town. Determination
of the price schedule shall include consideration of the cost of all maintenance and operation
expenses, principal and interest payment on any outstanding debt, and a reserve for capital
expansion of the facilities.
Section 3.
All income received by the Cemetery Department or Cemetery Committee shall be paid over the
Town Treasurer and used to pay the expenses for the operation of the cemeteries as may be authorized
by the Cemetery Committee and approved by the Town Manager.
Section 4.
Nothing in this bylaw shall prevent the Town of Concord from appropriating funds for the extension
or improvement of the cemetery properties over and above those financed out of the fund.
These appropriations will be treated as special deposits on the books of the fund and administered
by the Cemetery Committee and the Town Manager for the specific purposes for which they were
appropriated. Any balance after the completion of the project will be returned to the General Fund
of the Town.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance at a Town Meeting by a majority vote of the qualified
voters of the Town present and voting thereon. The accumulated receipts of the department
for the preceding fiscal period will be retained and constitute the working capital to establish the
fund.
Section 6.
This bylaw supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict to it.
Article 66, Town Meeting, May 1975
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
CIVIL DEFENSE BYLAW
Section 1. Civil Defense Agency
There is hereby established a Civil Defense Agency (hereinafter called the “agency”). It shall
be the function of the agency to have charge of civil defense as defined in §1, Chapter 639,
Acts of 1950 and to perform civil defense functions as authorized or directed by said chapter
or by any and all executive orders or general regulations promulgated thereunder and to
exercise any authority delegated to it by the governor under said Chapter 639.
Section 2. Director of Civil Defense
The agency shall be under the direction of a director of civil defense (hereinafter called the
“director”) who shall be appointed as prescribed by law. The director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the agency, subject to the
direction and control of the Town Manager. The director may, within the limits of the
amount appropriated therefor, appoint such experts, clerks and other assistants as the work
of the agency may require and may remove them, and may make such expenditures as may
be necessary to execute effectively the purposes of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950.
The director shall also have authority to appoint district coordinators and may accept and
may receive, on behalf of the town, services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way
of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil defense, offered by the federal government, or any
agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or corporation, subject to the terms of the
offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. The director shall
cause appropriate records to be kept of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans.
Section 3. Civil Defense Advisory Council
There is hereby established a civil defense advisory council (hereinafter called the “council”).
Said council shall serve without pay and shall consist of the director of civil defense, such
other department heads and such other persons as the Town Manager may deem necessary.
The director shall serve as chairman of said council. Said council shall serve subject to the
direction and control of the Town Manager and shall advise and assist the Town Manager
and the director on matters pertaining to civil defense.
Section 4. Police Aid to Other Cities and Towns in Event of Riots or Other
Violence Therein
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town at the request
of said city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms of violence therein.
Section 5. Termination of Bylaw
This bylaw shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950
and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or substitution therefor.
Section 6. Definition
All references to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in force, shall be applicable to any act or
acts in amendment or continuation of or substitution for said Chapter 639.
Article 2, Town Meeting, October 1950
Administrative Code, Civil Defense Agency, 7/12/82
Chapter 639, Acts of 1950 (now incorporated as MGL Ch. 33, Appendix 13-1 through 13-22, as amended)
NOTE:
This bylaw was adopted during the Cold War-era methodology of emergency management. The term “Civil Defense”
has now been replaced with “Emergency Management.,” and the responsibility for coordinating the Town’s response to
man-made and natural disasters is now assumed by the Concord Emergency Management Agency (CEMA) and the
Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC), both of which are headed by the Fire Chief. Although some aspects
of this bylaw have been superseded by the Town Charter, §2d (see Administrative Code for a clarification of appointing
authority) and other changes to government practices, the basic premise of this bylaw is still valid. It is anticipated that
a revision to the bylaw will be made at some point in the future to reflect changes in organizational structure.
Revised December 2012
1
Introduction
This handbook has been designed to inform new and current committee members of the
various laws, policies, and procedures that relate to committees in the Town of Concord.
Included in this handbook are sections on organizing a meeting, financial matters, appointment
procedures, legal issues, and committee descriptions.
Included in the appendix section is the Table of Contents of all of the Administrative Policies &
Procedures (APPs). Copies of these APPs are available in the Town Manager's Office and are
available on the town’s web site, both on the Town Manager’s page and under the “Important
Documents” section of the web site.
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION I. Town Government 5
A. Legal Basis of Town Government
B. History of the Charter of the Town of Concord
C. The Concord Town Charter
D. Notes on Charter Amendments
SECTION II. Legal Issues 15
A. Utilization of Town Counsel
B. Legal Review of Contract Documents
C. Liability
D. Open Meeting Law & Conflict of Interest Law
E. Acceptance of Gifts
F. Application for and Acceptance of State & Federal
Grants
G. Outline of State Regulations - Public Access to Records
H. Use of Electronic Mail
SECTION III. Committee Procedures 20
A. Powers & Duties
B. Participation in Government
C. Officers of Committees
D. Minutes
E. Deadlines
F. Committee Meetings
G. Meeting Postings & Notice of Meetings
H. Agenda
I. Charge
J. Goals
K. References
SECTION IV. Appointment Policy & Procedures 25
A. General
3
SECTION V. Miscellaneous Items 27
A. Committee Paperwork and Finances
1. Use of Clerical Staff
2. Management/Professional Staff
3. Stationery
4. Mailings
5. Photocopying
6. Use of Green Cards
7. Request for Services from Other Departments
8. Committee Finances
B. Reservations of Public Meeting Rooms; Open Doors
1. Use of Town Buildings
2. Keys
3. Meeting Cancellations
C. Telephone Procedures
1. Use of Town Telephones
2. Phone Messages
3. Emergencies
4. Telephone Directory Town & School
SECTION VI. Committee List & Committee Descriptions 34
1. Agricultural Committee
2. Board of Appeals
3. Board of Assessors
4. Cemetery Committee
5. Community Preservation Committee
6. Comprehensive Sustainable Energy Committee
7. Concord Cable Television Advisory Committee
8. Concord Local Cultural Council
9. Conservation Restriction Stewardship Committee
10. Council on Aging Board
11. Finance Committee
12. Hanscom Field Advisory Commission
Representative
13. HATS (Hanscom Area Town’s Selectmen)
14. Board of Health
15. Historical Commission
16. Historic Districts Commission
17. Housing Authority
18. Hugh Cargill Trust Committee
19. Library Committee
20. Light Board
21. Local Option Local Income Tax Committee
22. MAGIC Representative
4
23. MAPC Representative
24. MBTA Representative
25. Minuteman Regional High School Committee Rep.
26. Natural Resources Commission
27. Personnel Board
28. Planning Board
29. Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
30. Public Works Commission
31. Records and Archives Committee
32. Recreation Commission
33. Board of Registrars
34. Retirement Board
35. School Committee
36. Board of Selectmen
37. Trustees of Town Donations
38. White Pond Advisory Committee
SECTION VII. Appendix 40
A. Records Management Procedures
B. Conflict of Interest - Disclosure Form
C. APP #19 Acceptance of Gifts
D. APP #18 Applications for and Acceptance of State
and Federal Grants
E. APP #50 Use of Electronic Mail
F. Meeting Notice Posting Form
G. APP #10 Town Board, Committee and Task Force
Appointment Policy
H. Green Card
I. Table of Contents - Administrative Policies & Procedures
5
SECTION I
I. TOWN GOVERNMENT
A. Legal Basis of Town Government
B. History of the Charter of the Town of Concord
C. The Concord Town Charter
D. Notes on Charter Amendments
6
A. LEGAL BASIS OF TOWN GOVERNMENT
Town government's responsibility and authority in Massachusetts is based on the
Constitution of the Commonwealth, enactments of the General Court, and interpretive
decisions of the State courts. The powers and duties of many boards are outlined in
enabling statutes (primarily Chapter 41 of the General Laws) and further defined in the
Town's general bylaws.
The full text of the Massachusetts General Laws (referred to hereafter as MGL) can be
found at the Concord Free Public Library. These volumes also contain abstracts of court
decisions affecting the interpretation of the statutes. They are updated by quarterly
pamphlets covering all volumes and cumulative annual "pocket parts" in the back cover
of each volume. An electronic copy of the Massachusetts General Laws may also be
found on the State’s web site.
B. HISTORY OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF CONCORD
On March 12, 1956, the Selectmen-Manager form of government became effective in
the Town of Concord. This was the result of a special act passed by the General Court
in 1952*, which act was accepted by the Town of Concord at the annual Town election
of 1955.
Although adopted in 1956, the Charter falls under the 1966 "Home Rule Amendment"
(Article 89) of the Massachusetts State Constitution. This was made certain by a letter
from the Commonwealth's Attorney General to the Concord Town Counsel, dated June
29, 1972. Amendments to the Charter may therefore be made according to the
procedures defined by the Home Rule Amendment in its Section 9.
The Charter was amended by a special act passed by the General Court in 1973 ("An
Act Providing for the Election of Persons to Fill Vacancies in the Membership of the
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Concord") upon petition by the Town voted at the
Town Meeting in October 1972.
It has also been amended by referendum vote. A list of these referenda is given at the
end of Section II of this Charter, on page 14. They are referenced by number in the
Charter text.
The contents of the special act of 1952, as amended, are set forth in this Section.
The document as a whole will be referred to as the "Selectmen-Manager Charter," or
simply as the "Charter."
*Passed by the General Court in 1952 (Acts 1952, Chapter 280);
Accepted by the Town of Concord at Town Election, March 7, 1955;
Effective 11:58 p.m., March 12, 1956.
See Also: Charter, Sec. 19
7
C. THE CONCORD TOWN CHARTER
AN ACT ESTABLISHING A SELECTMEN-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR
THE TOWN OF CONCORD
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled,
and by authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. ELECTED OFFICIALS
At the town election following the acceptance of this act the registered voters of the town
of Concord shall elect the following officials:
A. A moderator for a term of one year;
B. Two selectmen for terms of three years each, two selectmen for terms of two
years each and one selectman for a term of one year;
C. Two members of the school committee for terms of three years each, two
members for terms of two years each, and one member for a term of one year.
At each annual town election thereafter a moderator shall be elected for a term
of one year and selectmen and members of the school committee for terms of
three years to replace those whose terms expire. When a vacancy or vacancies
occur in the membership of the board of selectmen, the board of selectmen shall
call a special town election to fill the vacancy or vacancies for the unexpired term
or terms, except that if such vacancy or vacancies occur less than one hundred
days prior to the annual election and not less than three members of such board
remain in office, the vacancy or vacancies shall remain unfilled until such annual
election (See Note #1, Amendments). When a vacancy or vacancies occur in
the membership of the school committee, the board of selectmen shall call a
special town election to fill the vacancy or vacancies for the unexpired term or
terms, except that if such vacancy or vacancies occur less than one hundred
days prior to the annual election and not less than three members of such
committee remain in office, the vacancy or vacancies shall remain unfilled until
such annual election (See Note #2, Amendments). The powers, duties and
responsibilities of elected officials shall be as now or hereafter provided by
applicable statutes and bylaws and votes of the town, except as herein otherwise
provided.
SECTION 2. APPOINTED OFFICIALS
A. The selectmen shall appoint a town manager as provided in Section 5, who may
thereafter be removed as provided in Section 7.
B. The selectmen shall appoint a library committee, a planning board, a board of
appeals, a town accountant, trustees of town donations, a personnel board, a
public ceremonies and celebrations committee (see Note #3, Amendments),
election officers, registrars of voters other than the town clerk and such other
officers, boards and committees as they shall hereafter be directed to appoint by
bylaw or vote of the town, and such temporary or ad hoc committees as in their
judgment shall from time to time be necessary or desirable (see Note #3,
Amendments). The selectmen may, by majority vote, undertake an investigation
of the affairs of any committee, board or official appointed by them or by the
town manager, and they shall have access to all records and other documents
8
which they may deem necessary or desirable for this purpose. The selectmen
may remove, after such hearing as the selectmen may deem advisable, any of
the officers, boards or committees appointed by them under the provisions of this
paragraph B, or any member thereof, other than the town clerk.
The selectmen shall, at the respective times specified in clauses 1 and 2 herein
and at intervals of not more than ten (10) years thereafter appoint the following
special committees:
1. within one year after this paragraph takes effect, a committee for the
purposes of reviewing and recodifying the existing zoning bylaw and
revising the building code of the town; and
2. within one year after this paragraph takes effect, a committee for the
purpose of reviewing and recodifying all other existing bylaws of the town.
(Clause 3 deleted. See Note #8, Amendments)
Within one year following its appointment, each such committee shall submit a
report to the selectmen with specific recommendations for action to be taken to
accomplish the purpose of such committee. (See Note #5, Amendments)
C. The moderator shall appoint a finance committee and such other officers, boards
and committees as he shall herein after be directed to appoint by bylaw or vote
of the town.
D. The town manager shall appoint, upon merit and fitness alone, and may remove
for cause:
1. a town clerk, a town treasurer, a town collector and a board of five
assessors (see Note #7, Amendments), subject however, in each
instance, to the approval of the selectmen;
2. all other officers, boards, committees and employees of the town, with
the exception of the elected officials specified in Section 1, officials,
boards and committees appointed by the school committee and by the
selectmen and moderator as herein before in this Section 2 provided and
employees of the same.
SECTION 3. MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; POWERS, DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES;
TERMINATION
The membership of boards and committees appointed as provided in Section 2, the
length of the term of each member thereof and of officers so appointed, and the powers,
duties and responsibilities of the same shall be as now or hereafter provided by
applicable statutes and bylaws and votes of the town, except as herein otherwise
provided. Upon appointment and qualification of the various officials as provided for in
Section 2, the term of office and all powers and duties of each person theretofore
holding each such office shall cease and be terminated.
SECTION 4. MULTIPLE OFFICERS
Neither the moderator nor any member of the board of selectmen, the school
committee, or the finance committee may, during the term for which he was elected or
appointed, be elected or appointed to any other town office, except as otherwise
provided herein. Any person appointed by the town manager to any town office under
9
the provisions of this act or of any other statute of the Commonwealth shall be eligible
during the term of said office to appointment to any other town office, except the town
accountant shall not be eligible to hold the position of town treasurer or town collector.
Subject to the approval of the selectmen, the town manager may assume the powers,
duties, and responsibilities of any officer, board or committee which he is authorized to
appoint, such assumption to be evidenced by and effective upon the filing with the town
clerk of a written declaration of such assumption signed by the town manager, and
thereupon each officer, board or committee whose powers, duties and responsibilities
are so assumed by the town manager shall be discharged and shall have no further
powers, duties or responsibilities as such.
SECTION 5. APPOINTMENT OF TOWN MANAGER
The selectmen elected as provided herein shall appoint, as soon as practicable, for a
term of three years, a town manager who shall be a person especially fitted, in their
opinion, by education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office. The
town manager shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs. No holder of
elective office in the town shall within two years of holding of such office be eligible for
appointment as town manager. The town manager may be appointed for successive
terms of office. Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall be sworn, in the
presence of a majority of the selectmen, to the faithful and impartial performance
thereof by the town clerk or by a justice of the peace or notary public. He shall execute
a bond in favor of the town for the faithful performance of his duties in such sum and
with such sureties as may be fixed or approved by the selectmen.
SECTION 6. APPOINTMENT OF A TEMPORARY TOWN MANAGER
In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the town manager, he may
appoint, subject to the approval of the selectmen, a suitable person to perform the
duties of the manager during such absence or disability. If the town manager fails to
make such appointment or the person so appointed fails to serve, the selectmen may
appoint a suitable person, who may be a selectman, to perform such duties. In the
event of any vacancy in the office of town manager or the suspension of the town
manager as hereinafter provided, the selectmen shall, within seven days, appoint the
person to perform such duties.
SECTION 7. REMOVAL OF TOWN MANAGER
The selectmen may remove the town manager by the affirmative vote of at least three
members of the board. At least thirty days before such proposed removal shall become
effective, the selectmen shall file a preliminary written resolution with the town clerk
setting forth the specific reasons for his proposed removal. The town clerk shall
forthwith deliver a copy of such resolution to the town manager or mail the same to him
by registered mail at his last known address. The manager may file with the selectmen,
within seven days after receipt of such copy, a written request for a public hearing not
earlier than ten days or later than twenty days after the filing of such request. After such
public hearings, if any, otherwise at the expiration of thirty days following the filing of the
preliminary resolution and after full consideration, the selectmen, by the affirmative vote
of at least three members of the board may adopt a final resolution of removal. In the
preliminary resolution, the selectmen may suspend the manager from duty, but shall in
any case cause to be paid to him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary for the then
current month and, at the discretion of the selectmen, such additional amount not in
excess of three months' salary, as the selectmen shall deem proper.
10
SECTION 8. COMPENSATION OF TOWN MANAGER
The town manager shall receive such compensation for all services performed by him
as the selectmen shall determine, but it shall not exceed the amount appropriated
therefor by the town.
SECTION 9. POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN MANAGER
In addition to specific powers and duties provided elsewhere in this act the town
manager shall have the general powers and duties enumerated in this section:
A. The town manager shall supervise and direct and shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all officers, boards and committees appointed by him
and their respective departments.
B. He may, with the approval of at least three of the selectmen, establish, combine,
reorganize, or discontinue departments under his supervision; and, with the
approval of both the selectmen and the finance committee, he may transfer all or
part of the appropriation of a discontinued department to any other department,
any balance not so transferred to be returned to the town treasury.
C. With respect to the wage or salary and classification of employees appointed by
the town manager, he shall be governed by the provisions of the "Wage and
Salary Classification Plan - Town of Concord, Massachusetts", as the same may
be amended from time to time and for so long as the same may remain in force.
D. The town manager shall keep full and complete records of his office, and shall
render as often as may be required by the selectmen a full report of all
operations during the period reported on.
E. With the exception of property under the jurisdiction of the school committee, the
town manager shall have full and exclusive jurisdiction over the rental and use of
all town property, and shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair
thereof; and, upon request by the school committee, he shall be responsible for
the maintenance and repair of property under its jurisdiction, but only to such
extent and for such period as the school committee shall from time to time
specify. He shall be responsible for the preparation of plans and the supervision
of work on existing and on new buildings and grounds, unless a special
committee of the town is created for such purpose.
F. The town manager shall purchase all supplies and materials and equipment and
award all contracts for all departments of the town, but he shall make purchases
for departments not under his supervision only upon requisition duly authorized
by the head of such department.
G. The town manager shall administer either directly or through a person or persons
appointed by him in accordance with this act all provisions of general and special
laws applicable to the town and bylaws and votes of the town, within the scope of
his duties, and all rules and regulations made by the selectmen.
H. The town manager, subject to the approval of the board of selectmen, shall have
authority to prosecute, defend and compromise all litigation to which the town is
a party, and to employ counsel whenever in his judgment it may be necessary.
I. The town manager shall perform such other duties consistent with his office as
may be required by bylaw or vote of the town or by vote of the selectmen.
11
SECTION 10. INVESTIGATION BY TOWN MANAGER
The town manager may without notice cause the affairs of any committee, board, or
official under his control or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof to be
examined. The town manager shall have access to all town books and papers for
information necessary for the performance of his duties.
SECTION 11. RELATIVE TO DUTIES OF BOARDS AND OFFICERS
APPOINTED BY TOWN MANAGER
Except as otherwise herein provided, each committee, board and officer appointed by
the town manager shall, in the performance of their duties, be subject to the general
supervision and direction of the town manager. Such committees and boards shall
promptly organize for the proper conduct of their respective offices. Each committee
and board member and each officer appointed by the town manager shall hold office
until his successor has been appointed and qualifies, unless his office shall have
become vacant by reason of his resignation or removal.
SECTION 12. VACANCIES TO BE FILLED BY TOWN MANAGER
Any vacancy in an office or committee or board over which the town manager has power
of appointment shall be filled by the town manager, as hereinbefore provided.
SECTION 13. OATH OF OFFICE OF TOWN OFFICIALS
All elected officials shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their respective duties
by the town clerk or a justice of the peace or notary public, except that the town clerk
shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his duties by the chairman of the Board of
Selectmen or by a justice of the peace or notary public.
SECTION 14. WARRANTS
A copy of each warrant for the payment of town funds prepared by the town accountant
shall be submitted to the town manager who shall make recommendation to the
selectmen with respect to the approval or disapproval by them of each such warrant or
of any item or items in any such warrant.
SECTION 15. RECEIPTS PAID TO TREASURY
Every official shall pay into the treasury of the town all amounts received by him on
behalf of the town and all fees received by him in accordance with the provisions of any
general or special law and shall make a full and true return thereof to the town
accountant.
SECTION 16. ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURES
Not less than 90 days before the annual town meeting each year (See Note #4,
Amendments), the town manager shall submit to the selectmen a careful detailed
estimate in writing of the probable expenditures of the town government for the ensuing
fiscal year, stating the amount required to meet the interest and maturing bonds and
notes or other outstanding indebtedness of the town, and showing specifically the
amount necessary to be provided for each fund and department, together with a
statement of the expenditures of the town for the same purposes in the two preceding
years and an estimate of the expenditures for the current year. He shall also submit a
statement showing all revenues received by the town in the two preceding fiscal years
together with an estimate of the receipts of the current year and an estimate of the
12
amount of income from all sources of revenue exclusive of taxes upon property in the
ensuing year. He shall report the probable amount required to be levied and raised by
taxation to defray all expenses and liabilities of the town together with an estimate of the
tax rate necessary to raise said amount. For the purpose of enabling the town manager
to make up the annual estimates of expenditures, all boards, officers, and committees of
the town shall, upon his written request, furnish all information in their possession and
submit to him in writing a detailed estimate of the appropriations required for the efficient
and proper conduct of their respective departments during the next fiscal year.
SECTION 17. ANNUAL BUDGET
The selectmen shall consider the tentative budget submitted by the town manager and
make such recommendations relative thereto as they may deem expedient and proper
in the interests of the town. Not less than 60 days before the annual town meeting each
year the selectmen shall transmit a copy of the budget together with their
recommendations relative thereto to each member of the finance committee. (See Note
#6, Amendments)
SECTION 18. DUTIES OF CERTAIN TOWN OFFICIALS RELATIVE TO ELECTION
It shall be the duty of the selectmen and the town clerk in office and any other town
official upon whom by reason of his office a duty devolves under the provisions of their
act, when this act is accepted by the registered voters as herein provided, to comply
with all the requirements of law relating to elections, to the end that all things may be
done necessary for the nomination and election of the officers first to be elected under
this act.
SECTION 19. SUBMISSION OF ACT AND TIME OF TAKING EFFECT
This act shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the town of Concord for acceptance
at the first annual town election occurring not less than thirty days after the passage of
this act. The vote shall be taken by ballot in answer to the question which shall be
printed on the official ballot: "Shall an act passed by the General Court in the year
nineteen hundred and fifty-two entitled 'AN ACT ESTABLISHING A SELECTMENMANAGER
FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE TOWN OF CONCORD' be
accepted?" If this act shall be so accepted by a majority of the qualified voters voting
thereon it shall become and be in full force and effect immediately after the final
adjournment of the annual town meeting held in the year following the year in which this
act is so accepted, provided, however, that said annual town meeting shall be held in
conformance with the provisions of this act. If this act is rejected by the qualified voters
of the town of Concord when first submitted to said voters under this section, it shall be
submitted for acceptance in like manner to such voters at the next following annual town
election in said town, and if it is not accepted at said annual election, it shall again be
submitted for acceptance in like manner to such voters at the next following annual
election and, if accepted by a majority of such voters voting thereon at either of said
elections, shall take effect as hereinbefore provided.
SECTION 20. BYLAWS, RULES, ETC.
All laws, bylaws, votes, rules and regulations in force in the town of Concord when this
act takes effect, not inconsistent with its provisions, whether enacted by authority of the
town or any other authority, shall continue in full force and effect until otherwise provided
by law, bylaw, or vote; all other laws, bylaws, votes, rules and regulations, so far as
they refer to the town of Concord, are hereby repealed and annulled, but such repeal
shall not revive any pre-existing enactment.
13
SECTION 21. REVOCATION OF ACCEPTANCE
At any time after the expiration of three years from the date on which this act is
accepted, and not less than sixty days before the date of an annual meeting, a petition,
signed by not less than twenty percent of the registered voters of the town, may be filed
with the selectmen, requesting that the question of revoking the acceptance of this act
be submitted to the voters at the next annual town meeting. At said election the
question shall be printed on the official ballot: "Shall the acceptance by the town of
Concord of an act passed by the General Court in the year nineteen hundred and fiftytwo
entitled 'AN ACT ESTABLISHING A SELECTMEN-MANAGER FORM OF
GOVERNMENT FOR THE TOWN OF CONCORD' be revoked?" If such revocation is
favored by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon, the acceptance of this act
shall be revoked and this act shall become null and void beginning with the annual town
meeting next following such vote, provided that all town officers holding office under this
act shall continue to hold office until their successors have been duly qualified. At the
first annual town election following such vote of revocation the registered voters of the
town shall elect by ballot all elective officers, boards, and committees whose election to
office was required immediately prior to the acceptance of this act, provided however,
that the town does not vote to accept other plans which provide for a different
arrangement from that existing immediately prior to the acceptance of this act. It shall
be the duty of the selectmen and the town clerk in office and any other town official
upon whom by reason of his office a duty devolves when this act is revoked, to comply
with all of the requirements of this section relating to elections to the end that all things
may be done necessary for the nomination and election of the officers required to be
elected following the revocation of this act. The said revocation shall not affect any
contract then existing or any action at law or any suit in equity or any other proceedings
then pending, with the exception of any contract made by the town with the town
manager then in office, whose contract shall be terminated immediately upon such vote,
but who shall receive three months' compensation from the date following such vote.
The board of selectmen shall be charged with all the powers and duties of the town
manager which duties and responsibilities may be discharged by themselves or by a
temporary town manager appointed by them. Any special laws relative to said town
which are repealed by this act shall be revived by such revocation. All laws, bylaws,
votes, and rules and regulations repealed and annulled, as provided in Section 20, shall
be revived by such revocation. Bylaws, votes and rules and regulations in force when
said revocation takes effect, so far as consistent with the general laws respecting town
government and town officers and with special laws, shall not be affected thereby.
Approved in its original form May 5, 1952
14
D. NOTES ON CHARTER AMENDMENTS
1. Article 2, Town Meeting, October 10, 1972; passed by the General Court, Acts 1973,
Chapter 179, ( Section 1C amended – filling of vacancies on Board of Selectmen)
2. Article 3, Town Meeting, October 10, 1972; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1973, (Section 1C amended – filling of vacancy on School Committee)
3. Article 4, Town Meeting, October 10, 1972; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1973, (Section 2B amended – adding Public Ceremonies & Celebrations
Committee and Ad Hoc Committees to those appointed by Selectmen)
4. Article 5, Town Meeting, October 10, 1972; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1973, (Section 16 amended – changed deadline for Town Manager’s budget
submittal to Selectmen from December 1st to 90 days prior to Annual Town Meeting)
5. Article 18, Town Meeting, March 6, 1973; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1974, (Section 2B amended – added provision for Selectmen to appoint at
intervals of not more than 10 years the following committees: Zoning Bylaw
Recodification Committee, Town Bylaw Recodification Committee, and an advisory
committee to Board of Assessors for revaluation of taxable properties)
6. Article 8, Town Meeting, May 6, 1974; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1975, (Section 17 amended – changed deadline for Selectmen’s transmittal of
Town Manager’s budget to Finance Committee, with recommendations, from December
20th to 60 days prior to Annual Town Meeting)
7. Article 39, Town Meeting, April 4, 1978; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1979, (Section 2D amended – changed size of Board of Assessors from three
to five)
8. Article 48, Town Meeting, April 9, 1984; accepted by the Town of Concord at Town
Election 1985, (Section 2B amended – deleted provision for appointment of an advisory
committee to Board of Assessors for revaluation of taxable properties)
9. Article 69, Town Meeting, May 8, 2003; passed by the General Court, Acts 2004,
Chapter 347, September 16, 2004 (Section 5 amended – removed the requirement that
the Town Manager be a resident of Concord)
15
SECTION II
II. LEGAL ISSUES
A. Utilization of Town Counsel
B. Review of Contract Documents
C. Liability
D. Open Meeting Law, Conflict of Interest Law and Ethics
E. Acceptance of Gifts
F. Application for and Acceptance of State and Federal Grants
G. Outline of State Regulations - Public Access to Records
H. Use of Electronic Mail
16
II. LEGAL ISSUES
A. Utilization of Town Counsel
1. Town Counsel provides legal services to all Town departments and agencies.
A committee/board must take a formal vote to request utilization of Town
Counsel. After voting, the committee chair or assigned staff person to the
committee must contact the Town Manager to receive authorization. The
request must include the subject and probable duration of Counsel review.
2. Copies of correspondence to and from Town Counsel are to be provided to the
Town Manager.
3. From time to time, the services of special legal counsel other than Town
Counsel are called for. The utilization of such legal counsel, must be expressly
authorized by the Town Manager in advance when the Town is, or may be
responsible for associated expenses. When an employee utilizes private legal
counsel in an action arising in the course of the employee's official duties with
the Town (either as defendant or plaintiff), the Town Manager must be advised
immediately in order to determine any necessary coordination with Town
Counsel.
B. Review of Contract Documents
All contract documents must be reviewed by the Finance Department. From the
time that contracts are received by the Finance Department, applicants should be
prepared to wait a minimum of seven days for review. In most instances, the
contracts will be reviewed as soon as possible. Additional time may be required in
order to allow sufficient time for a decision to be made on whether to refer the
contract to Town Counsel and to allow Town Counsel sufficient time for review.
C. Liability
Prior to 1978, towns and town officers (including appointed members of town bodies)
were protected by the doctrine of sovereign immunity from lawsuits based on actions
taken within the scope of official duties. Part of that immunity was removed by a
statute (Chapter 258, Section 1-13) that holds a town liable up to $100,000 for
certain negligent or wrongful acts or omissions by its officers or employees. In many
cases there is no immunity for town officials or town employees but the law allows a
municipality to indemnify its officials and employees from personal financial loss,
including legal costs, resulting from a claim. The Town of Concord annually
purchases various liability insurance policies to provide said coverage as allowed by
law.
17
D. Open Meeting Law, Conflict of Interest Law and Ethics
Complete information regarding the Open Meeting Law and the Conflict of Interest
Law is available on the Town’s web site at www.concordma.gov. From the home,
page click on “Important Documents” and the information will be located under
“Charter, Laws & Policies.” Information regarding the State Ethics Commission
online training program will be supplied by the Town Clerk’s office.
Please contact the Town Clerk’s office if you have any questions or require
clarification on any of these documents.
E. Acceptance of Gifts
See Appendix C for a copy of Administrative Policy & Procedure #19 on this topic.
F. Applications for and Acceptance of State and Federal Grants
See Appendix D for a copy of Administrative Policy & Procedure #18 on this topic
G. Outline of State Regulations Determining Public Access to
Records
"Public Records" definition: "Public Records" are all books, papers, maps,
photographs, recorded tapes, financial statements, etc., made or received by any
officer or employee of the Commonwealth or any political subdivision, to serve a
public purpose. These documents are open to public view unless these materials
fall within the following exemptions in that they are:
1. Documents exempted from disclosure by law.
2. Documents related solely to internal personnel rules and practices - may be
withheld only to the extent that the performance of the agency requires such
withholding.
3. Personnel and medical files; materials relating to a specifically named
individual, the disclosure of which may constitute an invasion of privacy.
4. Inter-or intra-agency memos or letters relating to policy decisions being
developed (but not complete factual studies or reports).
5. Notebooks and other materials prepared by an employee which are personal to
him and are not maintained as part of the files of the governmental unit.
6. Investigatory materials necessarily compiled out of the public view by law
enforcement officials, the disclosure of which would probably so prejudice the
possibility of effective law enforcement that such disclosure would not be in the
public interest.
7. Trade secrets or commercial or financial information voluntarily provided to an
agency for use in developing governmental policy and upon a promise of
confidentiality. This does not apply to information submitted as required by law
or as a condition of receiving a governmental contract or other benefit.
8. Proposals and bids to enter into any contract or agreement - until the time for
opening the bids or receipt of bids has passed.
9. Appraisals of real property to be acquired until (1) an agreement is entered into
to acquire or sell the property; or (2) three years have elapsed since receiving
the appraisal.
18
Access to Public Records
A request for public records may be either oral or in writing. A written request is
required only when there is substantial doubt as to whether the record requested is
public. Any person having custody of any public record shall "without unreasonable
delay" permit it to be inspected and examined by any person, under their
supervision, and shall furnish one copy thereof on payment of a reasonable fee. A
custodian of a public record has ten (10) days following receipt of a request for
inspection or a copy of a public record, to comply with the request.
Fees
Pursuant to Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Regulation 950 CMF 32.06 the
following fee schedule for copies of public records is in effect in the Town of
Concord:
1. Photocopies - 20 cents per page
2. Computer printouts - 50 cents per page
3. The actual cost incurred may be charged for records not susceptible to
ordinary means of reproduction, such as oversized documents.
4. If a search must be made to locate, pull from the files and re-file a requested
record, a prorated fee based on the hourly rate of the lowest paid employee
capable of performing the task may be assessed in addition to the copying fee.
Denial by Records Custodian
If a department head determines that any record or portion of a record that is sought
is not public, the department head (within 15 days of the original request) shall in
writing set forth the reasons for the denial. Prior to the end of the 15-day period, the
department head shall make such a recommendation to the Town Manager. Upon
request, the department head shall advise the person requesting access of his rights
of appeal (Chapter 66, Section 10B, MGL).
Appeal to the Supervisor of Public Records
Should a person be denied access to any record in the custody of a governmental
agency, or if there has not been compliance with any provision of the State
regulations regarding a public record request, an appeal may be made to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Supervisor of Public Records within 30 days of
the denial. The Supervisor of Public Records will, within l0 days after receiving such
appeal, investigate the circumstances and render the person a decision in writing.
If the Supervisor of Public Records determines the record is public (s)he will order
the custodian to comply with the request. If the custodian refuses to comply, the
Supervisor of Public Records may notify the Attorney General to take what
measures (s)he deems necessary to insure compliance. In any court proceedings
that may follow, it will be presumed that the record sought is public and the burden is
upon the custodian to prove that a specific exemption applies.
19
? “A Guide to the Mass. Public Records Law” published by the Secretary of the
Commonwealth, updated March 2009
? 950 CMR 32.00 Public Records Access
? Mass. General Laws Ch. 66, Sect.1
Access to Miscellaneous Documents and Records
The Selectmen's/Town Manager's Office contains many files which can be viewed
by committee members upon request. A variety of “Important Documents” are also
maintained on the Town’s web site.
Other documents, such as past Minutes of the Board of Selectmen are filed in
storage in the Town House. Requests to view this material should be made to the
Selectmen's/Town Manager's Office.
H. Use of Electronic Mail
See Appendix E for a copy of Administrative Policy & Procedure # 50 on this topic.
20
SECTION III
III. COMMITTEE PROCEDURES
A. Powers and Duties
B. Participation in Government
C. Officers of Committees
D. Minutes
E. Deadlines
F. Committee Meetings
G. Meeting Postings and Notice of Meetings
H. Agenda
I. Charge
J. Goals
K. References
21
III. COMMITTEE PROCEDURES
A. Powers and Duties
While all boards and committees appointed by the Moderator, the Selectmen or
Town Manager are an essential part of our Town government, the responsibility and
authority of some are governed by statute, in addition to the committee charge.
These include the Board of Appeals, Election Officers, Historic Districts Commission,
Planning Board, Board of Registrars, Board of Assessors, Historical Commission,
Natural Resources Commission, Council on Aging, Board of Health, Municipal Light
Board, Public Works Commission, Recreation Commission, and Cemetery
Committee. It is in the overall best interest of the Town for each such board or
committee to function in a manner which is consistent with general policies
coordinated or promulgated by the Board of Selectmen and/or Town Manager.
Other committees serve as advisors to the Town in the performance of their duties
to the public, and have powers and duties as delegated to them in their individual
charges. Such committees shall represent the Town in dealing with regional and
State planning agencies to the extent requested by the appointing authority. When
doing so, they should take positions which have been endorsed by the Town and
they should keep Town officials fully informed concerning all such liaison activities.
B. Participation in Town Government
Effective Town government requires strong and informed citizen participation. The
work of every board or committee is intertwined with that of others. To foster
informed decision making, the Board of Selectmen believes it appropriate that every
committee have as full representation as possible of its membership at the following
regular governmental functions:
o Coordination meetings
o Finance Committee hearings on budgets
o Planning Board hearings on warrant articles
o Selectmen's hearings on warrant articles
o Town Meeting
The objective is not to enforce uniformity or adherence to a majority view, but to
assure understanding of all issues relating to the work of the committee on which an
individual serves, and of Town government in general. Broad participation is
essential to maintenance of an open town meeting, which otherwise could be
dominated by those having only a limited range of special interests.
22
C. Officers of Committees
Each committee should annually elect from among its members a chair and a clerk.
Certain committees may also find it desirable to elect a Vice-Chair who can act in
the absence of the Chair. In the case of new committees, or committees that have
become inactive, the Selectmen or Town Manager may appoint a Chair pro-tem to
serve until the committee itself elects the Chair for the balance of the current year.
Except in unusual circumstances, the Chair and the Clerk positions should rotate
yearly among the committee membership. Annually, when the new Chairperson has
been elected, a committee member should notify the Town Manager's Office of the
new Chairperson.
The committee Chair or a designee should plan on attending the monthly chair
breakfast. This meeting is held to update the chairs of other committees on the
activities of their committee.
D. Minutes
All boards and committees must keep minutes of their proceedings, including subcommittees
and task force committees. Minutes should be handled as described in
Appendix A, Records Management Procedure. The minutes, including executive
sessions, must contain detailed information. In addition to date, time, place and
members present or absent, they must also include a summary of the discussion on
each subject, a list of documents and other exhibits used at the meeting, the
decisions made and the actions taken at each meeting, including the record of all
votes. Documents and other exhibits, such as photographs, records or maps used
by the body at an open or executive session are, along with the minutes, part of the
official record of the session.
Each board or committee must establish its own procedures for the approval and
submission of its minutes to the Town Manager's Office on a timely basis. For
committees which meet monthly or more frequently, the minutes shall be reviewed
and approved not later than the next regular meeting following the one being
reported. Committees which meet less frequently shall adopt a procedure which will
ensure approval within one month of the original meeting date.
In most instances, committee minutes should be reviewed and approved within six
weeks of the original meeting date. All committees with permanent staff assigned
should submit a copy of approved minutes to the Board of Selectmen immediately
upon approval. All other committees should submit a copy of approved minutes to
the Town Clerk and Board of Selectmen.
Upon the dissolution of any committee, either by action of the appointing authority or
pursuant to an expiration date provided in the committee charge, all records,
documents, correspondence and files concerning the committee's work will be
promptly turned over to the Town Clerk for transfer to the Library archives.
E. Deadlines
All committees should be cognizant of the following deadlines:
1. Budgets are prepared by department heads with committee review and input
on matters relating to policy. The department head submits a proposed budget
to the Town Manager.
23
2. All committees are required to write an annual report for use in the Annual
Town Report. These are due in early January.
3. At least one Coordination Meeting is held in the fall. Representatives from all
committees meet with the Town Manager and the Selectmen to discuss items
to be placed on the Warrant for Town Meeting, and to discuss other significant
policies and projects. Although usually the Warrant does not technically close
until early January, committees that plan to submit a Warrant Article for
Town Meeting should be prepared to discuss it at the Coordination
Meeting in December. Draft Warrant Articles are due soon after the
Coordination Meeting during the time the Warrant is open as established
by the Selectmen.
F. Committee Meetings
A meeting of a committee occurs any time a quorum of 51% of the members of
committee (or a subcommittee) get together to discuss or consider any public
business or policy over which the committee has some jurisdiction or advisory
authority. Meetings must be held in a handicapped accessible place which is open
to the public. The Selectmen urge committees to meet in a Town building.
A regular meeting time and location should be established. While the frequency of
the meetings will depend on the nature and workload of the committee, most
committees will meet at least once a month.
With the exception of executive sessions, all committee meetings, by law, are open
to the public, including the press. Committees are expected to operate within both
the letter and spirit of the law in this regard (e.g., public discussions should be
audible and handouts made available whenever possible and feasible if they are
integral to the discussion). The conditions under which a committee can go into
executive session are explained in the Open Meeting Law.
G. Meeting Postings and Notice of Meetings
Meeting Postings – Meeting postings must be accessible to the public at all hours,
and the Attorney General’s Office has preliminarily determined that availability on the
Town’s website is sufficient for compliance. In Concord, meetings and agendas are
posted by the Town Clerk on the Town House lobby bulletin board, on the Town’s
website and on an electronic bulletin board which will be available in the Police
Department lobby on Walden Street. The Town Clerk’s Office will take responsibility
for posting on the electronic bulletin board all meetings and agendas that are sent
electronically in advance of the meeting. If a committee is currently posting agendas
on the committee or board web page, it may continue to do so, but it should also
send an electronic copy to the Town Clerk for posting on the electronic bulletin
board.
Notice of Meetings - All committee members should be notified in writing or by
telephone of the date, time, and place scheduled for each meeting if the committee
is meeting on an irregular basis or whenever a special meeting is called. Written
notice of regularly scheduled or emergency meetings is not necessary.
Meeting notices should contain the following information:
? Name of the committee
? Date, day of week and starting time of meeting
? Location of meeting, including the name of Town building and room (if possible)
24
Meeting notices must now be posted 48 hours in advance of the meeting, with
Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays EXCLUDED from the 48-hour count. So a
Monday evening meeting needs to be posted (including an agenda) no later than
Thursday. All meeting postings should be sent to the Town Clerk’s Office
electronically no later than Noon on the required day (so a Monday evening
meeting should be posted by Noon on the previous Thursday; a Wednesday evening
meeting should be posted no later than Noon on the preceding Monday, etc.)
Meeting postings should be sent to the following e-mail address:
townclerk@concordma.gov.
H. Agenda
The Chair of every committee must prepare and post electronically with the Town
Clerk at least 48 hours in advance an agenda which must include a listing of all
topics which the chair or convener reasonably anticipates will be discussed. The list
of items to be discussed should be in sufficient detail so that the subject can be
identified (cannot just be “old business” and “new business”). Meeting agendas
should be sent to the following e-mail address: townclerk@concordma.gov.
I. Charge
All committee members will receive a copy of his/her committee's charge at the time
of his/her appointment which explains the specific authority and responsibilities of
that committee.
J. Goals
It is recommended that in May or June, committees should develop a plan of action
which maps out how the committee is to meet its deadlines and to accomplish its
goals as stated in its committee charge.
K. References
The Concord Free Public Library contains two books that describe parliamentary and
committee procedures in detail: Sturgis Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure
by Alice Sturgis, and Roberts Rules of Order by Sarah Roberts. Committees are
encouraged to consult these books if they have any procedural problems that cannot
be resolved by other means.
25
SECTION IV
IV. APPOINTMENT POLICY & PROCEDURES
A. General
26
IV. APPOINTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES
This policy has been jointly adopted by the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager, and
is intended to cover all committees, boards, commissions and task forces (each, a
“Committee”) appointed by the Town Manager and Selectmen (each, an “Appointing
Authority”). This policy does not apply to Town employees.
A. General
It is also the policy of the Selectmen and Town Manager to seek the best qualified
persons to serve on each Committee. The Selectmen and Town Manager will
endeavor to develop a pool of persons interested in serving on each such
Committee from at least the following sources:
1. Green cards on file
2. Personal knowledge
3. Recommendations from Town organizations or individuals
4. Suggestions from the Committee having a vacancy
5. Suggestion by prospective appointee(s)
6. Research of skills available in Town
7. Individual responses to publicity regarding vacancies (new green cards)
It is also the policy of the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager to enlarge the
general pool of applicants through active solicitation of Town organizations and
through publicity in the press and on community access television. The timing and
extent of specific active solicitations shall be determined by the Appointing Authority
based on its judgment as to appropriateness and need.
In accordance with the vote on Article 47 of the 1978 Annual Town Meeting, the
Board of Selectmen and Town Manager shall make a special effort to seek out
roughly equal numbers of women and men as candidates for appointments over
which they have authority, and will make appointments in accordance with the
Massachusetts Equal Rights Amendment which states, in part, that “Equality under
the law shall not be denied or abridged because of sex, race, color, creed, or
national origin” and will not exclude candidates from appointment based on their
sexual orientation.
See Appendix G Committee Appointment Policy APP #10 for additional information on Town
Board, Committee, and Task Force Appointment Policies.
27
SECTION V
V. MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS
A. Committee Paperwork and Finance
1. Use of Clerical Staff
2. Management/Professional Staff
3. Stationery
4. Mailings
5. Photocopying
6. Use of Green Cards
7. Request for Services from Other Departments
8. Committee Finances
B. Reservations of Public Meeting Rooms; Open Doors
1. Use of Town Buildings
2. Keys
3. Meeting Cancellations
C. Telephone Procedures
1. Use of Town Telephones
2. Phone Messages
3. Emergencies
4. Telephone Directory Town & School
28
V. MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS
A. Committee Paperwork and Finance
1. Use of Clerical Staff
Each committee is responsible for its own clerical work. In some cases,
arrangements can be made between a committee and the Town Manager for
Town staff to undertake committee clerical work.
2. Management/Professional Staff
Several committees have responsibilities that are complex and of significant
volume, and require support from management/professional staff. The
department or division head liaison assists the committee with general meeting
coordination, analysis of issues through research and written reports, and
coordination of communications with other committees, town departments, and
the Town Manager. The staff member may be responsible for compiling a
budget, to be reviewed by the committee prior to submission to the Town
Manager. The Town Manager provides general management, direction, and
supervision to the staff member and his/her daily operations.
3. Stationery
Committee members may acquire stationery from the Town Manager’s Office
or from the clerical staff of the committee's staff liaison. Paper and envelopes
with the Town logo are also available.
4. Mailings
Committees with no other staff support may bring envelopes to the Town
Manager's Office so that they can be run through the postal meter machine.
Committees are responsible for addressing these envelopes. For large
mailings (those in excess of 300), arrangements may be made with the Town
Manager to have labels printed by computer.
5. Photocopying
A photocopying machine is located on the second floor outside of the Town
Manager's Office and is available for official committee use during business
hours 8:30 AM - 4:30 PM Monday - Friday, to be scheduled with the Town
Manager's or the Selectmen's administrative staff.
6. Use of Green Cards- (Appendix H)
The Town maintains a file of over 200 green cards of information filled out by
Concord residents who have expressed an interest in serving on a committee.
The file is kept in the Selectmen's/Town Manager's Office, and is available for
use during business hours (8:30 AM – 4:30 PM Monday - Friday).
Arrangements can be made for its use at other times.
29
The file is divided into two sections: "active" and "inactive." Committee
members are encouraged to "recruit" Concord residents who may have special
skills or interests that may be of use to the particular board or committee.
Such people are encouraged to come to the Selectmen's/Town Manager's
Office and fill out a green card.
7. Request for Services from Other Departments
Requests for services from other Town departments such as police, fire, public
works, and finance should be made through the committee's staff liaison.
8. Committee Finances
A few committees have their own budget, but most committees do not. Instead,
they use the budget of the department with which the committee is associated.
All purchases are made for committees by the committee's staff liaison, with
prior approval by the department head. The Town Manager's Office can make
exceptions to this general practice, when necessary.
B. Reservation of Public Meeting Rooms; Open Doors
1. Use of Town Buildings
Public meeting rooms are available for board and committee use in various
Town buildings, and reservations should be made in advance by contacting the
appropriate staff as follows:
• Town House - Administrative Assistant to the Board of Selectmen (978)
318-3001.
• 141 Keyes Road - Administrative Assistant to the Planning Board (978)
318-3290.
• Harvey Wheeler Community Center - Council on Aging (978) 318-3020.
• Hunt Recreation Center - Recreation Department (978) 318-3035.
Reservations for meeting rooms should be made at least 48 hours in advance
with the appropriate person for the building in which the committee is planning
on meeting. Also, all meetings must be posted with the Town Clerk's office at
least 48 hours prior to the meeting. (See Notice of Meetings section on page
23) for additional information on posting meetings). Reservations are made on
a first come-first served basis.
30
The committee or board utilizing the meeting room is responsible for ensuring
that the lights are turned off when the meeting is finished. The last committee
or board to leave the building should also ensure that any remaining lights are
turned off and that all doors are locked.
When the Town House is used for special committee-related events, the Town
Manager's staff shall be notified in advance of such an event, but it is the
responsibility of the committee/user to clean the room upon completion of the
event.
2. Keys
a. Any committee or board which meets in any Town building is responsible
for ensuring that the front door and handicapped-accessible doors are
unlocked while their meeting is occurring. The first committee or board to
meet in the evening or on the weekend is responsible for unlocking the
doors.
(1) The chair of all standing committees who meet regularly in any Town
building should have a key to the front door. The key should be
passed on each time a committee changes its chair.
(2) If a committee or board is holding a meeting and does not have a key,
then the chair shall pick up a key that morning from the appropriate
contact for that building.
(In an emergency, the key to the Town House may be picked up from
the Police Department.)
b. Where a staff member is assigned to a particular committee, the staff
member is responsible for ensuring that the doors are unlocked and later
re-locked.
3. Meeting Cancellations
Outlined below is a procedure for notifying the public in order to support a
uniform procedure upon cancellation of committee or board meetings due to
inclement weather or any other unforeseen event.
The decision to cancel a meeting is up to the individual committee or board.
Should it be necessary to cancel a meeting due to inclement weather or any
other unforeseen event, the committee chair or the assigned staff person
should notify the Town Clerk's Office of the cancellation, or if time allows, send
a written notice to the Town Clerk's Office. The chair or staff person should
arrange for the posting of a cancellation notice on the front door or other visible
location at the building where the meeting was to have taken place.
In the event that a meeting is cancelled at the last minute due to inclement
weather or another unforeseen event, the chair or assigned staff person should
have the meeting cancellation posted on the Town’s web site; committee
members should be instructed to check the web site for cancellations.
31
C. TELEPHONE PROCEDURES
1. Use of Town Telephones
The Selectmen's Meeting Room and the Hearing Room at the Town House
have telephones that may be used to make local calls or may be used during a
committee meeting for a conference call. Long distance calls may only be
made for committee business, and require the permission from the Town
Manager's Office. In order to place an outside call it is necessary to press an
available line key, dial "9" and then the number you are calling.
2. Phone Messages
People who call the Selectmen's/Town Manager's Office requesting to get in
touch with a committee member will be given the committee member's home
phone number (as it appears on their green card). Business phone numbers
will not be given out. Any committee member who prefers not to allow his/her
phone number to be given out at all, or who would rather his/her office phone
number to be given out should make such a notation on his/her green card.
3. Emergencies
In case of an emergency at a Town building, please notify the police/fire
dispatch at 911. Personnel from the Water & Sewer Division of the Public
Works Department are on call, as are Concord Municipal Light Plant staff,
each through the Police Department.
32
AMBULANCE, FIRE AND POLICE EMERGENCY – 911
Call this Department: For questions on: Phone:
Assessing Assessments, Abatements 318-3070
Board of Appeals Zoning Appeals, Special Permits & Variances 318-3295
Board of Health Health, Sanitation, Septic Permits/Title V 318-3275
Board of Selectmen Committee Appointments; Alcoholic Beverage Licensing 318-3001
Building Inspector Building Permits, Electric Permits, Plumbing & Gas Permits,
Plot Plans, Home
Occupation Permits, Zoning Enforcement
318-3280
CCTV Local Public Access Television 369-5038
Comcast Cable (Westford) Cable Television office - 4 Lyberty Way, Westford, MA 692-6500
Community Service Coordinator Free service for residents providing information, referral or
assistance for the following services: financial assistance,
counseling, legal services, domestic violence resources, after
school and camp support, employment, fuel assistance,
parenting support groups
318-3034
Council on Aging Senior Activities, Information & Transportation 318-3020
Fire Department Routine Fire & Ambulance Business, Burning Permits 318-3488
Historic Districts Commission Historic Districts 318-3299
Concord Housing Authority Affordable, Subsidized & Elderly Housing 369-8435
Human Resources Town Personnel Information & Job Openings 318-3025
Information Technology Software, Hardware and Internet Technology 318-3171
Library Main Library 318-3300
Circulation Desk 318-3301
Fowler Branch Library 318-3350
Children's Services 318-3358
Reference Services 318-3347
Light Plant After Hours Emergencies 318-3400
Electric Service & Operations 318-3101
Electric, Water & Sewer Final Readings; Electric New
Accounts
318-3154
Natural Resources Conservation Land/Environment, Wetlands 318-3285
Planning & Land Management Planning, Land Use, Zoning, Affordable Housing Lotteries 318-3290
Police Routine Police Business 318-3400
33
Call this Department: For questions on: Phone:
Public Works After Hours Emergencies 318-3400
Administration 318-3206
Cemeteries 318-3230
Engineering/Road Permits 318-3210
Highways/Snow & Ice Removal 318-3220
Parks & Trees 318-3230
Trash, Recycling & Yard Waste Information 318-3240
Water & Sewer Operations (see Town Accountant for Billing) 318-3250
Recreation Department Recreation Programs, After/Before School, Carousel, Terrific
Tuesday, Hunt Gym
369-6460
Beede Swim and Fitness Center 287-1000
Retirement Board Town Retirement System Information/Benefits 318-3068
School Department Ripley Administrative Offices/Superintendent's office 318-1500
Alcott Elementary School 318-9544
Thoreau Elementary School 318-1300
Willard Elementary School 318-1340
Peabody Middle School 318-1360
Sanborn Middle School 318-1380
Concord-Carlisle Regional High School 318-1400
Concord-Carlisle Adult and Community Education
Week days
Week nights
318-1540
318-1432
Town Accountant Accounting 318-3060
Utility Billing (Light, Water, Sewer) 318-3062
Water & Sewer New Accounts 318-3062
Town Clerk Births, Deaths, Marriages; Dog Licenses; Business
Certificates; Elections; Voter Registration
318-3080
Town Manager’s Office General Administration 318-3000
Treasurer/Collector Ambulance Bills; Parking Tickets; Property & Excise Tax
Bills; Trash Collection & Recycling Subscriptions; Electric,
Water & Sewer Bill Payments
318-3050
Youth Services Coordinator Assists with programs and services for youth and families 318-3043
Veterans Agent Veterans’ Information/Referrals/Benefits 318-3038
To find out if a public meeting has been cancelled visit the Town’s web site at www.concordma.gov. Also
visit the web site for a calendar of municipal events and meetings, and for general information about the
Town.
34
SECTION VI
VI. COMMITTEE LIST
Below is a list of long-standing committees. Other short term committees exist and are
not listed here.
1. Agricultural Committee
2. Board of Appeals
3. Board of Assessors
4. Cemetery Committee
5. Community Preservation Committee
6. Comprehensive Sustainable Energy Committee
7. Concord Cable Television Advisory Committee
8. Concord Local Cultural Council
9. Conservation Restriction Stewardship Committee
10. Council on Aging Board
11. Finance Committee
12. Hanscom Field Advisory Commission
13. HATS Hanscom Area Towns Committee
14. Board of Health
15. Historical Commission
16. Historic Districts Commission
17. Housing Authority
18. Hugh Cargill Trust Committee
19. Library Committee
20. Light Board
21. Local Option Local Income Tax Committee
22. MAGIC
23. MAPC
24. MBTA
25. Minuteman Regional High School Committee
26. Natural Resources Commission
27. Personnel Board
28. Planning Board
29. Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
30. Public Works Commission
31. Records and Archives Committee
32. Recreation Commission
33. Board of Registrars
34. Retirement Board
35. School Committee
36. Board of Selectmen
37. Tax Relief Committee
38. Trustees of Town Donations
39. White Pond Advisory Committee
40. Youth Coordinator Advisory Board
35
VI. COMMITTEE DESCRIPTIONS
The following is a brief description about each standing committee of the Town. A full
copy of the Committee Charge/Administrative Code is available upon request from the
Town Manager's Office.
1. Agricultural Committee – Consists of five residents of the Town appointed by
the Board of Selectmen each for staggered five-year terms. The membership
shall be as follows:
Three members who are engaged in farming representing farmer interests;
Two citizens at-large interested in promoting farming
The purpose of the Committee is to provide a forum for the discussion of issues of
interest and concern to farmers in Concord and to advise the Board of Selectmen
concerning how the town can help to support farming in Concord.
2. Board of Appeals - Consists of three members appointed by the Selectmen.
There are also three associate members who serve on the Board when regular
members cannot serve. The Board decides, upon appeal, the application of
the zoning, subdivision, sign and building bylaws.
3. Board of Assessors - Consists of five members appointed by the Town
Manager with Selectmen approval. The Assessors recommend an annual tax
rate for the Board of Selectmen to vote and set, establish the valuation of all
taxable real and personal property, observe and value all new construction and
alterations of taxable real property.
4. Cemetery Committee - Consists of five members appointed by the Town
Manager. The Committee is responsible for the operation of all town
cemeteries and burial grounds and establishing policies and regulations for
such.
5. Community Preservation Committee – Consists of nine voting members
pursuant to MGL Chapter 44B. The Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding disposition of community
preservation funds.
6. Comprehensive Sustainable Energy Committee – Consists of up to nine
members appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of the Board of
Selectmen. The Committee will assist the Town to identify, design, and
implement programs and projects fostering energy conservation, energy
efficiency, and renewable energy generation, and to track and report on the
financial and environmental impacts of such programs.
7. Concord Cable Television Advisory Committee - Consists of five members
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The Committee is charged with
providing advice and assistance to the Board of Selectmen in monitoring
compliance with the Cable Television License Agreement and other aspects of
cable television service in Concord including the local access channels.
8. Concord Local Cultural Council - Consists of at least five and not more than
twenty-two members appointed by the Selectmen. The Council receives funds
from the Massachusetts state lottery that have been earmarked for the Arts
and distributes it along with other funds that the Council has raised to support
the various Arts organizations in Concord. The Council also helps coordinate
activities among these various Arts groups.
36
9. Conservation Restriction Stewardship Committee – Consists of seven
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The Committee shall provide
stewardship of the over 110 Conservation Restrictions that have been granted
to the Town.
10. Council on Aging Board - Consists of nine members appointed by the Town
Manager plus one member each from the Board of Health, School Committee,
and the Recreation Commission. The Council on Aging Board provides
guidance regarding policies, programs, and long range planning.
11. Finance Committee - Consists of fifteen members appointed by the Moderator.
The Finance Committee: 1) reviews all Articles for Town Meeting and
coordinates Public Hearings that pertain to appropriations or expenditures of
money or disposition of Town property, 2) reviews and approves or
disapproves all transfers of money from the reserve fund, 3) establishes
guidelines for budget increases to be considered in fiscal year planning, and
4) submits the budget with its recommendations to the Town as part of its
annual report to Town Meeting.
12. Hanscom Field Advisory Commission - One representative is chosen by the
Selectmen to be Concord's representative to the Hanscom Field Advisory
Commission. The Commission consists of representatives from each of the
Towns near Hanscom Field for the purpose of assuring that the interests of the
Towns are articulated by evaluating plans of current and future operations at
Hanscom Field.
13. HATS - (Hanscom Area Town Committee) - The membership of HATS
consists of a selectmen from each member town, a Planning Board member
and up to two members-at-large. HATS shall facilitate cooperation between
the towns and all entities in the L.G. Hanscom Field area by addressing issues
related to growth and development management policies as set forth in M.G.L.
Chapter 40, Section 4(I).
14. Board of Health - Consists of five members appointed by the Town Manager.
The Board is responsible for the overall stewardship of the public health of the
Town. The responsibilities of the board are defined both by local bylaws and
state law.
15. Historical Commission - Consists of five members plus two associate members
appointed by the Town Manager with Selectmen approval. The Commission
compiles and maintains inventories of historic areas, buildings, and other
objects of historic significance to the Town.
16. Historic Districts Commission - Consists of five members plus five associate
members all appointed by the Selectmen. It is responsible for the preservation
and protection of buildings, places, and districts of historic or literary
significance in the Town.
17. Housing Authority - Consists of four members who are elected and a fifth
member appointed by the Governor. The purpose of this committee is to foster
the development and administration of an adequate supply of low and
moderate income housing for Town residents.
37
18. Hugh Cargill Trust Committee - Consists of five members appointed by the
Selectmen. This Committee is established to actively assist the Board of
Selectmen in receiving, investigating, and allocating merit to various
applications for funds by Concord residents with temporary, emergency,
financial needs. The source of these funds is the income from the Hugh Cargill
Trust and various public and private donations.
19. Library Committee - Consists of seven members appointed by the Selectmen
for the purpose of: providing policy guidance to the Library Director,
recommending policy and organizational methods to the Town Manager, and
serving as liaison between the Library and governmental units, and private
groups that relate to Library services.
20. Light Board - Consists of five members appointed by the Town Manager. The
Town Manager, acting in the role of General Manager of the Light Plant, relies
on the assistance of the Light Board to make recommendations concerning the
general operations and maintenance of the Light Plant, and to formulate policy
for ongoing operation and future development of electrical supply and the
distribution system.
21. Local Option Local Income Tax Committee – Consists of up to nine members
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The purpose of the Committee is to
secure enabling legislation to permit Massachusetts cities and towns to enact a
local income tax to replace (entirely or) in part the residential property tax by
working to amend the Articles in the Massachusetts Constitution that have
been interpreted as preventing such a local tax. When enabling legislation is in
place, the committee will secure a Town Meeting vote to enact the enabling
legislation.
22. MAGIC - Minuteman Advisory Group on Interlocal Coordination is a regional
planning agency. A member of the Board of Selectmen represents the Town of
Concord.
23. MAPC - The Metropolitan Area Planning Council Representative is appointed
by the Town Manager to represent the Town of Concord and its policies at
M.A.P.C. meetings and to keep the Town Manager, Selectmen, and the
Planning Board informed about major regional issues.
24. MBTA - The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority Advisory Board
Representative is appointed by the Board of Selectmen to represent Concord
and its policies in meetings of the M.B.T.A. Advisory Board, and to keep the
Selectmen informed about major issues involving the M.B.T.A.
25. Minuteman Regional High School Committee - The Concord representative is
appointed by the Town Moderator. This school district provides vocational
technical education to students from the region's sixteen towns.
26. Natural Resources Commission - Five members and two associate members
appointed by the Town Manager. It is responsible for the overall stewardship
of the natural resources of the Town, and the establishment of Town
environmental policy in conjunction with the Selectmen and Town Meeting.
The Commission administers the Wetlands Protection Act and serves as the
Conservation Commission and Town Forest Committee.
27. Personnel Board - Consists of five members appointed by the Selectmen. It is
responsible for the administration of the classification and compensation plans
of the Town.
38
28. Planning Board - Consists of seven members appointed by the Selectmen. It
reviews all plans regarding the purchase of or construction on public land. It
also investigates all petitions pertaining to zoning and, in accordance with the
Zoning Bylaw, reviews and makes modifications to site plans for approval or
disapproval.
29. Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee - Consists of seven members
appointed by the Selectmen. The committee is responsible, with the approval
of the Board of Selectmen, to plan and implement public ceremonies to
observe Patriots' Day, the historic events at Meriam's Corner, Memorial Day
and Veterans' Day. In addition, the committee annually designates the Town's
Honored Citizen.
30. Public Works Commission - Consists of five members appointed by the Town
Manager. The Commission advises the Town Manager, the Public Works
Director, and the Planning Board on issues pertaining to water, sewage,
drainage, and roads and solid waste removal. It sets policy, adopts regulations
and establishes fees for the water system, sewage and sewage disposal
facilities, drainage facilities, roads, sidewalks, solid waste removal and
recycling. The Commission also approves new road standards.
31. Records and Archives Committee - Consists of five members appointed by
Selectmen to oversee maintenance, storage, etc. of the Town's records and
memorable documents.
32. Recreation Commission - Consists of five members appointed by the Town
Manager. The Commission provides policy guidance to the Recreation
Director regarding programs, policies, operations, and long range planning;
reviews the Recreation Department's budget, and sets user fees.
33. Board of Registrars - Consists of three members appointed by the Selectmen.
The committee's duties include: the annual listing of all persons in the Town
who are 17 years of age or older; attending to the registration of voters;
accepting nomination papers; certifying initiative or referendum petitions; and
maintaining voting lists.
34. Retirement Board - The Retirement Board composition is as follows per MGL
Chapter 30, Section 20(4). Five members chosen in the following manner: The
Town accountant who shall be a member ex officio, a second member
appointed by the Board of Selectmen, a third and fourth member shall be
elected by the members in or retired from service of such system from among
their number in such manner and for such term, not exceeding three years, as
the Board of Selectmen in the town shall determine, and a fifth member who
shall not be an employee, a retiree, or official of the governmental unit and
shall be chosen by the other four for a term of three years. The Retirement
Board shall administer the contributory retirement system for public employees
of the Town.
39
35. School Committees - Consists of five members elected by the Town to serve
on the Concord Public School Committee and the Concord Carlisle Regional
School Committee. There are also two Carlisle School Committee members
who serve on the Concord Carlisle Regional School Committee. The
Committee members act as public officers and not as agents of the Town.
Committee members have no authority as individuals but shall have complete
authority within the General Laws, over school affairs when they serve as a
legal body.
36. Board of Selectmen - Consists of five elected members. The Selectmen
appoint the Town Manager and numerous other boards and committees. The
Selectmen also make recommendations for budget, approve town government
organization, approve actions in litigation, serve as licensing authority on many
matters, vote many rules and regulations, and issue Warrants for Town
Meeting.
37. Tax Relief Committee – Consists of three members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The Committee will solicit donations for Concord residents in
need. The dissemination of the collected funds will be the responsibility of the
Hugh Cargill Trust Committee. The Committee will educate the public and
advertise the need for a fund throughout the year.
38. Trustees of Town Donations - Consists of five members appointed by the
Selectmen. The Trustees manage and dispense all real and personal property
donated to the Town. They also hold title to any cemetery lot in perpetual trust
as the exclusive burial place for any one designated in the instrument by which
such title becomes vested in the trustees.
39. White Pond Advisory Committee - Five members appointed by the Selectmen
to review and analyze the concerns of the White Pond neighborhood.
40. Youth Coordinator Advisory Board – The Board shall consist of seven voting
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and up to two non-voting
Associate members. The Board will work to improve the quality of life of
Concord’s school-aged young people who are under the age of 21.
40
SECTION VII
VII APPENDIX
A. Records Management Procedures
B. Conflict of Interest - Disclosure Form
C. APP# 19 Acceptance of Gifts
D. APP# 18 Applications for and Acceptance of State and Federal Grants
E. APP# 50 Use of Electronic Mail
F. Meeting Notice Posting Form
G. APP #10 Town Board, Committee and Task Force Appointment Policy
H. Green Card
I. Table of Contents - Administrative Policies & Procedures
41
APPENDIX A
Records & Archives Committee
Approved 10/20/10
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
State law requires all committees to keep accurate written records of its public meetings. All committees,
commissions, boards, sub-committees and ad-hoc committees shall appoint a clerk/secretary who will be
responsible for posting meeting notices and agendas, taking minutes of all meetings, and serving as records
custodian.
The records of each meeting are public records, and a copy of all non-executive session minutes must be available
for public inspection. Records of any executive session remain closed to the public only as long as publication may
defeat the purposes of the executive session. Minutes of meetings should include the following information:
• Date, time and place of the meeting
• Members present or absent
• A summary of the discussions on each subject
• A list of documents and other exhibits used at the meeting
• The decisions and actions taken at the meeting (including those taken in executive session)
• Exact wording of all motions, including who made and seconded the motion
• The vote of each member. Those members present and not participating in the vote should be recorded as
abstentions.
• Votes in executive session must be recorded in the minutes by a roll call.
Once minutes are accepted by committee vote they become the official record of the meeting and become a
permanent public record. Any secretarial notes, if not destroyed once the official minutes are accepted, are
considered a public document under the public records law.
What to do with approved minutes:
• A courtesy copy of the minutes, upon approval, should be sent to the appointing authority (Town Manager,
Board of Selectmen, or Moderator).
• The original approved set of minutes should be retained in the department office for committees with
assigned staff liaisons. A copy should be forwarded to the Town Clerk electronically after the minutes are
approved – townclerk@concordma.gov. It is not necessary to forward attachments or supporting documents.
Older original copies of minutes should be periodically forwarded to the Town Clerk’s Office for binding and
transfer to the Town Archives.
• Committees without assigned staff liaisons should submit the approved minutes to the Town Clerk’s Office
electronically for filing and public access once they are approved – townclerk@concordma.gov. Supporting
documents used at the meeting should be forwarded with the minutes to the Town Clerk for filing and public
access.
• All approved minutes are retained by the Town Clerk’s Office. Periodically, the Town Clerk’s copy of the
minutes will be bound up and transferred to the Town Archives.
What about other committee records?
Under the State Open Meeting Law, documents and other exhibits used by the body at an open or executive session
(including photographs, recordings or maps) shall, along with the minutes, be part of the official record of the
session. These should be retained either at the department level (for those committees with staff liaisons) or at the
Town Clerk’s Office (for those committees without staff liaisons). These supporting documents will be periodically
placed in the Town Archives by the Town Clerk.
Dissolution of a committee:
Upon dissolution of a board, committee, or commission, the records should be culled, weeding out all nonpermanent
records. These should be organized in a reasonable and understandable manner and submitted to the
Town Clerk for review by the Records & Archives Committee and transferred to the Town Archives.
42
APPENDIX B
8/12
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
State Ethics Commission
John W. McCormack State Office Building, Room 619
One Ashburton Place, Boston, MA 02108
Telephone (617) 727-0060 Fax (617) 723-5851
DISCLOSURE FORM
G.L. c. 268A, §23(b)(3)
(to be filed with appointing authority;
elected municipal officials file with town clerk)
Name:
Public Office or Position:
Address: Phone:
City or Town:
I publicly disclose the following facts pursuant to G.L. c. 268A, §23(b)(3):
I make this disclosure pursuant to G.L. c. 268A, §23(b)(3) in order to dispel any appearance of
potential conflict of interest occasioned by the facts set out above, that I may be improperly or
unduly influenced in the performance of my official duties, or that I would be likely to act or fail
to act as a result of kinship; rank, position, or the undue influence of any party or person with
regard to the above circumstances.
Signature: Date:
TEXT OF G.L. c. 268A, §23(b)(3)
§23(b)(3) No current officer or employee of a state, county or municipal agency shall
knowingly, or with reason to know …act in a manner which would cause a reasonable person,
having knowledge of the relevant circumstances, to conclude that any person can improperly
influence or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of his official duties, or that he is likely to
act or fail to act as a result of kinship, rank, position or undue influence of any party or person.
It shall be unreasonable to so conclude if such officer or employee has disclosed in writing to
his appointing authority or, if no appointing authority exists, discloses in a manner which is
public in nature, the facts which would otherwise lead to such a conclusion.
43
APPENDIX C
Effective Date: 9/11/79
Revised: 06/99
Town of Concord
APP # 19
Acceptance of Gifts
The acceptance of gifts is specifically governed by State Statute and Town Bylaw. This
Administrative Policy-Procedure shall set forth the procedures for the acceptance of
gifts.
I Funds
A. Chapter 44, Section 53A of the General Laws provides:
1. For the acceptance of gifts or grants of funds by a Town officer or
department (committee or board also) with the approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
2. For the deposit of the funds with the Town Treasurer.
3. For the expenditure of funds for the specific purpose of the gift without
further Town Meeting appropriation, subject to the approval of the
Selectmen.
B. The only exception to the above provisions is gifts to the Cemetery Perpetual
Care fund which are governed by Chapter 14, Section 25 of the General Laws
(Gifts for Cemeteries), and a number of Special Acts/Town Bylaws governing the
Trustees of Town Donations.
C. Any employee or board member who receives a gift on behalf of the Town shall
promptly deposit the gift with the Treasurer. If the gift is of a value of $250 or
more, written acknowledgment shall be provided by the Treasurer to the
benefactor. The recipient shall also notify the Town Manager of the receipt of
the gift.
a. By vote of the Board of Selectmen on September 10, 1979, the Town
Manager is authorized to accept gifts of funds up to $500.
b. For gifts over $500, a vote of the Board of Selectmen is required.
44
D. No expenditure of the funds will be permitted until the Town Manager or
Selectmen have accepted the gift, as appropriate.
E. All expenditures from the funds will be made through the Town's standard
purchasing and bill-payroll processing procedures.
II. Real and Personal Property
A. The Town Bylaw approved under Article 41 of the 1977 Annual Town Meeting,
provides "that the Town authorize the Town Manager or Treasurer to accept
bequests, devises or gifts of property, both real and personal, or any interest
therein, in the name of the Town, subject in each case to the approval of the
Board of Selectmen, except as otherwise provided by law."
B. The General Laws authorizing the establishment of the Natural Resources
Commission (MGL Ch 40, 8C), and the Historical Commission (MGL Ch 40, 8D)
authorize these commissions to accept real and personal property subject to the
approval of the Board of Selectmen. The Library Corporation, as separate from
the Library Committee, and not a Town agency, is not covered by this policyprocedure.
C. Any employee or board member who is offered a gift of real or personal property
on behalf of the Town, and the Natural Resources Commission and Historical
Commission, when they accept a gift of real or personal property on behalf of the
Town, shall notify the Town Manager in writing.
a. By vote of the Board of Selectmen on September 10, 1979, the Town
Manager is authorized to accept gifts of personal and real property,
exclusive of land and buildings, with an estimated value of up to $500.
b. Gifts of land and buildings, and property with an estimated value of over
$500, require a vote of the Board of Selectmen.
The employee or board member will be notified of the date and time of the agenda item
in the event they wish to attend. The Treasurer will provide the Selectmen with a listing
of all such gifts received for acceptance.
The above Administrative Policy-Procedure governs gifts only, and not payments for
services rendered; fines; fees; or replacement of damaged property.
Any questions in this regard should be forwarded to the Town Manager's Office.
Distribution: Department Heads
Board and Committee Chairpersons
Town Counsel
45
APPENDIX D
Effective Date: 9/11/79
Revised: 06/99
Town of Concord
APP # 18
Applications for and Acceptance of State and Federal Grants
The application for and acceptance of state and federal grants is governed by state and
federal statutes. This Administrative Policy-Procedure shall set forth the procedures for
the application and acceptance of all grants:
1. Applications for grants of state and federal funds must be signed by the Town
Manager. A copy of the application and notification of any awards shall also be
forwarded to the Town Accountant.
2. The Town Manager shall be notified as soon as an application is initiated.
3. After a grant has been awarded, the expenditure of funds in accordance with the
grant will require the approval of the Board of Selectmen. The employee or
board member will be notified of the date and time of the agenda item in the
event they wish to attend.
4. All expenditures from grant funds shall be made utilizing the Town's standard
purchasing and bill-payroll processing procedures.
cc: All Board and Committee Chairpersons
All Department Heads
Town Counsel
46
APPENDIX E
Date Issued: 11-16-98
Date Revised: 05-29-07
Town of Concord
APP #50
Use of Electronic Mail
POLICY/PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is twofold. First, it is to address the implications of electronic mail (email)
as a public record. Second, it is to ensure the proper use of e-mail as a communications
tool in the workplace.
The term “public records” is defined by statute to include all documentary materials or data,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received by an officer or employee of
any agency or municipality of the Commonwealth, unless falling within a statutory exemption
(M.G.L. C.4, S.7). Therefore, the Secretary of the Commonwealth advises that the Public
Records Law clearly applies to government records generated or received electronically. All
electronic mail sent, and all electronic mail received by way of the Town’s system, or any
address when in an official capacity, should be considered a public record subject to inspection
and disclosure and scheduled retention and disposition. Notwithstanding the record retention
guidelines included in Appendix A of this policy, employees and committee members using email
while acting in their official capacity are the keepers of the public record in that respect.
They should have no expectation of privacy in their use or storage of electronic mail.
E-mail is a Town of Concord resource and is provided as a business communications tool. As a
frequent method of communication in the workplace, it is important to provide a clear e-mail use
policy to ensure that e-mail shall not be used in any manner that is discriminatory, that
contributes to a hostile work environment, that interferes with the Town’s business, or that
violates any other Town policies in any manner,
RESPONSIBILITIES
As with all Town Administrative Policies and Procedures, it is the responsibility of all department
heads to monitor and reinforce employee compliance with the Town policy and related
department procedures that may be put in place toward that end.
It is the responsibility of Information Services to support and maintain the Town’s e-mail system;
and provide routine backup and off-site storage of e-mail files for data recovery purposes.
It is the responsibility of all employees and committee members to comply with Town policy and
departmental procedures. Computers, e-mail and the Internet must be used in a manner
consistent with other Town policies, such as those prohibiting discrimination and harassment,
and those identifying minimum standards of conduct.
COMMITTEE USE OF ELECTRONIC MAIL
In order to assist members of governmental bodies to comply with the Open Meeting Law in
their use of this technology, the Middlesex District Attorney's Office has established guidelines
for committees’ use of electronic mail. The guidelines reaffirm that no substantive discussion by
a quorum of members of a governmental body about public business within the jurisdiction of
the governmental body is permissible except at a meeting held in compliance with the
requirements of the Open Meeting Law. Like private conversations held in person or over the
telephone, e-mail conversations among a quorum of members of a governmental body that
relate to public business violate the Open Meeting Law, as the public is deprived of the
opportunity to attend and monitor the e-mail "meeting."
47
Despite the convenience and speed of communication by e-mail, its use by members of a
governmental body carries a high risk of violating the Open Meeting Law. Not only do private email
communications deprive the public of the chance contemporaneously to monitor the
discussion, but by excluding non-participating members, such communications are also
inconsistent with the collegial character of governmental bodies. For these reasons, the
Middlesex District Attorney cautions that e-mail messages among members of governmental
bodies are best avoided except for matters of a purely housekeeping or administrative nature.
PRIVACY/PUBLIC ACCESS
Town computers, software, hardware, Internet access and e-mail, including all pass codes and
attachments composed, sent or received, are Town property and can be confiscated at any
time (with or without notice).
Information on the Town’s system, including e-mail messages, content, attachments and
websites visited are not private; incoming and outgoing messages and attachments are subject
to being, and will be, accessed, reviewed, disclosed or monitored in the exclusive discretion of
the Town at any time (with or without notice) and regardless of passwords.
Use of the system is limited to current employees and others who have been approved to use it
by the Town. No employee shall read or access another employee’s e-mail without a legitimate
business purpose.
No employee shall send e-mail under another employee's name without authorization.
No employee shall change any portion of a previously sent e-mail message without
authorization.
APPROPRIATE USE
E-mail shall be used for business matters directly related to the operational activities of the
Town of Concord and as a means to further the Town’s objective of providing services that are
efficient, complete, accurate, and timely.
E-mail shall not be used for personal gain or to conduct personal business; limited personal
communication is permitted as long as it does not interfere with work or business use in any
way. The nature and frequency of such personal use is subject to the review and discretion of
the department head.
E-mail shall not be used to promote discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin,
age as defined by law, marital status, sex, political affiliation, religion, disability, genetic
information or sexual orientation as defined by law; to promote, result in, or contribute to sexual
harassment; or to promote personal, political or religious business or beliefs.
E-mail shall not be used in any other way that is inconsistent with Town policies and
procedures.
Employees who discover a violation of this policy by another employee are obligated to report it
to their supervisor or to the Assistant Town Manager.
An employee violation of this policy by may result in disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
Distribution: All Town Employees
Board and Committee Members
48
APPENDIX A
to
APP #50
Use of Electronic Mail
E-MAIL FILING AND RETENTION
In addition to ensuring the appropriate use e-mail sent and received via Town
technology, this policy is intended to provide for efficient retention of e-mail
communications. E-mail communications are considered public records and retention
and disposition of public records are authorized by retention schedules issued by the
Secretary of the Commonwealth. Transmission data contained in an e-mail
communication (including the sender, addressee, date and time of transmission, and
receipt) should be retained as part of the record, whether the record is printed out or
stored electronically.
Departments may retain e-mail in hard copy, electronically, or by a combination of these
two means. E-mail should not be retained electronically for longer than two years; after
that time, the record should be printed and retained in paper form. Departments are
responsible for developing filing systems that include e-mail and are responsible for
instructing employees on appropriate use of these systems.
When appropriate, e-mail messages may be filed with program records and assume the
same retention as the records they are filed with. When e-mail records do not relate
obviously or directly to a program, they may be filed as correspondence. If a particular
record is not described on an existing records retention schedule, the appropriate
department head may apply to the Supervisor of Public records for authority to dispose
of that record, and to add records to existing schedules. Only when e-mail messages
are clearly conversational and do not add in any way to the operational records of the
department, may they be discarded without adhering to retention schedules. Examples
of this form of e-mail include: “Sorry I missed you via telephone. Please call me when
you have a minute.”; “I will be out of the office at a conference this Thursday, so please
mark your calendar.”; or “This is a reminder of this Friday’s staff meeting. Please send
along any agenda items you may have.”
Some e-mail systems enable users to enclose or attach records to messages. These
enclosed or attached records need to be filed according to their function and content,
and they will assume the retention schedule of the records they are filed with.
49
APPENDIX F
8/12
DATE POSTED:
TOWN OF CONCORD, MASSACHUSETTS
NOTICE OF MEETING OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
(In accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 30A, §§18-25)
Town Board or Committee Meeting Place Time Date
50
APPENDIX G
Adopted: 2/27/79
REVISED: 1/12/98
REVISED: 6/18/12
Town of Concord
APP #10
Town Board, Committee, and Task Force
Appointment Policy
The Board of Selectmen and Town Manager have jointly adopted this policy concerning the
appointment of members to Town boards, committees, and task forces. Please refer to this
policy when considering or suggesting an individual for appointment to a Town board,
committee, or task force.
Distribution: All Department Heads
All Committee, Board and Task Force Chairs
Town Clerk
51
I. General
This policy has been jointly adopted by the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager, and is
intended to cover all committees, boards, commissions and task forces (each, a
“Committee”) appointed by the Town Manager and Selectmen (each, an “Appointing
Authority”). This policy does not apply to Town employees.
II. Powers and Duties
Effective local government requires that all Committees respect the duties and responsibilities
of other Committees and coordinate their activities to the greatest extent possible. It is in the
overall best interest of the Town that each Committee carries out its responsibilities in a
consistent and professional manner that is in harmony with the general policies promulgated by
the Board of Selectmen.
The powers and duties of some Committees appointed by the Selectmen or Town Manager are
governed by State statute. These include: the Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Historic
District Commission, Board of Health, Natural Resources Commission, and others. Once
appointed by the Selectmen or Town Manager, these Committees operate with a high degree
of autonomy. However, it is in the best interests of the Town that these Committees be guided
by the general policies promulgated by the Selectmen to the extent possible.
Other Committees appointed by the Selectmen or Town Manager serve as, among other
things, advisors to the Selectmen or Town Manager in the performance of their respective
duties to the public. These Committees have the powers and duties delegated to them in their
specific charges. Committees may be called upon to represent the Town in dealing with other
local, regional, or State agencies to the extent requested by their Appointing Authority. When
doing so, they shall take positions on all issues consistent with the views of the Board of
Selectmen and Town Manager, and they shall keep their Appointing Authority fully informed
concerning their activities.
III. Officers of Committees, Boards, and Task Forces
Each Committee shall annually elect from among its members a Chair and a Clerk. Certain
Committees may also find it desirable to elect a Vice-Chair who may act in the absence of
the Chair. In the case of new Committees, or Committees that have become inactive, the
Appointing Authority may appoint a chair pro-tem to serve until the Committee itself elects a
Chair for the balance of the current year.
Except in unusual circumstances, the chairmanship and the clerkship should rotate yearly
amongst the Committee membership.
IV. Open Meeting Law and Minutes
All Committees shall operate in accordance with the Open Meeting Law (MGL Ch. 39, sect.
23a- c) and shall keep minutes of their proceedings. Each Committee shall establish its own
procedures for approval and submission of minutes to the Town House on a timely basis.
Committees are strongly urged to prepare, review and approve minutes as expeditiously as
possible in order to maximize the public’s access to information concerning Committee activity.
In most instances, Committee minutes should be reviewed and approved within six weeks of
the original meeting date. All Committees shall submit electronically a copy of approved
minutes to the Town Clerk and to the Board of Selectmen immediately upon approval.
Committees are reminded that “draft” copies of the Committee’s minutes are considered a
public record and must be made available to the public upon request, even when the
Committee has not yet had the opportunity to review and adopt the minutes.
52
Upon the dissolution of any Committee, either by action of the Appointing Authority, or
pursuant to an expiration date provided in the Committee’s charge, all records, documents,
correspondence and files concerning the Committee’s work shall be promptly turned over to
the Town Clerk for appropriate filing and archival storage.
V. Participation in Town Government
Effective Town government requires active and informed citizen participation. The work of
every Committee is inter-dependent with that of others. To foster informed decision making in
the Town, the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager believe it appropriate that every
Committee have as full representation of its membership as possible at the following regular
governmental functions:
• Town government Coordination Meetings (September & December)
• Finance Committee budget hearings
• Planning Board hearings on Town Meeting warrant articles
• Selectmen’s hearings on Town Meeting warrant articles
• Town Meeting
The objective is not to enforce uniformity or adherence to a majority view, but to assure
understanding of all issues relating to the work of the Committee on which an individual
serves and an understanding of Town government in general. Broad participation is essential
to maintain an open Town Meeting and to avoid domination by those having only a limited
range of knowledge or special interests.
VI. Conflict of Interest
All Committee members are subject to the requirements of Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 268A, Conduct of Public Employees. The statute covers:
(a) Gifts or receipt of compensation or gratuities from anyone other than the Town
(b) Offers or promises to influence official acts
(c) Financial interest in contracts or other particular matters
(d) Acting as agent or attorney before a Town Committee
(e) Unfair advantage in relation to a particular matter
If a prospective Committee member has any question concerning a potential conflict of
interest under MGL ch. 268A, the member shall raise the question in advance of appointment.
Those members currently serving should discuss questions of conflict with the Committee
chair and the Appointing Authority as soon as possible. The State Ethics Commission is a
useful resource for information concerning the application of the law, and Committee
members are expected to follow guidance provided by the State Ethics Commission. Subject
to review by the State Ethics Commission, the Appointing Authority will make the final
determination concerning conflict of interest, with the assistance of Town Counsel as
appropriate.
In addition, all Committee members must avoid the appearance of conflict of interest in all
matters coming before the Committee. Committee members shall seek guidance from the
State Ethics Commission as appropriate, and file with their Committee chair and the
Appointing Authority written notice of facts potentially creating the appearance of a conflict of
interest as required.
VII. Appointment Policy and Procedures
(a) General
It is the policy of the Selectmen and Town Manager to seek the best qualified persons to serve
on each Committee. The Selectmen and Town Manager will endeavor to develop a pool of
persons interested in serving on each such Committee from at least the following sources:
53
1. Green cards on file
2. Personal knowledge
3. Recommendations from Town organizations or individuals
4. Suggestions from the Committee having a vacancy
5. Suggestion by prospective appointee(s)
6. Research of skills available in Town
7. Individual responses to publicity regarding vacancies (new green cards)
It is the policy of the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager to enlarge the general pool of
applicants through active solicitation of Town organizations and through publicity in the press
and on community access television. The timing and extent of specific active solicitations
shall be determined by the Appointing Authority based on its judgment as to appropriateness
and need.
In accordance with the vote on Article 47 of the 1978 Annual Town Meeting, the Board of
Selectmen and Town Manager shall make a special effort to seek out roughly equal numbers
of women and men as candidates for appointments over which they have authority, and will
make appointments in accordance with the Massachusetts Equal Rights Amendment which
states, in part, that “Equality under the law shall not be denied or abridged because of sex,
race, color, creed, or national origin” and will not exclude candidates from appointment based
on their sexual orientation.
(b) Term of Office
1. Unless otherwise prescribed by statute, Town Meeting vote, or specific
Committee charge, three years shall be the standard term of office for Committee
members.
2. Except as provided in section VII(c) below, those appointed to a three-year
term as a full member of a Committee shall be limited to two (2) full
consecutive terms.
3. Except as provided in section VII(c) below, those appointed to a fullmember
Committee term of five (5) years or longer shall be limited to one
(1) full term.
4. A partial term to fill a vacancy shall not be considered to be a full term.
5. Before reappointment to a second term, the individual contribution of the member’s
value to the Committee and his or her attendance record shall be reviewed by the
Committee chair. Attendance of less than 75% of all Committee meetings shall
prejudice reappointment.
6. All terms, unless prescribed by statute, shall terminate at the end of the month
following Town Meeting, or May 31st, whichever is later.
7. The terms of office on Committees shall be set on a staggered basis in the
interest of fostering continuity of knowledge and experience on all Committees.
The Appointing Authority shall determine the year in which a given term expires at
the time of appointment.
Exception: Ad hoc committees appointed for a specific responsibility, at which time
the charge to the Committee should include a specific time frame for submission of
the Committee’s final report and dissolution of the Committee.
8. With the consent of the Committee chair, a Committee member may take a leave
of absence from Committee meetings and responsibilities not to exceed 90 days.
For an absence longer than 90 days, the Committee member should resign and
otherwise face removal under section VII(l) below.
9. Each Committee member shall hold office until his or her successor has been
appointed and qualifies, unless his or her office shall become vacant by reason of
resignation or removal.
54
(c) Appointments for Additional Terms
Members who have served a three-year term on the Records & Archives Committee may be reappointed
to additional terms indefinitely. For other Committees, the Appointing Authority may
re-appoint a Committee member to serve one or more terms on the Committee beyond what is
permitted under section VII(b) above where one or more of the following obtains:
1. Through service on the Committee, the member has developed extensive and
valuable background knowledge and experience concerning specific matters before
the Committee that are expected to be ongoing Committee matters in the future and
which will be difficult adequately to pass on to new members.
2. A Committee member has skills and expertise, (such as an uncommon advanced
degree in a field directly relevant to the Committee's charge) that make the
member's continued service on the Committee of special value to the Town.
3. The departure of the member from the Committee will result in an absence of
important institutional knowledge or know-how regarding the ongoing activities of the
Committee that will not be furnished by other Committee members, such as where
all members of the Committee would be new appointees if the member in question is
not reappointed.
It is intended that re-appointments under this section VII(c) shall be rare. In each such case, the
appointment shall specifically reference this section of this Appointment Policy.
(d) Dual Committee Appointments
In general, individuals shall be limited to service on only one Committee at a time, especially
in the case of a statutory or regulatory Committee. Exceptions shall be made for instances
in which, by law or specific Committee charge, a Committee member serves as a
representative on another Committee (e.g. the Board of Health representative on the Council
on Aging), or serves on a joint Committee formed from other Committees.
(e) Committee Transfers
In general, a member of one Committee shall only be considered for appointment to another
Committee upon completion of the current Committee term of office.
(f) Eligibility for Appointment
All residents of the Town of Concord aged 18 and over are eligible for appointment, except the
following:
1. Town employees whose service on a given Committee, in the judgment of the
Appointing Authority, would create the appearance of a conflict of interest. Example:
an employee of the Public Works Department should not be appointed to the Public
Works Commission, but may, however, be appointed to the Council on Aging,
Recreation Commission, or other Committee where appointment would not create an
appearance of conflict.
2. The Town Manager, Concord Public School and CCRHS Administrators, and Town
department heads (these individuals exert a significant influence over public policy
by virtue of their positions, but may be eligible for ad hoc Committees where such
representation is required by the charge).
3. Elected Municipal Officials (Selectmen, School Committee members, Town
Moderator, Housing Authority Commissioners), except that elected officials may
serve on temporary, ad hoc Committees.
4. Relatives, spouses, or business associates of existing Committee members whose
appointment, in the judgment of the Appointing Authority, would create the
appearance of a concentration of power or viewpoint or a conflict of interest.
55
(g) Criteria for Selection
Actual appointments from the pool of applicants shall be made by the Board of Selectmen and
Town Manager on the basis of:
1. the level of applicant’s interest in serving and interest in the work of the Committee;
2. the need for diversity on the Committee, taking into account the educational and
professional background of the applicant, as well as the need for diversity among all
committee members in terms of neighborhood representation, gender, age, and
other demographic characteristics.
3. special skills needed by a particular Committee.
(h) Residency
In most instances, Committee members should be residents of the Town of Concord. There
may be occasional exceptions when an individual’s unique skill or experience supports the
appointment of a non-resident and would be beneficial to the Committee’s work; however, this
should be relatively rare. Non-residents shall not be eligible for appointment to any Committee
responsible for exercising statutory or regulatory authority.
In the event a Committee member becomes a resident of another community, the member
or the Committee chair shall promptly notify the Appointing Authority. The Appointing
Authority may, upon the request of the Committee chair, permit the non-resident member
to continue to serve until the subsequent May 31, except in the case of statutory and
regulatory Committees.
(i) Role of Committee in Appointments
Each Committee is expected to:
1. Encourage individuals to complete green cards
2. State the qualifications they are looking for in appointments
3. Make suggestions to the Appointing Authority on potential members
Committees may invite prospective members to attend meetings to familiarize themselves
with the work of the Committee. Committees shall not make any representation to
candidates concerning the likelihood of appointment nor provide their suggestions on
candidates to the Appointing Authority with any rank order, nor take any vote with respect
to candidates.
(j) Selection Procedures
1. The individual member and the Committee chair shall notify the Appointing Authority
in writing as soon as a vacancy occurs.
2. A notice will be prepared for release to the press and for public posting pursuant to
the 1996 Town Meeting vote under Article #12.
3. No action will be taken on a vacancy for at least two weeks after the announcement
of the vacancy.
4. For Board of Selectmen appointments, nominations shall be made at one Board
meeting, and formal action will not be taken until a subsequent Board meeting.
5. For Town Manager appointments that are approved by the Board of Selectmen, the
request for appointment shall be made at one Board meeting, and action on the
request shall be taken not later than the next Board meeting.
6. Except in unusual circumstances, the Appointing Authority shall endeavor to make
appointments within two months of the announcement of a vacancy.
56
(k) Orientation Procedure
Upon appointment, all Committee members shall present themselves at the Town Clerk’s
office in order to take the oath of office. The Town will provide the new Committee member
with an informational packet referred to as the “Committee Handbook” which shall include: a
copy of the Committee charge or relevant administrative code, and copies of the Open
Meeting, Public Records, and Conflict of Interest laws.
It shall be the responsibility of the Committee chair to provide for the orientation of new
members to familiarize them with the work of the Committee, current projects, and Town
government operations in general as they may impact the Committee’s work.
(l) Removal from Committees
As provided in the Town Charter, the Board of Selectmen may remove, after such hearing
as the Selectmen deem advisable, any Committee members appointed by the Board.
Further, the Town Manager may remove any Committee member appointed by the Town
Manager for cause, with or without a hearing. “Cause” shall include the repeated failure to
attend Committee meetings, the commission of an ethical violation ( as found by the State
Ethics Commission or a violation of the Open Meeting Law, as found by the Office of the
Attorney General, if the Town Manager believes such action to be necessary to preserve
public confidence in Town government.
VIII. Conflicts with Law
In case of a conflict between any provision of this Appointment Policy and the laws of The
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Town Charter, Massachusetts law or the Town
Charter, as the case may be, shall take precedence.
57
APPENDIX H
8/12
LAST NAME: FIRST NAME: PRECINCT #: TOWN OF CONCORD
COMMITTEE INTEREST
STREET ADDRESS: INDICATE COMMITTEE PREFERENCE
E-MAIL ADDRESS: 1.
PHONE – HOME: OFFICE: 2.
FAX #: CELL#: 3.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: DATE APP'T COMMITTEE TERM EXPIRED
PROFESSION/TITLE:
RELEVANT EXPERIENCE, EDUCATION:
RELEVANT DEGREES, PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATES:
PLEASE CHECK THE ANNUAL TOWN REPORT FOR A COMPLETE LISTING
OF COMMITTEES AND COMMITTEE REPORTS, THEIR APPOINTIVE
AUTHORITIES, AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS:
CARDS WILL BE IN ACTIVE FILE FOR 5 YEARS.
MAIL COMPLETED CARD TO: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
TOWN HOUSE
PO BOX 535
CONCORD, MA 01742
58
APPENDIX I
Revised 10/12
ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES & PROCEDURES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
APP # SUBJECT DATE
1 Use of Town Property 10/99
Last Rev 09/12
2 Out-Of-State Travel 08/01
Last Rev 09/12
3 Departmental Deficits - Use of Reserve Fund 06/99
Last Rev
4 Reservation of Public Building Meeting Rooms; Open Doors - Town
House
06/99
Last Rev 09/12
5 Municipal Grievance Procedures
Relating to the Americans with Disabilities Act
07/97
Last Rev 09/12
6 Communications 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
7 Site Inspection Tours 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
8 Emergency Meeting Cancellations 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
9 Employee Conduct 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
10 Board of Selectmen Guidelines - Town Committee and Board
Appointments
02/79
Rev 01/98
Last Rev 06/12
11 Closing of Town Buildings for Adverse Weather Conditions 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
12 Annual Town Report 09/99
Last Rev
13 Standards of Conduct 03/99
Last Rev 09/12
14 Utilization of Town Counsel
Legal Review of Contract Documents
06/99
Last Rev 09/12
15 Notification of White Pond Advisory Committee 06/99
Last Rev
16 Flag Lowering 06/99
Last Rev
17 Public Statements - Lawsuits 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
18 Application for and Acceptance of State and Federal Grants 06/99
Last Rev
19 Acceptance of Gifts 09-79
Last Rev 09/12
20 Citizen Requests to Distribute Literature 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
21 Reimbursement for Utilization of Private Automobiles 01/08
Last Rev
22 Storage of Inflammable Materials and Explosives _____
23 Building Move Procedures 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
24 Weapons 02/02
Last Rev 09/12
59
APP # SUBJECT DATE
25 Public Records Law 08/00
Last Rev 09/12
26 Names on War Memorials 01/03
Last Rev
27 Town Vehicle Use 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
28 Display of Merchandise on Town Sidewalks 06/99
Last Rev
29 Educational Assistance Policy and
Addendum
06/99
Last Rev 10/09
30 Use of Cell Phones While at Work 01/05
Last Rev 09/12
31 Pole and Conduit Location 06/99
Last Rev
32 Use of Town Land By Community Groups 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
33 Selection of Consultants 06/94
Last Rev
34 Rental and Sale of Town Property
Last Rev 05/11
35 Prohibition of Smoking 08/04
Last Rev 09/12
36 Purchasing
Addendum
03/83
11/85
Last Rev
37 Historic Districts Commission Authority Over Town Projects 09/83
Last Rev 09/12
38 Municipal Outdoor Lighting Policy and Guidelines 12/01
Last Rev
39 Application for Building Permit Small Lots Under the Grandfather
Clause of MGL Chapter 40A S6.
07/84
Last Rev
40 Right-to-Know Law 06/99
Last Rev 09/12
41 Employment and Services for Disabled Persons 06/99
Last Rev
42 HIPAA Privacy Policy 02/05
Last Rev
43 Naming of Town Property 12/27/90
Last Rev 09/12
44 Designation of National Incident Management System Town’s Incident
Management Standard
03/17/06
Last Rev
45 Telephone Procedures, Policies & Guidelines 09/05/91
Last Rev
46 Rabies Control Plan 4/29/93
Last Rev
47 Seat Belt Law 2/25/94
Last Rev
48 Charitable and Political Sign Placement 04/07
Last Rev 02/09
49 Buy Recycled Policy 12/99
Last Rev
50 Use of Electronic Mail 11/98
Last Rev 10/12
60
APP # SUBJECT DATE
51 Use of Internet 11/98
Last Rev 10/12
52 Deployment and Use of Technology 04/00
Last Rev 10/12
53 Pay for Employees Activated for Military Duty 11/03
Last Rev 10/12
54 Decision Process for Land Acquisition 08/08
Last Rev
55 Web Content and Link Posting 06/09
Last Rev 10/12
56 Staff Provision of Records & Information 05/10
Last Rev
57 Workplace Violence 07/10
Last Rev
58 Equal Employment Opportunity – Statement of Policy 02/11
Last Rev
59 Energy Management Policy 06/11
Last Rev
60 Sustainable Municipal Practices 09/11
Last Rev
61 Remote Network Access 10/11
Last Rev
62 Social Media Policy 07/12
Last Rev
End Alphabetical Index 06/99
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE BYLAW
Chapter 1. Establishment
1. There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee consisting of nine
voting members pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B. The
Committee shall consist of the following members:
• One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission
• One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the Authority
• One member of the Natural Resources Commission as designated by the
Commission
• One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board
• One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the
Commission
• Four at-large members to be designated by the Board of Selectmen
2. Terms for the four at-large members will begin on June 1 of each year and will be
staggered four-year terms. Any vacancy on the Community Preservation Committee
shall be filled by the commission, authority, or board that designated the member
who creates the vacancy by designating another member in accordance with Section
(1) above for the unexpired term.
3. Should any commission, authority or board designating a member for the
Community Preservation Committee cease to exist for whatever reason the Board of
Selectmen will determine the appropriate alternative designating commission,
authority or board.
Chapter 2. Duties
1. The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and
resources of the town regarding community preservation. The committee shall
consult with town boards and others including, inter alia, he Historical Commission,
the Housing Authority, the Natural Resources Commission, the Planning Board and
the Recreation Commission in conducting such studies. As part of its studies the
Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs,
possibilities and resources of the town regarding community preservation
possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly, including on the
Town’s web page, and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town. The Committee will file an annual
report on its activities to the Town Clerk.
2. The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations to the Town
Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the
acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration and preservation of historic resources; for the
acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use; for the creation,
preservation and support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or
restoration of such open space, land for recreational use and community housing
that is acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to community
housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall recommend, wherever
possible, the reuse of existing buildings, or construction of new buildings on
previously developed sites.
3. The Community Preservation Committee may include in its recommendations to the
Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific
purposes that are consistent with community preservation, but for which sufficient
funds are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose, or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are
consistent with community preservation.
Chapter 3. Requirements for a quorum and cost estimates
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the
presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Community Preservation
Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Community Preservation Committee shall
approve its actions by majority vote. Meetings will be held in accordance with the open
meeting law. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated costs.
Chapter 4. Amendments
The Community Preservation Committee shall, from time to time, review the administration
of this By-law, making recommendations, as needed, for changes in the By-law and in
administrative practice to improve the operations of the Community Preservation
Committee. The first review shall be completed at least by November 1, 2008 and
subsequent reviews shall be completed in no more than five-year intervals. This Bylaw may
be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the Town Meeting, provided that the
amendments would not be in conflict with Chapter 44B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
Chapter 5. Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this By-law be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 6. Effective Date
This vote shall take effect and this Bylaw shall be submitted to the Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth only upon certification that a majority of voters have approved a ballot
question accepting sections 3 to 7, inclusive, of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B.
Upon approval of this Bylaw by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, the Board of
Selectmen shall request the Historical Commission, the Housing Authority, the Natural
Resources Commission, the Planning Board and the Recreation Commission to designate a
member to serve on the Community Preservation Committee. The Board of Selectmen will
designate four at-large members of the Community Preservation Committee.
Chapter 7. Exemption Application Deadline
The application deadline for exemption from the surcharge shall be the same as for personal
exemption applications, 90 days following the issuance of the actual tax bill.
Article 38, Annual Town Meeting, April 2004
Article 44, Annual Town Meeting, April 2005
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
COMPETITIVE BIDDING BYLAW
The procurement of supplies, services or real property and the disposing of supplies or real
property shall be carried out in conformance with the provisions of Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 30B as enacted by Chapter 687 of the Acts of 1989, and amendments thereto.
The Town Manager, acting as the Chief Procurement Officer may make any additional
administrative rules and regulations governing procurement activities as he may deem
necessary for the efficient management of the Town. The Town Manager is authorized to
award contracts for the operation, maintenance, repair and improvement of wastewater
treatment facilities for a term not to exceed twenty (20) years in length, including any
renewal, extension or option.
Articles 21 and 22, Town Meeting, March 1960
Article 48, Town Meeting, April 1979
Article 42, Town Meeting, April 1982
Article 43, Annual Town Meeting, April 1991
(1991 version deleted earlier bylaw and replaced with revised language)
Article 42, Annual Town Meeting, May 2000 (amended 1991 version)
Article 48, Annual Town Meeting, May, 2001 (amended 2000 version)
See also M.G.L., Chapter 30B
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
CONSERVATION COMMISSION BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town accept §8C of Chapter 40 of the M.G.L. and that the Town
adopt the following bylaw:
There shall be established a Conservation Commission, with all the rights and duties
set forth in §8C of Chapter 40 of the M.G.L., for the promotion and development of
the natural resources and for the protection of watershed resources of the Town.
The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Town Manager,
subject to the approval of the Selectmen, one member to serve for a term of one
year, two members to serve for terms of two years and two members to serve for
terms of three years, their successors to be appointed for terms of three years each.
Article 50, Town Meeting, March 1959
Note:
In Concord, the Natural Resources Commission serves as the Conservation Commission.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
CONSTRUCTION NOISE BYLAW
Section 1. Construction Noise
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create, assist in creating, continue or allow to continue
any loud noise related to non-public construction activities as outlined below prior to 7:00 am
and after 8:00 pm on weekdays and Saturdays which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
reasonable quiet, comfort, repose or the health and safety of others within the Town. Additionally, it
shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create, assist in creating, continue or allow to continue
any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise related to non-public construction activities
as outlined below prior to 8:00 am and after 6:00 pm on Sundays and the following holidays: New
Year’s, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Construction shall mean those activities requiring a building permit, and shall also include any site
preparation, earth removal, grading, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action,
including demolition, for or of private streets, structures, utilities or similar non-public property.
Construction noise shall be that noise generated by manual or mechanical activities associated
with construction.
Section 2. Exemptions
Noise associated with Emergency Work or Emergency Vehicles is exempt from the provisions of
this Bylaw. Emergency Work shall mean any work performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore
public safety, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. Emergency
Vehicles shall mean any vehicle operated in an effort to protect, provide or restore public safety including,
but not limited to, ambulances, police vehicles and fire vehicles.
Noise associated with construction activities undertaken with authorization of the Police Chief in
order to complete a project, which is in the public interest, in a timely and expeditious manner shall
be exempt from the provisions of this Bylaw.
Article 61, Town Meeting, April 2010
NOTE:
Section 3 of this bylaw, approved at the April 2010 Annual Town Meeting, was subsequently disapproved by the Attorney
General and has therefore been deleted.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
DEMOLITION DELAY BYLAW
Section 1. Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish a predictable process for preserving
and protecting significant buildings and other structures within the Town of
Concord (the “Town”) which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the
cultural, political, architectural or social history of the Town; to encourage
owners of such buildings and other structures to seek out persons or groups
of people who might be willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate, or restore
such buildings or other structures rather than demolish them; or, barring that,
to create a record, including a photo/video history of such buildings or other
structures; and to provide a reasonable time period for public notice and discussion
by interested groups and individuals of means by which to preserve
such buildings and other structures.
Section 2. Definitions
For the purposes of this bylaw the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
2.1 “CHC” - the Concord Historical Commission
2.2 “Building Commissioner”- the Building Commissioner of the Town of
Concord, or other person authorized by state law or local bylaw to issue
demolition permits in the Town.
2.3 “Building or other Structure” - any combination of materials forming a
shelter for persons, animals, or property, and/or such other walls, fences,
paths, statues, monuments, bridges, burial grounds or other combinations
of building materials.
2.4 “Demolition” - any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing
any building or other structure or any substantial portion thereof, or commencing
the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of
completing the same. A “substantial” portion or “substantial” destruction
of a building or other structure is defined as either half the volume of the
building or other structure or half its value, as determined by the Building
Commissioner.
2.5 “Significant listed building or other structure” - a building or other structure
placed on the attached list by virtue of its inclusion in the Historic Resources
Masterplan of Concord, MA of 1995* or its having been designated
a “significant listed building or other structure” by the procedures laid
out in section 8 of this bylaw, and by its location outside of a Local Historic
District, or LHD. (LHD buildings are already protected by the LHD
designation.) *Available at the Public Library.
2.6 “Demolition Permit” - a written approval for demolition of a building or
other structure, issued by the Building Commissioner in response to an
application for such a permit, as required by the State Building Code.
2.7 “6 Month Delay period” - the 6 month period, dated from the stamped receipt
by the Building Commissioner of the application for a demolition
permit.
Section 3. Procedure
3.1 When the Building Commissioner receives a demolition permit application
for a “significant listed building or other structure”, he will within 15 days
inform both the applicant and the CHC in writing by certified mail that a
demolition permit application has been received, that the Demolition Review
Bylaw is in effect, and whether s/he has determined to grant or deny
such permit.
If the Building Commissioner determines to grant the demolition permit,
the CHC will then have up to 15 days to appeal the Building Commissioner's
decision to the Board of before a demolition permit is issued.
If the Building Commissioner determines not to grant the demolition
permit, the permit applicant may in a similar manner as above appeal the
decision to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals will handle appeals
under this bylaw in the same manner in which it handles all other appeals.
No demolition permit may actually be issued until the expiration of
the appeal period. The filing of an appeal will stay the issuance of a demolition
permit until final disposition of the appeal. In any case, at the end of
the 6 Month Delay period, all appeals by either the CHC or the applicant
or any abutter shall be moot, and a demolition permit shall be issued if no
alternative method of saving the significant listed building or other structure
has been agreed upon.
If the applicant does not choose to appeal, the 6 Month Delay period will
go into effect and no demolition permit will be issued until 6 months after
the date of the initial application to the Building Commissioner.
3.2 During the 6 Month Delay period, the applicant, the CHC and any other
interested parties are encouraged to work to seek an alternative to the proposed
demolition. (See Sec. 1, Intent and Purpose). The Building Commissioner
will not issue a permit for any construction or alteration on the site
of the significant listed building or other structure during this 6 months.
3.3 Upon notification of the 6 Month Delay period in the issuance of the
demolition permit, an applicant may request a waiver of the demolition delay
bylaw by applying directly to the Concord Historical Commission for a
demolition plan review.
3.4 Demolition Plan Review
(a) After the Building Commissioner's initial determination that a demolition
application involves a demolition of a significant listed building or
other structure which is subject to the 6 month delay period, the applicant
for the demolition permit may submit to the CHC a demolition
plan which shall include the following information: (i) a lot plan showing
the location of the building or other structure to be demolished on
the property and with reference to neighboring properties; (ii) a brief
description of the type of building or other structure and the reason for
the proposed demolition with supporting data; (iii) and optionally may
include a brief description of the proposed reuse of the premises upon
which the building or other structure is located.
(b) After giving public notice the CHC shall hold a public hearing within
30 days from receipt of the demolition plan. At the close of this hearing
a vote of the majority of the CHC members shall determine whether
to issue a waiver. Within 15 days from the date of the public hearing
the CHC shall file a written report of its decision with the Building
Commissioner, which shall include the following: (i) a description of
the age, architectural style, historical associations and importance of the
building or other structure to be demolished; (ii) a determination as to
whether the building or other structure should be preserved and remain
subject to the demolition delay.
(c) Upon a determination by the CHC that any building or other structure
which is the subject of an application for demolition is a significant
building or other structure which should be preserved, the CHC shall
advise the applicant and the Building Commissioner that the 6 Month
Delay period remains in force, and no demolition permit shall be issued
until 6 months after the date of the original application to the
Building Commissioner.
3.5 The Building Commissioner may issue a demolition permit for a significant
listed building or other structure at any time after receipt of written
opinion from the CHC to the effect that either: (i) the building or other
structure is determined not to warrant preservation, or (ii) the CHC is satisfied
that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some
other person or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore
such building or other structure.
Section 4. Emergency Demolition
Nothing in this bylaw shall restrict the Building Commissioner from immediately
ordering the demolition of any building or other structure in the event of
an imminent danger to the safety of the public.
Section 5. Enforcement and Remedies
5.1 The CHC and/or the Building Commissioner are each specifically authorized
to request that the Town Manager, with the approval of the Selectmen,
institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, as
they may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the
requirements of this bylaw or to prevent a threatened violation thereof.
5.2 Anyone who demolishes a significant listed building or other structure
without first obtaining and complying fully with the provisions of a demolition
permit in accordance with this bylaw shall be subject to a fine as
specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town
Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal
Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town
Meeting, as amended.
5.3 No building permit for a new building or other structure shall be issued
with respect to any premises upon which a significant listed building or
other structure has been voluntarily demolished in violation of this bylaw
for a period of two (2) years after the date of the completion of the demolition.
As used herein “premises” includes the parcel of land upon which
the demolished significant listed building or other structure was located,
and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.
5.4 Upon application for a demolition permit for a significant listed building
or other structure the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the
building or other structure, if vacant, to the satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner. Should the owner fail to secure the building or other structure,
the loss of such building or other structure through fire or other
cause may be considered voluntary demolition for the purposes of section
5.2 and/or section 5.3.
5.5 Nothing in this bylaw shall be deemed to exempt applicants from any requirements
of the state Building Code.
Section 6. Local Historic Districts
Nothing in this bylaw shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of Chapter
345 of the Acts of 1960 as amended (the Historic Districts Act). This bylaw
shall not apply to any proposed demolition of a building or other structure
which is located within a Local Historic District established under the Local
Historic District Bylaw. The Historic Districts Commission shall have jurisdiction
over any demolition proposals within a Local Historic District pursuant
to all procedures, standards and requirements set forth therein.
Section 7. Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph and
part shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 8. Addition of other significant buildings and/or other
structures to this Bylaw's list
Further significant buildings and other structures may be added to the list
covered by this Bylaw when there is a future revision of the Historic Resources
Masterplan. Such additions will be pursuant to a Town Meeting vote
modifying the significant listed buildings or other structures based on a report
from the CHC, following the public hearings required for all warrant articles.
Demolition Review: Buildings and other structures deemed Historically
valuable, but not protected by Local Historic District designation:
NL = National Landmark LD = Local Historic District SO = State Owned
NR = National Register SR = State Register TO = Town Owned
Priority
N
R
S
R
L
D
S
O
T
O
Comments
138 Baker Ave Hosmer Homestead 3 Y Y House
265 Ball’s Hill Road Old Ball House 2
265 Ball’s Hill Road Ball Barn 1 Barn
612 Barrett’s Mill Rd James Barrett House 2 House
324 Bedford Street Caesar Robbins 2
50-52 Belknap Street Josiah Davis Store 3 House
383 Cambridge Turnpike
Fletch/Cuming 2
455 Cambridge Tpke Eliphalet, Nathaniel &
John Fox House
3 House
20 Commonwealth
Avenue
Concord Junction Depot 2 Y Y Depot
106 Elm Street Franklin Sanborn 2
965 Elm Street Warden’s House 2 Y
998 Elm Street John Cuming House 2 Y Y Y
299 Estabrook Road Benj. Clark House 3 “Antietam”
Fairhaven Road Smallpox Cemetery 2 Y Cemetery
158 Fairhaven Road Ephraim Potter/Pest 2 Y Y Smallpox
Hospital
240 Fairhaven Road Chas Francis Adams 2
NL = National Landmark LD = Local Historic District SO = State Owned
NR = National Register SR = State Register TO = Town Owned
Priority
N
R
S
R
L
D
S
O
T
O
Comments
350 Fitchburg Tpke Francis & Noah Wheeler
House
3 House
317 Garfield Road Thorn Mott Shaw 2 Y Y
112 Great Meadows
Road
Samuel Hoar House 3 Gave Gt.
Meadows
249 Harrington Ave Wheeler/Harrington 2 Y
45 Hubbard Street Black Horse Tavern 2
702 Lowell Road Charles Flint House 3 House
761 Lowell Road Brown House 3 House
1325 Lowell Road Daniel Wood House 3 Musket. Farm
1710 Lowell Road Adams/Chandler/Mel 2
631 Main Street Amos Wood House 3 House
1646 Main Street Capt John Brown House 3 House
1694 Main Street Roger Brown 2 Y Y
1700 Main Street Damon Mill 2 Y Y Mill
1709 Main Street Damon Mill Tail Race 2 Tail Race
25 Middle Street Old Academy 2 HDT Taught
577 Monument Street J.E. Wright (Shattuck/
Barr)
3
635 Monument Street Minot Pratt Farm 3
755 Monument Street Log Cabin/Water Tank 2
775 Monument Street Barrett/Hutchins House 1
1024 Monument
Street
Barn 3 Barn
1024 Monument St Samuel Buttrick House 3
1360 Monument
Street
Barrett
House/Boathouses
2 Oct. Farm
1455 Monument
Street
Lawrence Farm/Barn 3 Farm Bldgs.
1586 Monument
Street
Blood/Mason House 3
190 Nashawtuc Road Wm. Wheeler/Maru-
Yama
3
505 Old Bedford Road Samuel Fox House 3
550 Old Bedford Road Enos Fox House 3
637 ORNAC Wood Stave Water Tank 2 Y Water Tank
20 Powdermill Road Parkman Tavern 1 Y Y
82 Sandy Pond Road Prescott/Hosmer 2
256 Simon Willard
Road
Berkeley Wheeler House 3 H. Little, Arch.
263 Simon Willard
Road
Little Home 2 H. Little,
Home
NL = National Landmark LD = Local Historic District SO = State Owned
NR = National Register SR = State Register TO = Town Owned
Priority
N
R
S
R
L
D
S
O
T
O
Comments
Opp 110 Spencer
Brook Rd.
Barn & 2 Silos 1 Barn/Silos
107 Spencer Brook
Road
Barn, Now house 2 Barn
110 Spencer Brook
Road
Jones/Farrar 2
158 Spencer Brook
Road
Clarke/Mansfield 2
606 Strawberry Hill
Road
Barn 2 Barn
49 Sudbury Road Sanborn House/School 2
92 Sudbury Road Edward Bulkeley 1
99 Sudbury Road Scotchford/Wheeler 2
120 Sudbury Road Henry & Caleb Wheeler
House
3 House
387 Sudbury Road Abiel Wheeler House 3
728 Sudbury Road Henry Bigelow House 3
1571 Sudbury Road Windmill 3 Windmill
19 Thoreau Court Burke-Brennan House 3 House
341 Virginia Road John Wheeler/Thoreau 1 Y Thoreau
Birthplace
477 Virginia Road Wheeler/Merriam 2 Y Y
711 Virginia Road Hangar 24 3 Y Y
170 Walden Street Asa Heywood House 3 House
107 Westford Road Stephen Barrett 2
216 Westford Road Peter/Hiram 2
344 Westford Road John Melvin 2
Westford/Pope Roads Spencer Brook Bridge 2 Y Bridge
321 Williams Road Barn & Silo 2 Barn/Silo
321 Williams Road Ezekiel Miles House 3
429 Williams Road Charles Miles 2
Article 53, Annual Town Meeting, May 3, 1999
Article 64, Annual Town Meeting, April 2006
Article 8, Special Town Meeting, November 2007
Article 45, Annual Town Meeting, April 2008 (Corrected & Revised October 2011)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
DISORDERLY CONDUCT BYLAWS
No person shall remain upon any sidewalk in front of a building or upon any doorstep or
other projection of a building in said Town so as to annoy or disturb the occupants of such
building or so as to obstruct the passing to or from or by such building, or refuse or neglect
to depart therefrom when ordered so to do by such occupant or by any constable or police
officer.
Article 16 (Sub-Article 11), Town Meeting, April 1905
***************
No person shall behave in a rude or disorderly manner, or use any indecent, profane, or
insulting language in any of the public places or ways in said Town.
Article 16 (Sub-Article 10), Town Meeting, April 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY BYLAW
The Sale of Personal Property of the Town shall be handled in the manner prescribed by
M.G.L. Chapter 30B, §15 as amended from time to time. The Town Manager is authorized
to donate surplus property to a charitable organization.
Article 8, Town Meeting, March 1935
Article 1, Special Town Meeting, April 1982
(replaced earlier versions in their entirety) Article 52, Town Meeting, May 1, 2001
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
DOG BYLAW
Section 1. No owner of a dog shall permit such dog to be outside the confines of the
property of the owner unless the dog is held firmly on a leash or is under the control of its
owner.
Section 2. No owner of a dog shall permit such dog:
a. to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or endanger the safety of any person,
by biting, barking, howling, or in any other manner;
b. to run at large or unmuzzled in violation of an order of the Selectmen or the Dog
Officer;
c. to worry, kill, maim or otherwise injure another’s fowl, livestock or domesticated animal;
d. to chase a vehicle on any way open to the public travel;
e. to be unlicensed or untagged in violation of state law;
f. to be in a school or municipal building;
g. to run at large unless said dog shall have been vaccinated against rabies during the
preceding thirty-six months; or
h. to be on a Town playground or on School property unless the dog is held firmly on a
leash or is under the control of its owner.
i. to be within the boundaries of Town cemetery property unless the dog is held firmly on
a leash at all times. Furthermore, it shall be the duty of each person who owns,
possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on
any Town cemetery property.
Section 3. The Dog Officer may impound any dog found to be involved in a violation of
Section 2 hereof, and on doing so shall immediately notify the owner, if ascertainable from
some device on the dog, of such impoundment and of the owner’s right to redeem the dog
on reimbursing the Dog Officer for maintenance and on licensing the dog if it then be
unlicensed. Any dog so impounded and unredeemed after ten days may be disposed of as
provided in Chapter 140, §151A of the M.G.L.
The Dog Officer may restrain or muzzle, or issue an interim order to restrain or muzzle, for
a period not to exceed fourteen days, any dog which is in violation of Section 2 hereof.
Upon restraining or muzzling or issuing an interim order to restrain or muzzle, the Dog
officer shall submit in writing to the Selectmen a report of the action and the reasons
therefor.
Upon receipt of such report, the Selectmen may take such action as may be deemed
necessary. If the Selectmen fail to act on the report during the period in which the dog is
restrained or muzzled, upon expiration of the period, the interim order shall be automatically
vacated.
The owner of any dog which has been ordered to be restrained or muzzled under the
provisions of this section may request the Selectmen in writing to vacate such order.
Section 4. The owner of a dog who violates any section of this bylaw shall be subject to
a fine for each offense as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement
of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal
Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
The Dog Officer may issue a separate and additional fine each day for a continuing or
recurring violation.
Section 5. As used herein the word “owner” includes the owner of the dog, a person
who has the care and custody of a dog, and the agent of the owner.
Article 9, Special Town Meeting, June 1971
Article 10, Special Town Meeting, October 1975 (Amended 1971 bylaw)
Article 40, Annual Town Meeting, April 1980 (This repealed the 1971 bylaw)
Article 44, Annual Town Meeting, April/May 1998 (Amended 1980 bylaw)
Article 52, Annual Town Meeting, April/May 1999 (Amended 1980 bylaw)
Article 64, Annual Town Meeting, April 2006 (Amended Section 4)
Article 42, Annual Town Meeting, April 2007 (Amended Section 4)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
FARMING BYLAW
This Bylaw highlights the importance of farming to the Town of Concord, reiterates that
farming is a valued and accepted activity here, and is intended to help promote understanding
between farmers and their neighbors.
SECTION 1. FARMING IN CONCORD
The Town of Concord has long been a town where farming has been a significant activity
and is an important part of the Town’s economy. Farming is still an important activity contributing
to the Town’s character and quality of life.
SECTION 2. CONSTITUTIONAL AND LEGISLATIVE RECOGNITION
The significant and unique nature of the use of land for agricultural activities has been recognized
by the Constitution of Massachusetts (Article 97, power to take and purchase agricultural
land), and by the General Laws of Massachusetts; see, for example, Chapter 40A,
Section 3, Paragraph 1 (zoning bylaws may not prohibit or unreasonably regulate commercial
agriculture); Chapter 90, Section 9 (limited exception for use of vehicles used exclusively
for agriculture purposes on public ways); Chapter 111, Section 125A (odor and noise from
certain normal and generally acceptable farming activities exempt from nuisance actions by
Boards of Health); and Chapter 243, Section 6 (limitation on actions for nuisance against
operations of a farm). See, also, Chapter 128, Section 1A for a definition of “farming” and
“agriculture”.
SECTION 3. PURPOSE OF THIS BYLAW
The purpose of this Bylaw is to recognize the foregoing, to establish policies to encourage
and promote farming by recognizing the nature of farming activities, and to balance the interest
of those conducting farming activities and the interest of residents affected by them.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
“Farming” or “agriculture” shall mean:
• farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
• dairying;
• production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural,
floracultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
• growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry
or lumbering operations;
• raising of livestock including horses;
• keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
• keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, goats, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other domesticated
animals for food and other agricultural purposes, including bees and furbearing
animals.
“Farming activities” shall include farming and the following activities:
• operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over roads within
the Town;
• control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease
organisms of plants and animals;
• application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides, and irrigation;
• construction and maintenance of drainage facilities for agricultural use;
• conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational and promotional
activities, including agritourism, providing that the activities are related
to marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm;
• construction and operations of greenhouses or hoophouses for crop production
and plant propagation;
• processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation
of a farmer’s market or farm stand including signage thereto;
• maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus, owned or
leased by the farm owner or manager, used expressly for the purpose of propagation,
processing, management, or sale of the agricultural products; and
• on-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations.
SECTION 5. DECLARATION AS TO FARMING
The Town and its residents recognize and accept that due to weather conditions, soil conditions,
the timing of crop planting, crop management, and harvesting and other conditions
unique to farming, farming activities may occur on holidays, week days and week-ends by
night or day. The Town and its residents also recognize and accept that farming activities
result in noise, dust, odor, and fumes. Such acceptance is based on the premise that farming
activities are conducted in accordance with normal, generally accepted agriculture practices
used in Concord and those current Best Management Practices (BMPs) as recommended by
the University of Massachusetts Extension or its successor. Residents of Concord should
expect and accept such agricultural activities as a normal and necessary aspect of living in a
town with farms.
SECTION 6. DISCLOSURE NOTIFICATION
In order to help promote understanding between farmers and their neighbors, the Town of
Concord will declare and publicize that Concord has a Farming Bylaw. Copies of this bylaw
shall be posted in the Town House, to the Concord Ag Committee website, and will be
available for distribution from the Town Clerk, the Planning Board or its designee. It may
also be published on brochures or other town websites.
SECTION 7. EFFECT ON OTHER REGULATION
Nothing in this Bylaw shall limit or amend existing law, statutes or regulations, although it
shall be considered in applications thereof. Nothing in this Bylaw shall limit or prevent future
regulation of agriculture activities; however, the terms and intent of this Bylaw shall be
considered in the enactment of such regulation.
SECTION 8. DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Concerns regarding agricultural activities may be brought to the Town Manager, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, or the Board of Health, depending upon the nature of the issue. The
Town Agriculture Committee is also available to assist in addressing any concern or resolving
any dispute relating to agricultural activities.
Passed by Declared Majority Vote
April 27, 2011
Approved by Attorney General May 23, 2011
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
FILLING VACANCIES ON TOWN BOARDS AND
COMMITTEES BYLAW
That the appointing authority shall, except in unusual circumstances, fill a vacancy on a
board, commission, council or committee within a two-month period following the
occurrence of the vacancy. Failing to do so, the appointing authority shall post in the Town
House a notice of the position to be filled. Such posting shall remain in place until the
vacancy has been filled.
Article 12, Town Meeting, April 29, 1996
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
FINANCE COMMITTEE BYLAW
Section 1.
At the annual Town Meeting to be held in the year 1922 and before the final adjournment thereof,
there shall be appointed by the Moderator a Finance committee consisting of fifteen members. Five
members of such committee shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years; and five members
shall be appointed to serve for a term of two years; and five members shall be appointed to serve for
a term of one year. At each annual Town Meeting after the annual meeting of the year 1922, the
Moderator shall appoint five members of such committee to serve for a period of three years.
Except in case of death, resignation or removal from office, each member of the committee shall
hold office until the final adjournment of the annual Town Meeting of the year in which his term of
office expires. Said committee shall at all times consist of fifteen members, and vacancies occurring
therein, otherwise than by expiration of the term of office, shall be filled by the Town Moderator.
No member of such committee shall be an officer of the Town or a member of any board of the
Town.
Section 2.
The Finance Committee shall meet and organize as soon as practicable each year after the final
adjournment of the annual Town Meeting and at such organization meeting shall elect a chairman
and a clerk.
Section 3.
When the warrant for a Town Meeting contains any article or articles under which an appropriation
or expenditure of money or the disposition of any property of the Town may be made, the Finance
Committee shall consider such article or articles after giving one or more public hearings thereon
and shall report in print its recommendations to such Town Meeting. The recommendations of the
Finance Committee concerning any articles in the warrant for an annual Town Meeting shall be
printed and distributed to the voters of the Town not less than seven days before such meeting.
The Finance Committee may consider and report upon any other article in any warrant issued for a
Town Meeting whenever in the opinion of a majority of the committee such consideration and
report seem advisable for the best interests of the Town. The Finance Committee may carry on its
inquiries and investigations through such sub-committees as it may create and the committee shall
determine the method by which such sub-committee shall be selected.
Article 8, Town Meeting, March 1921
MGL, Ch. 39, §16
Administrative Code, 5/11/1970
Charter, §2C
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
FIRE LANES BYLAW
Section 1.
It shall be unlawful to leave any motor vehicle unattended within the limits of any private
way furnishing means of access for fire apparatus to any building.
Section 2.
No person shall obstruct or park a motor vehicle in any fire lane. The Chief of the Fire
Department or his designee shall have the discretion to establish fire lanes on commercial or
public property which shall be identified as such by the posting of signs and pavement
markings as reflected in the “Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices” as most recently
amended. Said fire lanes shall not be greater than eighteen (18) feet wide for all buildings
and shall run from the wall of the building or any overhang of such building or any sidewalk
adjacent thereto. Any fire lane in excess of eighteen (18) feet shall require the approval of
the property owner. The Chief of the Fire Department shall notify in writing all property
owners of record and the Chief of Police, of the establishment on their property.
Section 3.
The penalties for violators of the bylaw will be enforced through the “Traffic Rules and
Regulations of the Town of Concord” for the purposes of ticketing, assessing fines and the
towing of motor vehicles.
Section 4.
If any vehicle is found in violation of the provisions of this bylaw and the identity of the
driver cannot be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
Article 40, Town Meeting, April 1990
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
FISHING BYLAW
Fishing from any bridge on any public way in the Town is prohibited at all times.
Article 19, Town Meeting, March 1950
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION BYLAW
VOTED: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule
Amendment, and under the Town’s statutory police powers, adopt the following bylaw regarding the
protection of groundwater.
Section 1. Authority
This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Concord under its home rule powers, its police powers to
protect the public health and welfare, and its authorization under MGL Chapter 40, §21.
Section 2. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the existing and potential
groundwater supply and groundwater recharge areas within the Town.
Section 3. Definitions
The following terms shall have the following meanings in the bylaw.
a. “Discharge” means the disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration or
placing of any hazardous material, regardless of volume into or on any land or water so that such
hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment to be emitted into the
air or discharged into any waters including groundwaters. Discharge includes, without
limitation, leakage of such hazardous or toxic material from failed or discarded containers or
storage systems, and disposal of such materials into any on-site sewage disposal system, drywell,
catch basin or landfill.
b. “Hazardous Material” means a product or waste, or combination of substances which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses in the
Board of Health’s judgment a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety or
welfare or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed of,
or otherwise managed. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any substance deemed a
hazardous waste in 315 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 2.04 or in 40 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 261 shall be deemed a hazardous material for purposes of this bylaw.
Wastes generated by but not limited to the following activities are presumed to be toxic or
hazardous, unless and except to the extent that anyone engaging in such an activity can
demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the Board of Health:
• airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair
• chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation
• cabinet making
• dry cleaning
• electronic circuit assembly
• metal plating, finishing and polishing
• painting, wood preserving and furniture striping
• pest control
• photographic processing
• printing
• and such other activities as may reasonably be determined by the Board of Health.
Section 4. Prohibitions
a.
(i) Except as provided in Section 4 b. hereof, all discharges of hazardous material within
the Town are prohibited.
(ii) All handling and storage of hazardous material is prohibited except in accordance
with the provisions of this bylaw, the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management
Act, MGL Chapter 21C, as amended and the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, P.L. 94-580, as amended and regulations issued incident thereto.
b. Section 4 a. shall not apply to the following discharges.
(i) Proper disposal of any non-hazardous material in a sanitary or industrial landfill that has
received and maintains all necessary federal, state and Town permits for such purpose;
provided that all current permits have been filed with the Concord Board of Health.
(ii) Application of fertilizer and pesticides in accordance with label recommendations and
with applicable regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Control Board and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
(iii) Application of road salts in conformance with the snow and ice control program of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works and the Concord Department of Public
Works.
(iv) Disposal of “sanitary sewage” to subsurface sewage disposal systems as defined and
permitted by Title 5 of the Massachusetts Environmental Code and the supplemental
rules and regulations issued by the Concord Board of Health.
(v) Industrial discharges which are point source discharges subject to existing valid permits
under S401 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1967 as amended.
Section 5. Storage Controls at Industrial and Commercial Sites
a. Every owner or operator of a commercial, agricultural, horticultural or industrial establishment,
including home businesses, storing toxic or hazardous materials in quantities totaling more than
10 gallons liquid volume or 10 pounds dry weight shall register with the Board of Health the
types of materials stored, quantities, location and method of storage. An inventory of such
materials shall be maintained on the premises and be reconciled with purchase, use, sales and
disposal records on a monthly basis, in order to detect any product loss.
Registration required by this subsection shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of
this bylaw, and annually thereafter. Maintenance and reconciliation of inventories shall begin
within the same 60-day period.
b. Wastes containing toxic or hazardous materials shall be held on the premises in product-tight
containers for removal by a licensed carrier and for disposal in accordance with the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, MGL, Chapter 21C, as amended.
c. The Board of Health may require that containers of toxic or hazardous materials be stored on an
impervious, chemical resistant surface compatible with the material being stored, and that the
storage area be enclosed with a permanent dike of impermeable construction.
d. This section does not apply to storage or activities permitted or licensed in accordance with
Administrative Policies and Procedures for storage of inflammable materials and explosives
(APP #22) as amended, and issued by the Concord Board of Selectmen on February 22, 1980.
[Note: APP #22 revised 6/19/80]
Section 6. Special Permits
Any owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or any person who desires to
engage in discharges within the Town other than those discharges permitted pursuant to Section 4 b.
(i) through 4 b. (v) hereof may petition the Board of Health in writing for permission to do so.
Within six months of the effective date of this bylaw, the Board of Health shall adopt regulations to
administer this bylaw, but nothing in this bylaw or in any such regulations shall be construed by
implication or otherwise to impose upon the Board of Health any obligation to permit any
discharges other than those specifically permitted by Sections 4 b. (i) through 4 b. (v) hereof.
Section 7. Filings Required
Every owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or any person within the Town
whose operations are subject to any of the following acts shall file with the board copies of all
permit applications and supporting data filed pursuant thereto as well as all permits obtained, notices
of approval, denial, revocation and citations for violations in respect thereof and shall provide the
board with such additional information as the board shall by rule from time to time require:
a. the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 42 U.S.C. S6901 et seq.
b. the Federal Clean Air Act 42 U.S.C. S1857 et seq.
c. the Federal Clean Water Act 33 U.S.C. S1251 et seq.
d. the Toxic Substance Control Act 15 U.S.C. S2601 et seq.
e. the Safe Drinking-Water Act 42 U.S.C. S300f et seq.
f. the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
g. the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, MGL, Chapter 21C as amended, and
other Massachusetts counterpart statutes to the federal acts listed in sub-paragraphs a. through f.
above.
h. the Massachusetts Clean Water Act, MGL, Chapter 21, §26 et seq.
Section 8. Report of Spills and Leaks
Every person having knowledge of a spill, leak or other loss of hazardous materials shall immediately
report the spill or loss of same to the Board of Health and Fire Department.
Section 9. Enforcement
a. The provisions of this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder shall be enforced by the Board
of Health. The agent or designated representative of the Board of Health may, according to law,
enter upon any premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
b. Upon request of the agent or designated representative of the Board of Health, the owner or
operator of any premises at which hazardous materials are used or stored shall furnish all
information required to monitor compliance with this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder
including a complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels and other hazardous materials used or
stored on the premises, their volumes and concentrations, a description of measures taken to
protect storage containers from vandalism, corrosion and spillage, and the means of disposal of
all toxic or hazardous wastes produced on the site. A sample and analysis of wastewater
disposed to on-site septic systems, drywells or sewage treatment systems may be required by the
agent or designated representative of the Board of Health.
c. A current (not more than 2 years old) written plan for dealing with potential spillage, leakage, or
loss of hazardous materials used or stored on one’s premises shall be filed with the Board of
Health.
d. All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of hazardous wastes shall be retained for
no less than 10 years, and shall be made available for review by the agent or designated
representative of the Board of Health upon request.
e. The Building Inspector of the Town of Concord shall condition issuance of building and
occupancy permits upon conformity with the requirements of this bylaw and regulations
adopted hereunder respecting any hazardous materials to be used in the course of such
construction or occupancy.
Section 10. Violation
a. Written notice of any violation of this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder shall be given by
the agent or designated representative of the Board of Health, specifying the nature of the
violation; any corrective measures that must be undertaken, including containment and cleanup
of discharged materials; any preventive measures required for avoiding future violations; and a
time for compliance. Requirements specified in such notice shall be reasonable in relation to the
public health hazard involved and the difficulty of compliance.
b. Any violation of this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine for each day of violation as specified in
Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40,
§21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the
1984 Town Meeting, as amended, and the Town of Concord may enforce the same remedy
available to the Commonwealth for any such similar violation.
Section 11. Severability
Each provision of this bylaw shall be construed as separate, to the end that if any part of it shall be
held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall continue in full force and effect.
Article 42, Town Meeting, April 1981
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
HANDICAPPED PARKING BYLAW
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer to stand or park within
parking spaces designated as reserved for vehicles issued handicapped or disabled veteran
number plates or for vehicles transporting handicapped persons and displaying special
parking identification issued through the Chief of Police or as reflected in M.G.L. Chapter
40, §21(23) as most recently amended, or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp
designated for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way.
Any person or body that has lawful control of any way, property or place as appears in
M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21(23a) shall provide handicapped parking according to the formula
contained therein. Further, such handicapped spaces shall be identified in accordance with
clause 23(b) of Chapter 40, §21.
The Chief of Police or his designee may issue temporary handicapped parking identification
(permit) to any person upon application with supporting medical affidavit signed by a
licensed physician designating the applicant as physically handicapped. Said temporary
permit shall be issued with an expiration date not to exceed sixty (60) days from date of issue
and shall be displayed from the interior rear view mirror of any vehicle parked in a
designated handicapped parking space. The unauthorized use of a temporary permit shall be
punishable by a fine of $50.00 with each incident constituting a separate offense.
The penalty for violations of this bylaw shall be as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21(24)
and as from time to time amended and violations enforced through the Town of Concord
Traffic Rules and Regulations for the purpose of ticketing.
If any unauthorized vehicle is found in violation of the provisions of the bylaw and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such
vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
Article 41, Town Meeting, April 1990
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
HARRINGTON HOUSE REVOLVING FUND BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule Amendment,
adopt the following bylaw regarding a revolving fund for the Harrington House and the
grounds surrounding the house (hereinafter called the Harrington House) as defined in the lease
dated October 1, 1975, between the Historical Commission and the Natural Resources Commission.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury, an individual revolving fund (hereinafter
called the “Harrington House Fund”). All receipts designated as gifts and grants for the Harrington
House and such monies as from time to time may be appropriated by the Town for the upkeep
of the Harrington House will be put in this fund and kept separate from any other monies or
funds from the Town and shall be expended only for those purposes outlined in Section 2.
Section 2.
The money in the “Harrington House Fund” will be used for upkeep, repairs, restoration, maintenance
and improvement of the Harrington House, and for such capital expenditures as may be necessary
to keep Harrington House in good order.
Section 3.
The expenditure of money from the “Harrington House Fund” will be managed by the Concord
Historical Commission and will require its prior approval.
Section 4.
Nothing in the bylaw shall prevent the Town of Concord from appropriating funds for repairs, improvements
and restoration of the Harrington House. The Historical Commission is expressly allowed
to accept grants or gifts for the Harrington House.
Section 5.
Nothing in this bylaw shall prevent the Town from including the Harrington House under its blanket
insurance policy for town buildings.
Section 6.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the
Town present and voting thereon at the annual Town Meeting or any special Town Meeting called
for that purpose. Any Harrington House receipts of the Town for the year in which this bylaw is
accepted will be retained by the Historical Commission and will constitute the working capital to
establish the “Harrington House Fund.”
Section 7.
This bylaw supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict with it.
Article 39, Town Meeting, May 1977
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
HORSES ON SIDEWALKS BYLAW
Whoever rides or drives a horse along a sidewalk shall be punished by a fine as specified in
Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter
40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article
47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 22, Town Meeting, March 1924
Article 22, Town Meeting, March 1973
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 24, 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
HOUSE NUMBERING BYLAW
VOTED: To adopt a House Numbering Bylaw in response to E-911 as follows:
OBJECTIVE:
To enforce the Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 148, §59, which requires numbers on
all buildings for the purpose of the address of such buildings to be entered into an electronic
database for use in the Enhanced 911 Service as defined in Chapter 6A, §18A.
REQUIREMENTS:
The numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height, contrasting in color. Example:
Dark letters with light fielding.
The numbers shall be affixed on the front of buildings so as to be seen from the street. If
the building is more than fifty feet from the street, numbers shall be placed at the entrance
to the driveway at the street. If the driveway has more than one building on it, numbers
shall be placed at each turnoff and at forks in the road indicating which direction to take.
Numbers to be mounted on steel or wood posts 4” x 4”, and shall be a minimum of 44
inches from the ground. If mounted on mailboxes, the numbers shall be on both sides of
the mailbox and unobstructed by the mailbox flag. The mailbox shall meet the U.S. Postal
height regulation of 44 inches from the ground. If grouped or communal mailboxes are
used, a sign shall be used listing all house numbers. Multiple addresses at one location
(apartments, condominiums, residential compounds, and business), the sub-address
designation shall be after the street name. Example: Building 25, Unit 1.
EFFECTIVE DATE:
All existing structures shall comply with the requirements of this bylaw no later than July 1,
1996.
ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Inspector will enforce the posting of identification numbers on dwellings,
apartment buildings, condominiums and business establishments.
The Building Inspector, upon a written complaint from any resident of the Town, prior to
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any new or renovated building or structure, or
upon his own initiative, shall enforce the requirements of this Bylaw. Any existing
numbering system for any building or structure in existence prior to the enactment of this
Bylaw shall be deemed to comply with the requirement herein; unless, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, the degree of noncompliance with specific requirements of this Bylaw
shall constitute a danger to public safety, whereupon, the Building Inspector shall issue
written notification to the property owner requiring compliance with such provisions.
This Bylaw shall be enforced through the non-criminal disposition act, a warning or fine as
specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under
M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations
adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended. A period of 14 days for
compliance to be made from the time notice is issued before any fines are issued.
APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the enforcement of this Bylaw, or by the refusal of the Building
Inspector to enforce any provision of this Bylaw, may file an appeal with the Zoning Board
of Appeals within 30 calendar days of the date of such enforcement action or refusal. All
appeals shall be handled in a manner consistent with the standard rules of the Board of
Appeals.
Article 46, Annual Town Meeting, April 1995
Article 64, Annual Town Meeting, April 2006
LAND USE and MANAGEMENT PLAN
for the
Hugh Cargill Farm
Walden Street and Thoreau Street
Assessors' Map H10; Parcels 0217, 0220, 0221, 0222
28+/- acres
Goals and objectives
The goals of this Management Plan are to provide guidance for the management of the
remaining land of the Hugh Cargill Farm for its traditional uses, and recommend an
integrated plan for management of previously developed parcels (excluding residentially
developed areas) together with the remaining Hugh Cargill Farm. Traditional uses
include: Drinking water protection and production, agriculture, benefit of the poor in
Concord, wildlife protection, maintenance of a scenic gateway into Concord, and the
general enjoyment of Concord’s citizens and school children.
Open landscapes are declining regionally and in Concord, and this Plan is intended to
ensure that the Hugh Cargill Farm land remain open by regular mowing or agricultural
haying. The Cargill land provides a rural landscape on an important gateway into town,
as well as a connection with the Hapgood Wright Town Forest. Invasive plant species
should be selectively removed over time in order to restore the biodiversity of this site.
These activities will be conducted in a way that maximizes the wildlife habitat provided
by grasslands for butterflies, small mammals, and grassland nesting birds. Informal
playing fields are also an accepted use under this plan. No activity may be conducted that
will adversely impact the water quality of the Hugh Cargill well.
Although some of the original land has been carved off for other uses (and acquisition
funds placed in the trust to be disbursed to needy residents of Concord), this Plan seeks to
integrate management of all lands, regardless of ownership, within the original bounds to
be managed for the goals and objectives stated above. This will require coordination with
the School Department and Concord Water Division, and this Plan shall serve as a tool to
foster such collaboration, with recognition that it shall not place new constraints on the
established uses or existing controls afforded each independent authority.
No changes in permitted uses or hardscape improvements will be made to this Site
without public discussion and reference to the goals listed above. This report recognizes
that the intent of public discussion related to hardscape and permitted uses does not
include CPW Water Division property and water supply which remains under the
jurisdiction of Concord Public Works and the Public Works Commission.
In order to continue to meet the original intent of the benefactor of this land, all net
income generated on Hugh Cargill land (Parcels 0217 and 0222) will be deposited into
the Hugh Cargill Trust.
Page 1
History and Site Description
Hugh Cargill was a British soldier who became an American and citizen of Concord. In
1799 he bequeathed the “Stratton Farm” to the Town, which was “to be improved as a
poor-house, and the land to be improved by and for the benefit of the poor, and to be
under the special direction of the town of Concord, for the time being, for the purpose
aforesaid forever.” The Town ran the property as the “Poor Farm” until the Second
World War, a period of about 140 years. In the late 1940’s, the Town petitioned the
Attorney General for release of portions of the farm from the Trust for Alcott School, the
police and fire station, and in 1958 the Hugh Cargill Well. Land was released from the
Trust for limited purposes and not for general purposes. The Alcott piece (27 acres) was
released from the Trust for “School Purposes”, and the Concord Water Division parcel
(8.7 acres) released for “development and operation of a subsurface water supply”.
Today, two parcels still remain in the Trust, the community garden piece (4.3 acres) and
one along Thoreau Street, about 3.4 acres in size.
The north end of the original Stratton Farm is the location of the police and fire stations
and a private residence; these are not considered as part of the Site. Residential
development to the south is also not considered part of the Site. The remaining Cargill
land is held by the Town in four parcels (Parcels 0217, 0220, 0221, 0222). The Site
consists of the undeveloped portions of these four parcels, as well as undeveloped
portions of the Alcott Campus and Hugh Cargill Well Protection Area, about 28.5 acres
of fields, wetlands and woods.
Ownership, Divisional Responsibility, and Coordination
The entire property is owned by the Town of Concord. Three divisions of the Town have
controlled the land since the 1950’s. This Plan recommends that the Natural Resources
Division coordinate administration of this Plan, subject to approval from the School
Department and the Water Division on their respective lands. The Hugh Cargill
Community Garden (Parcel 0222) and the Thoreau Street Parcel (Parcel 0217) remain in
the Trust and under the control of the Selectmen. The School Committee and Concord
Public Works administer the Alcott land (Parcel 0221) and the Hugh Cargill Well field
(Parcel 0220) respectively, and this plan will be coordinated through their boards.
Figure A denotes ownership of each parcel.
In addition to the principle uses noted above, the Site offers many opportunities for
outdoor education and should be used to cultivate the next generation of land stewards
from the Alcott School and the Concord Carlisle Regional High School. To the extent
possible, land use decisions will be responsive to the intent of the original benefactor,
Hugh Cargill, whose primary concern was for the poor of Concord.
Land Use Regulatory Constraints
Much of the Cargill farm lies within three Zoning overlay districts: Floodplain, Wetlands
and Groundwater Conservancy, and work in these areas is subject to approval from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Work in the 100-year floodplain, wetlands, and 100-foot
buffer zone to wetlands is subject to approval of the Natural Resources Commission
(MGL 310 CMR 10.00). Work in areas contributing to the Hugh Cargill Well is subject
Page 2
to approval from the Public Works Commission, and potentially the Department of
Environmental Protection. These reflect real physical limitations related to very shallow
groundwater (0-5 feet) found on much of the site.
Hugh Cargill Well
In 2001, the Town gained approval from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection (MA DEP) to reactivate this drinking water supply based on the successfully
reconfiguration of the withdrawal system and its ability to provide adequate land-use
protection around the resulting wellheads. This protection area includes the land owned
by the Concord Water Division plus an additional protection overlay delineated as the
“Hugh Cargill Well Protection Area”. This protection area was approved under Article
57 of the 2001 annual Town Meeting which includes a portion of Town Forest east of
Walden Street and a portion of land owned by the School and the Trust to the west. “Use
Restrictions” within these drinking water protection areas are outlined within the
MGL. 310 CMR 22.00. These areas are shown on a recorded plan, referred to in a
recorded “Conservation Restriction” and their establishment was part of Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) approval of the new well field.
Management Overlays
Different sections of the Cargill land have had different historical uses. Originally the
land was entirely wooded, a swampy or at least moist forest. It was cleared and drained
for farming, probably in its entirety, beginning in the 1700’s through the mid-1800’s.
There has been partial reversion to forest in the wettest portions of the property. An area
along Thoreau Street, more recently abandoned, supports a shrub and herbaceous
community. Figure B denotes Management Overlays recommended under this Plan.
Management Overlays in this Plan are based on current, historical and potential use, and
these uses extend beyond the property lines of the divisional ownerships.
Alcott Campus
This 10.7-acre area includes the developed portion of the Alcott parcel including the
buildings, parking lots, existing ball fields, and landscaped lawns.
The Alcott Campus is managed according to the needs and direction of the School
Committee. This Plan recommends that the School Committee address the appearance of
the Walden Street side of the new school. Lighting should be in conformance with Town
policy for shielded, non-glare lighting; this is an otherwise dark part of Town. While the
lighting was designed with the Town standard in mind, this Plan recommends that the
School Committee investigate the possibility of reducing the impact of lighting on the
Walden Street side.
Landscaping, with an eye toward eventual screening, would soften the fully visible back
end of the building. Though small trees are considerably more cost effective, and may
have better survivability than larger plantings, this Plan recognizes that smaller trees will
take many years to mature and provide the desired screening. The Town Tree Warden
should be consulted in preparing a planting plan.
Page 3
Community Gardens
The Hugh Cargill Community Gardens occupy the northernmost field, mostly on Trust
land.
Grassland
This includes the Hugh Cargill Well Protection Area and adjoining portions of Trust and
School land, a total of 19.1 acres. This Plan contemplates that a low impact playing field
may be sited in the Grassland Overlay primarily on School land outside the Alcott
Campus.
Hugh Cargill Well Protection Area
This area has been designated by the Concord Water Division and is shown on a recorded
plan, approved by the State. The boundaries of this 9.3-acre area include a large portion
of the Water Division land as well as small portions of Trust and School land. It lies
entirely within the Grassland Overlay.
Woodland
There are two wooded areas; 5.5 acres of School property along Laurel and Thoreau
Streets and 3.9 acres of School and Trust land at the north end of the Alcott Campus, for
a total 9.4 acres.
Uses:
Permissible uses may extend across ownership boundaries. This Plan recognizes that any
activity on School Department or Water Division land will need approval before
implementation, and may require approval from other local boards and committees such
as the Natural Resources Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals.
Protection of water quality within the Hugh Cargill Well Protection Area is of the highest
priority. All permitted uses must conform to guidelines established by the Concord Water
Division and MGL 310 CMR 22.00 to ensure the highest quality groundwater is
maintained. At a minimum, no use of pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers within the Well
Protection Area is permitted without approval of the Concord Water Division. Uses under
this Plan are identified below.
Community Gardens
The community gardens portion of the Trust land is intended to remain in community use
under this Plan. This area is plowed by Town personnel in the spring, and administration
is provided by the Division of Natural Resources. An annual contribution should be paid
into the Hugh Cargill Fund. New Alcott gardens could be sited on School or Water
Division land.
Haying
Under this Plan, haying is defined as an activity where fields are cut for production. Early
cutting conducted more than once annually generally is preferred to maximize the quality
of hay production, and the profit realized from the investment.
Page 4
However, the major threat to survival of grassland birds in hayed or mowed fields is early
cutting before the young have fledged. If the Grassland supports grassland nesting birds
at some point in the future, mowing should wait until after the breeding season (July 20).
The mower height should be at least 6 inches off the ground so that small mammal
habitat is retained after mowing. If no grassland birds are present, haying may be
conducted earlier in the season. Haying should be done in a series of parallel lines from
the inside out, rather than conventional circular cutting, to avoid ‘herding’ small
mammals to the center of the field where they may be killed by the mower (see diagram).
Vegetated buffers (at least 25 feet) should be maintained around both sides of the
agricultural ditch. Trees and shrubs should be removed to favor native grasses and forbs.
Long sight lines are critical for attracting ground nesting birds, and desirable for
landscape preservation.
Haying will be conducted by lease to a local farmer, overseen by the Natural Resources
Division. In consultation with a farmer lessee, a choice may be made to manage a portion
of the Grassland Overlay for production of good quality hay, with earlier mowing, or for
other agricultural use like small fruits, but generally the intention is to protect wildlife
with cutting only late in the season. Agricultural rents will be deposited into the Hugh
Cargill Trust.
Mowing
Under this Plan, mowing is defined as an activity conducted to maintain land in its open
state, and to control woody invasives. Because there is no production associated with
mowing (compared to haying), the need to cut early and often is eliminated.
Timing and methodology of cutting, and maintenance of vegetated buffers, should follow
the recommendations for Haying.
Page 5
Mowing should be conducted by Concord Public Works, or by lease to a farmer under
direction of the Division of Natural Resources,. A mowing schedule will be developed by
the Natural Resources Division, with support from the Concord Water Division. The
mowing schedule will be reviewed and approved by the Concord Water Division on land
owned by the Concord Water Division; the School Committee will review and approve
the mowing schedule on land owned by the School Department. Mowing may be
conducted on a rotating schedule to provide flowers for butterflies throughout the
growing season, as well as adequate time for larvae and pupae to develop. If rotational
mowing is implemented, care will be taken to ensure that woody species are kept in
check.
Low Impact Playing Fields
There may be locations within and adjacent to the Alcott Campus for low impact playing
fields. This management plan recognizes that informal playing fields may be developed
on the Alcott campus without reference to this plan, such as the former Alcott school
parking lot.
If a playing field is constructed on the Walden Street side of the Alcott Campus, this Plan
recommends that the field be created without extensive grading or permanent structures.
The field should be designed to revert to other uses identified in the Plan if no longer
needed as a playing field. This field may be mowed more frequently to maintain turf;
striped; and irrigated if necessary. No permanent irrigation structures should be installed;
irrigation structures should be temporary and moveable. Playing fields that extend into
the Grassland Overlay should be laid so that the minimum amount of grading is required.
Invasive Species Management
Portions of the site are becoming infested with invasive species, including glossy
buckthorn, multiflora rose, purple loosetrife and Asiatic bittersweet. Invasive species
threaten biological diversity and minimize wildlife habitat value and should be
controlled. Regular mowing to the edge of fields may control some of these species.
Other control methods will be species-specific and will be determined using best
available literature and consultation with the New England Wildflower Society.
Passive Recreational Trails
Recreational trails could be designed and built on the property if they are unpaved and do
not interfere with other uses. Boardwalks are considered an acceptable component of
recreational trails, provided they are not pressure-treated in areas subject to Natural
Resources Commission jurisdiction. Possible trail locations would be between the High
School and Alcott School, and between Alcott School and Walden Street, with potential
offsite connections to the Town Forest, and other town lands.
Hugh Cargill Farm Task Force
This plan was developed by the Hugh Cargill Farm Task Force, a committee that held
several meetings in 2007 and 2008. The Task Force was represented by a diverse
assemblage of interests for the management of this land. We recognize that the needs of
Page 6
this Management Plan may change over time, and recommend that if future changes are
contemplated the opinions of these Committees and Boards be sought.
The Task Force membership was as follows:
One member of the Board of Selectmen (Virginia McIntyre)
One member of the Planning Board (Jeff Adams)
One member or designee of the School Committee (Fabian Fondriest)
One member or designee of the Public Works Commission (Paul Mahoney)
One representative from a youth sports organization (Pete Castrichini)
One member or designee of the Natural Resources Commission (Delia Kaye)
One member or designee of the Agriculture Committee (John Bemis)
One member representing community gardening interests (Jim Catterton)
One member or designee of the Historical Commission (Nancy Butman)
Alan Cathcart (Concord Water Superintendent) and Rebecca Purcell (co-coordinator of
the Hugh Cargill community garden) attended many meetings and provided valuable
insight to the Plan development.
Page 7
Appendix A - Management Recommendations
Beginning in Spring 2008:
Resolve matter of excess fill left in location of temporary access road and turn around by
ensuring that the original grades are reestablished.
Recommend that the School Committee consider landscaping improvements at Walden
Street side of Alcott to soften the view of the school from Walden Street.
If a low impact playing field is proposed, CPW, School Department, and DNR will work
with the proponent to site this field.
Volunteers remove invasive exotics along Thoreau Street, elsewhere as determined by
Natural Resources Division. Invasives plants will be disposed of properly, which may
include burning, chipping, or removal to the Concord recycling facility.
The Trails Committee will investigate the feasibility of locating a trail, to foster
connections between the High School and the Town Forest and other Town lands.
CPW defines the areas which will be hand mown (well field) and which areas can be
tractor mown with a goal of creating a natural and consistent landscape, in consultation
with the School Committee. CPW defines how much vegetation to remain along ditch
that lies to the north of the well field, in consultation with the Division of Natural
Resources.
Natural Resources Division defines the areas which will be managed for grass by haying,
in consultation with the Concord Water Division and the School Committee.
Once the area to be leased is determined, the Town will publicly bid the land to a local
farmer, with a goal of awarding bid within one month.
Farming plan should include:
o mowing and brush hogging (aesthetics, prior to lease being awarded, subject to
presence of ground nesting birds);
o Consideration of rotating fields to provide wildlife habitat in certain areas through
late summer and fall;
o Late summer/early fall plowing, cover crop for winter;
o harrowing and seeding for permanent grass the following spring;
o No herbicides or pesticides. Fertilizer and lime only with permission of CPW and
DNR;
o Possible limitation on date of first cutting as determined by DNR; if ground
nesting birds are present, first cut delayed until July 20. If not present, hay cut
at farmers’ discretion;
Page 8
Page 9
o Lease will provide that if an area is to be used for a low impact playing field, this
use will have precedence and that area will not be used for hay production until
playing field is no longer used.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
HUNTING BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town repeal the bylaw relating to hunting in the Town of Concord
adopted at the Annual Town Meeting on March 3, 1952 as approved by the Attorney
General, and substitute therefor the following bylaw.
Section 1.
No person shall fire or discharge any firearm within the limits of any park,
playground or other public property or within 500 feet of the boundaries of that
portion of the Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge located within the Town of
Concord, or within 500 feet of the pedestrian pathways used by the public as access
to and from the Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge except with the written
consent of the Board of Selectmen, or hunt or fire or discharge any firearm on any
private property except with the written consent of the owner or legal occupant
thereof, said written permission to be presented on demand.
Section 2.
This bylaw shall not apply to the lawful defense of life or property, nor to any law
enforcement officer acting in the discharge of his duties.
Section 3.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine
for each offense as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement
of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal
Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as
amended.
Article 29, Town Meeting, March 1953
(replaced bylaw adopted under Article 41, Town Meeting, March 1952)
Article 30, Town Meeting, March 1972
Article 25, Town Meeting, March 1973
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING BYLAW
VOTED: that the bylaw known as the “Reservation of Lots” bylaw enacted under Article 26 of
the 1987 Annual Town Meeting which required the reservation of land in every new standard subdivision
for the purchase by the Town for housing purposes be repealed in its entirety, and that the
following be substituted in its place.
Section 1. Purpose
To provide, as a matter of public policy and within the subdivision process, a means to address the
affordable housing needs of the Town and to encourage housing for persons of all income levels in
the Town of Concord, particularly, and to the extent permitted by law, for Town employees, residents
of the Town, and their children. This bylaw is specifically intended to carry out one of the
statutory objectives set forth in §2A, Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975 as adopted by the Town of
Concord in §1.2 of the Zoning Bylaw.
Section 2. Required Reservation of Land
In all new standard residential subdivisions, the Planning Board shall require as a condition of approval
that a minimum amount of land be reserved by the developer for purchase by the Town or
its designee for housing purposes, except as provided in §4. The following standards shall apply.
1. Minimum Tract Size
The requirement for reservation of land shall apply to all tracts containing at least five (5) times
the area required for a single-family house lot in the underlying zoning district.
2. Minimum Area to Be Reserved
At least ten (10) percent of the tract shall be reserved for housing purposes.
3. Location of Lots
The Planning Board shall designate on the plan the specific portion of the tract to be reserved.
Such land may be in one or more locations within the subdivision as the board may determine.
4. Period of Reservation
The land shall be reserved for a period of three years from the date of Planning Board endorsement
of the definitive subdivision plan.
If the Town or its designee fails to purchase the reserved land within the reservation period, the
land will be released automatically from reserve status and the developer shall be allowed to develop
the land and sell the lots.
5. Just Compensation
The Town or its designee shall pay just compensation for that portion of the reserved land
which the Town or its designee elects to purchase.
6. Maximum Number of Units on Reserved Land
No more than one (1) housing unit shall be built for every 10,000 square feet of land purchased
or acquired by the Town or its designee under this bylaw.
7. Applicability
The reservation shall be effective for the owner, developer, and any successors in interest,
whether through purchase, default, bankruptcy, or other acquisition.
Section 3. Exemptions
1. The requirement established herein for reservation of land shall not apply to residential compound
subdivisions, residential cluster subdivisions, or planned residential development subdivisions.
2. The requirement for reservation of land shall not apply to a subdivision tract created from a larger
tract which was subject to reservation of land for housing purposes after April 1987.
3. Where the reservation of at least ten (10) percent of the area of the subdivision tract results in
reducing the number of lots which could otherwise be obtained by more than twenty (20) percent,
in which case the requirement for reservation of land shall not apply.
4. If the Planning Board determines that the reservation of at least ten (10) percent of the tract results
in a subdivision layout which is deleterious to the Town, the board may reserve a lesser
amount of land.
Section 4. Options in Lieu of Reservation
Notwithstanding provisions in §§2 and 3 above, the Planning Board may, at its discretion, and at any
time during the reservation period, release a developer from the requirements for the reservation of
land provided that the Selectmen have agreed to accept, at no cost to the Town, for affordable housing
purposes adequate alternative contributions of land, housing or money to the Town or its designee.
In releasing the developer from the reservation requirement, the Planning Board shall find that the
alternative proposal adequately addresses the purposes of the bylaw while being sufficiently advantageous
to the Town to warrant departure from the reservation requirement.
Section 5. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement and administer this bylaw.
Article 61, Town Meeting, April 1992
(replaced previous “Reservation of Land Bylaw” adopted under Article 26 of the 1987 Annual Town Meeting)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
INSPECTOR OF GAS PIPING AND GAS APPLIANCES BYLAW
Section 1.
The Town Manager shall, upon the approval of this bylaw and annually in April thereafter,
appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in buildings, hereafter referred to as
the “inspector,” who shall be subject to removal by the Town Manager. The inspector shall
hold a master gas fitters license or a journeyman gas fitters license, or shall be a master
plumber or a journeyman plumber. The Town Manager shall annually appoint one or more
Deputy Inspectors of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances who shall be a master plumber or a
journeyman plumber, and who shall have the authority to act under this bylaw for and on
behalf of the inspector or in his place, in the event of the inspector having any interest,
professionally or otherwise, in any project coming within the scope of this bylaw, or during
the absence or disability of the inspector. The term “inspector” wherever appearing herein
shall, where the context so admits, be deemed to include a deputy inspector when properly
acting for or in the place of the inspector as herein provided.
Section 2.
The inspector shall see that the provisions of the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, relating to gas piping and gas appliances in buildings are strictly observed and
to that end with the approval of the Town Manager, shall have the authority to institute any
proceedings for the purpose of enforcing or preventing violations of the provisions thereof.
Section 3.
The compensation of the inspector shall be established by the Personnel Board.
Section 4.
The inspector shall keep a record of the business of his office, shall render to the Town
Manager a written report monthly and shall file with the Town Manager an annual report on
or before January tenth of each year.
Section 5.
The inspector shall have the right at reasonable times, in the performance of his duties, to
enter, examine, and inspect any premises, building or other structure within the town.
Article 17, Town Meeting, May 1964
See also MGL, Chapter 143, §3O
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
INSURANCE RESERVE FUND BYLAW
Voted: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article 89 of the
Amendments of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called
the Home Rule Amendment, adopt the following bylaw establishing an Insurance Reserve
Fund in the Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving
fund, hereinafter called the “Insurance Reserve Fund.” The Insurance Reserve Fund shall
be kept separate from any other monies or funds of the Town and shall be expended only
for the purposes stated below.
Section 2.
The Insurance Reserve Fund may be used by the Town Manager to pay the cost for
insurance policies and employee insurance benefits paid for by the Town and also to pay the
Town’s retained portion of an insured loss.
Section 3.
The fund shall be credited with such sums as may be appropriated to it by a Town Meeting,
and shall also be credited with premium refunds or experience credits received by the Town.
Funds received by the Town in payment of an insured loss will be credited to the general
funds of the Town.
Section 4.
The Town Accountant is authorized to transfer to the fund as of June 30th in any year
including fiscal year 1987 the unexpended balance of any appropriation for insurance
purposes.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of
the Town present and voting thereon at an annual or a special Town Meeting called for the
purpose.
Article 22, Town Meeting, April 1987
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES ON WHITE POND
BYLAW
The operation and use of any internal combustion engine, including a snow vehicle or
recreational vehicle, in or upon that portion of White Pond situated in the Town of Concord
is prohibited. Each violation shall make a person liable to a penalty as specified in Appendix
A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D
and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the
1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 57, Town Meeting, March 1966
Article 43, Town Meeting, March 1972
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
JUNK DEALER BYLAW
No person shall deal in junk or old metals in said Town without first obtaining a license so
to do from the Selectmen, which license shall be for a definite time and shall be revocable by
the Selectmen within that time.
Article 16, Town Meeting, April 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
LAND FUND BYLAW
Section 1.
The Town of Concord, acting under Article 89 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts
Constitution (the “Home Rule Amendment”), hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an
individual fund, hereinafter called the “Land Fund”.
Section 2.
The purposes of the Land Fund are:
a. to promote the common interest and welfare of the citizens by: protecting
environmentally sensitive or critical land, preserving historic sites, assuring the
availability of affordable housing, providing land for recreation, and for other future
anticipated municipal needs;
b. to stabilize the impact of land purchases on Concord taxpayers;
c. to respond in a timely manner to available parcels of real estate;
d. to provide a means for the Town to participate in planning for the use of a specific
parcel of real estate through its acquisition, preparation of a planned use strategy, and
Town Meeting decision on whether all or part of the land shall be used for a specified
municipal purpose, including affordable housing, or sold for private development.
Section 3.
After review by appropriate Town committees and boards and after a public hearing, the
Town Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, is authorized to expend
from the fund for the purposes of:
a. Acquiring options for the purchase of
i. conservation restrictions,
ii. agricultural preservation rights, or
iii. real estate, or as leasehold interest in real estate, for general municipal purposes,
including affordable housing, and
b. Appraisal, engineering, planning, and legal services in connection with the above-stated
purposes.
Section 4.
At any annual or special Town Meeting, the Meeting may appropriate funds to be credited to
the Land Fund.
Section 5.
At any annual or special Town Meeting, the meeting may appropriate and/or transfer funds
from the Land Fund, for the purpose of acquiring conservation restrictions, agricultural
preservation rights, or real estate for any municipal purposes, including affordable housing.
Section 6.
The Treasurer shall credit the accumulated interest income on any unused balance in the
fund to the fund. Said interest income may be expended along with the balance in the fund
for the purposes of the fund without further appropriation.
Section 7.
Gifts of monies by private parties for the same purposes as the fund, or for any specific real
estate acquisition project, may be received by the Town and credited to the fund. Gifts of
monies may be expended by the Town Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of
Selectmen, for the purposes of the gift, without further authorization by Town Meeting.
Section 8.
The Town Accountant shall annually include in the Town Report a report on the receipts
and expenditures of the fund.
Article 12, Town Meeting, April 1986
Article 33, Town Meeting, April 1994 (deleted & replaced 1986 version)
Tel: (978) 318-3080 / Fax: (978) 318-3093 / Email: townclerk@concordma.gov
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
LEASING OF LAND BYLAW
LEASING OF LAND BY SELECT BOARD AND TOWN MANAGER
A. The Town Manager is authorized to solicit, award and enter into lease or license
agreements for the use of land owned by the Town for a period of up to ten (10)
years, inclusive of any renewal, extension or option provision, subject to
approval by the Select Board, but without the necessity for further authorization
by Town Meeting.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the Town’s, the Town Manager’s, or
the Select Board’s authority to solicit, award and enter into such a lease or license
agreement for a longer term pursuant to any applicable law, including, without
limitation: (1) G.L. c. 40, § 3, authorizing the Select Board to enter into leases for
the use of municipal buildings for a period of up to thirty (30) years; (2) Chapter
331 of the Acts of 1981 permitting Town Meeting to authorize leases of public
buildings and lands for a period of up to forty (40) years; and (3) any action by
Town Meeting authorizing the Town Manager or the Select Board to enter into a
specific lease or license, or category of leases or licenses.
Article 12, Town Meeting, April 2017
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
LICENSE & PERMIT DENIAL, REVOCATION OR
SUSPENSION FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAXES OR
CHARGES BYLAW
Voted: To accept the provisions of §57 of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General
Laws, and adopts a Bylaw to establish a procedure and authorization for denying, revoking,
or suspending local licenses or permits for failure to pay municipal taxes or charges as
follows:
The appropriate licensing and permit-granting authorities of the Town may deny any
application for, or revoke or suspend any local license or permit, including renewals and
transfers issued by the Board of Selectmen, or any Town officer, committee or board for any
person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or any other municipal charges. The procedure for
denying application for, revoking or suspending such local license or permit shall be as set
forth in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, §57, as amended. The Collector of Taxes
shall charge a fee determined annually for certifying that the person, corporation or business
enterprise in question is in good standing with respect to all local taxes, fees assessments,
betterments, or other municipal charges.
Article 37, Town Meeting, April 1997
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
MOTOR BOAT BYLAW
1. No motor boat shall be operated upon any portion of the Concord River or its tributaries, or
of any inland lake, other than Walden Pond, lying within the town, in a manner which
endangers the safety of the public or is detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood or to the
value of property thereon.
2. It shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this bylaw if such boat is operated by a
motor not having an underwater exhaust, or in a noisy or obnoxious manner, or at any
unreasonable rate of speed, or without slowing down and exercising due caution while
approaching and passing persons bathing or any other water craft, or any speed in excess of
“no wake” speed.
3. Any person violating any provision of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine for each offense as
specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under
M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted
under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
4. The Town may join with any other town, through which said Concord River or any of its
tributaries flows, in the enforcement of this bylaw or a similar bylaw adopted by such other
town, in so far as such bylaws related to said river or its tributaries, and may appropriate
money for the enforcement in whole or in part of any and all of such bylaws.
Article 62, Town Meeting, March 1962
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
Article 44, Town Meeting, April 2007
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
NO NEW CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY POLES AND
OVERHEAD WIRES BYLAW
Section 1. No utility shall install or construct, except by way of direct one for one replacement or
upgrading of existing facilities, any poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures
upon, along or across any public or private way within the parts of the Town listed in Section 2.
Any poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures installed or constructed in
violation of this bylaw shall be immediately removed by the utility responsible therefor.
Section 2. This bylaw applies to the following parts of the Town:
(a) Any new public or private way approved by the Planning Board.
(b) Any way in which the wires and utility facilities are underground as of the effective date of this
bylaw.
(c) Any way in which the wires and facilities of any utility have been placed underground since the
passage of this bylaw.
(d) Any way in which an underground conduit and manhole system or its functional equivalent
has been or is being installed and is not yet fully utilized, or for which active plans have been or
are being made for such conduit and manhole system.
Section 3. Any person who installs or constructs any poles and overhead wires and associated
overhead structures which are in violation of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Section 4. Any person who fails to remove immediately any poles and overhead wires and
associated overhead structures which are in violation of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for
each consecutive fifteen-day period during which the failure continues.
Section 5. This bylaw implements M.G.L. Chapter 166, Section 22C, and shall be construed in a
manner consistent with the definitions in Section 22A of Chapter 166.
Article 28, Annual Town Meeting, April 1987
(became effective on January 1, 1989, in accordance with the provisions of MGL, Ch. 166, §22N)
Amended by Article 31, Annual Town Meeting, April 23, 2001
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
BYLAW PROVIDING FOR NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION OF
VIOLATIONS OF TOWN BYLAWS
Section 1. Scope and Authority
This bylaw provides for a non-criminal disposition of a violation of any Town bylaw or any
rule or regulation of any Town officer, board, or department, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty. This bylaw is enacted in accordance with MGL Chapter 40,
§21D (herein called “§21D”).
Section 2. Enforcing Person
“Enforcing person” as used in this bylaw shall mean any police officer, regular or special, of
the Town of Concord with respect to any offense; the Building Inspector and any such other
official as the Town Manager may from time to time designate, each with respect to
violations of bylaws and rules and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. If more
than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing
person with respect thereto.
Section 3. Violation
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation may, as
an alternative to instituting criminal proceedings, give the offender a written notice to appear
before the Clerk of the Concord District Court for a non-criminal disposition of the
violation, in accordance with §21D. The provisions of §21D are incorporated by reference
herein.
Section 4. Proceedings
Proceedings pursuant to this bylaw and §21D shall not be deemed to be criminal
proceedings.
Article 47, Town Meeting, April 1984
TOWN OF CONCORD
NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION BYLAW
APPENDIX A
BYLAW FINE SCHEDULE FINE ALLOWED
ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY
Alcoholic Beverages Bylaw 1st and each subsequent
offense
$100.00 Police Officers
Animal Bylaws 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
$25.00
$25.00
$50.00
Police Officers
Construction Noise Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$100.00
$200.00
Police Officers
Demolition Delay Bylaw 1st and each subsequent
offense
$300.00 Building Commissioner
Dog Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each
subsequent offense
$25.00
$50.00
$100.00
Dog Officer and Police
Officers
Groundwater Protection
Bylaw
Each day of violation $200.00 Board of Health
Horses on Sidewalks Bylaw
1st offense
2nd & each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
Police Officers
House Numbering Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$100.00
Building Inspector
Hunting Bylaw 1st and each subsequent
offense
$50.00 Police Officers
Internal Combustion
Engines on White Pond
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$100.00
$200.00
Police Officers
Motor Boat Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$100.00
Police Officers
Outdoor Fires and
Camping Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$100.00
Police Officers
Peeping Bylaw 1st and each subsequent
offense
$100.00 Police Officers
BYLAW FINE SCHEDULE FINE ALLOWED
ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY
Permit Parking Bylaw 1st and each subsequent
offense
$50.00 Police Officers
Private Digging of Roads
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd and each subsequent
offense
$50.00
$100.00
Town Engineer or his/her
designee
Regulation of Vehicles
Bylaw
1st and each subsequent
offense
$50.00 Police Officers
Sale of Tobacco to Minors
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense within 24-mo
period
$100.00
$200.00 + 7-day
suspension
$300.00 + 30-day
suspension
Public Health Director or
his/her designee
Sign Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense, 90 days after
notice
3rd and each subsequent
offense
$25.00
$25.00
$50.00
Building Commissioner
Smoke Free Workplace
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd offense
4th offense
Each subsequent offense
$25.00
$50.00
$100.00
$200.00
$300.00
Board of Health
Smoking in Public Places
Bylaw
1st and each subsequent
offense
$25.00 Police Officers
Snow and Ice Disposal
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
Each subsequent offense
Warning
$100.00
$200.00
Police Officers
Snow and Recreational
Vehicles Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$100.00
Police Officers
Soliciting Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$200.00
Police Officers
Underground Fuel Storage
Systems Bylaw
1st and each subsequent
offense
$100.00 Fire Chief
Trash Pickup Bylaw
1st offense
2nd & each subsequent
offense
Warning
$25.00
Public Works Director
and/or his/her Designee
BYLAW FINE SCHEDULE FINE ALLOWED
ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY
Unregistered Motor
Vehicles Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense-30 days after
warning
3rd and each subsequent
offense
Warning
$50.00
$100.00
Police Officers
Water Use Restriction
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd and each subsequent
offense
$50.00
$100.00
Police Officers
Wetlands Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd offense
$100 per day
$200 per day
$300 per day
Natural Resources Director
or other Designee of the
Town Manager
Zoning Bylaw 1st offense
2nd offense
3rd and each subsequent
offense
$50.00
$50.00
$100.00
Building Inspector
Article 22, Town Meeting, March 1973
Article 47, Town Meeting, April 1984
Selectmen's Minutes, February 4, 1985 (Regulation and Selectmen's Minutes, March 25, 1985
Articles 51 & 52, Town Meeting, April 1996
Article 23, Town Meeting, April 1999
Article 50, Town Meeting, May 2000
Article 67, Annual Town Meeting, April 29, 2002
Article 49, Annual Town Meeting, April 26, 2004
Article 49, Annual Town Meeting, April 27, 2005
Article 1, Special Town Meeting, April 2011
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
OUTDOOR FIRES AND CAMPING BYLAW
VOTED: That the Town adopt, pursuant to any and all authority, including MGL
Chapter 40, §21 and Article 2 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution, as
amended by Article 89 (the Home Rule Amendment), the following bylaw:
1. No person shall build an outdoor fire on any private property without the written
consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof and compliance with the State fire laws,
nor within the limits of any conservation area, playground, park or other public property
without first obtaining the written consent of the proper authorities. Consent of the
proper authorities shall mean a written permit approved by the Concord Fire
Department and by the Town Department of Natural Resources or other governmental
body having specific jurisdiction over the area involved.
2. No person shall camp upon any private property without the written consent of the
owner or legal occupant thereof, nor camp within the limits of any conservation area,
playground, park or other public property without first obtaining the written consent of
the proper authorities. Consent of the proper authorities shall mean a written permit
approved by the Concord Fire Department and by the Town Department of Natural
Resources or other governmental body having specific jurisdiction over the area
involved.
3. Any person violating the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine for each
offense as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town
Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of
Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 14, Town Meeting, June 1973
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PARADE BYLAW
Voted: That no street or way in the Town shall be used for any parade or other
procession unless
1. a written statement shall have been filed with the Police Department at least two days
prior to the date thereof, specifying the time of commencement and proposed route of
such parade or other procession; and
2. a written permit shall have been issued by the Police Department approving the same.
Article 30, Town Meeting, March 1949









































































TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PARKING METER REVOLVING FUND BYLAW
Voted: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments
to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home
Rule Amendment, adopt the following bylaw regarding a parking meter revolving fund in the
Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving fund
(hereinafter called “Parking Meter Fund”) for its parking meter and traffic regulation
operations. This Parking Meter Fund shall be kept separate from any monies or funds of the
Town and shall be expended only for those purposes outlined below.
Section 2.
Fees shall be established and charged at such rates that the revenue from parking meters and
parking meter fines shall not exceed in the aggregate the necessary expenses incurred for the
acquisition, installation, replacement, maintenance and repair of parking meters and the
regulations and enforcement of parking and other traffic activities incident thereto. The
revenue from the fees will be credited to the Parking Meter Fund and the Town Manager
shall have general authority to manage the Fund for its intended purposes.
Section 3.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance at a Town Meeting by a majority vote of the
qualified voters of the Town present and voting thereon. The accumulated receipts of the
meters for the preceding fiscal period will be retained and constitute the working capital to
establish the Fund.
Section 4.
This bylaw supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict with it.
Article 65, Town Meeting, May 1975
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PEEPING BYLAW
Section 1.
No person, other than an officer of the law, acting in the performance of his legal duty, shall
enter upon the premises of any person with the intention of peeping into a dwelling or spying
upon any person therein.
Section 2.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine for each
offense as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws
under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations
adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 42, Town Meeting, March 1952
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PERMIT PARKING BYLAW
Section 1.
For the purposes of limiting noise and congestion, aiding the access of fire and emergency
vehicles to buildings and property, and aiding in the removal of snow and ice from roads,
the Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized to regulate or prohibit parking, and to
establish a parking by permit only plan whereby the parking or standing of automobiles and
other vehicles, of whatever nature, within the Town is to be restricted. Such plan shall be
implemented in one or more defined zones of the Town as the Selectmen may determine,
and the Selectmen may adopt regulations consistent herewith to implement such restricted
parking zones. Parking or standing of vehicles within such zones shall be restricted to
residents and owners of such zones and their authorized invitees and guests; and Town of
Concord vehicles on official business.
Section 2.
Restricted parking zones may be established for one or more ways or areas, or any portion
thereof, within the control of the Town, including private ways under the control of the
Town provided that no less than eighty per cent of the owners of any property immediately
abutting the affected portion of any private way shall first consent in writing to the parking
restrictions to be imposed on such way.
Section 3.
Prior to establishing regulations to implement such restricted parking zones, including the
establishment of a zone for any particular way or area, the Selectmen shall hold a public
hearing, notice of which shall be published for two successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town, final publication to be not less than three days prior to such
hearing.
Section 4.
The Selectmen or their duly designated agent shall issue permits, in such form as the
Selectmen shall determine, to persons authorized to park automobiles or vehicles within any
such parking zone or zones, and the Selectmen may establish and charge such fee as they
determine necessary to defray the cost of issuing such permits.
Section 5.
Upon the adoption of any restricted parking zone, the Selectmen shall cause the posting of
suitable signs within such zone to give notice to the public of such restriction on parking or
standing of vehicles. The Selectmen shall give notice of the intention to implement such
zone by publication for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town, final publication to be not less than seven days.
Section 6.
The Selectmen are authorized to impose a fine for violation of regulations established for a
restricted parking zone as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement
of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal
Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended,
and to cause the towing or other removal of any vehicle parked or standing therein in
violation of said regulations.
Section 7.
In the event any provision of this bylaw or of any regulation adopted by the Selectmen shall
be held illegal or unenforceable, the remainder of this bylaw or regulation not held illegal or
unenforceable shall remain in full force and effect.
Article 9, Town Meeting, November 1978
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
Note:
The above permit parking system has been adopted on the following streets in the White Pond area: Mitchell Road
(from Powder Mill Road to White Ave), White Avenue, Dover Street, Bolton Street, Fern Street, Eaton Street,
Shore Drive, Darton Street, and Raymond Road.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PLANNING BOARD BYLAWS
1932 PLANNING BOARD BYLAW
Voted: That the following bylaw relating to the duties and conduct of the Planning Board be
and hereby is adopted.
Section 1.
The Planning Board shall consist of six members. The terms of the members shall be three years,
but at the annual Town Meeting to be held in the year 1933, there shall be elected two members to
serve for one year, two members to serve for two years, and two members to serve for three years;
and thereafter, there shall be elected at the annual Town Meeting in each year such members as are
necessary to fill vacancies.
Section 2.
Vacancies otherwise occurring in the board shall be filled as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 4, §11.
Section 3.
The Planning Board shall have access to public documents and information in the possession of any
Town official or department.
Section 4.
All plans for laying out, extending, discontinuing, or changing the limits of any playground or public
park, and every purchase of land for the site of any public building, and all plans for the location,
erection, or alteration of public buildings, shall be submitted to said board for its opinion at least
two weeks in advance of action by the board, department, or committee in charge of such work.
Section 5.
It shall be the duty of the Planning Board to investigate all petitions calling for a variation,
modification, change, or extension of use under the Zoning Bylaw and to report its
recommendations thereon to the Board of Selectmen, sitting as a Board of Appeals, at the public
hearing held relating thereto. The Board of Selectmen shall cause the Planning Board to be notified
of all such petitions when filed.
Section 6.
It shall be the duty of the Planning Board to conduct investigations respecting proposed
amendments to the Zoning Bylaw appearing in the Warrant for any Town Meeting, and to present
its recommendations to the Town for consideration at such Town Meeting. The Board of
Selectmen shall cause the Planning Board to be notified of all such proposed amendments.
Article 17, Town Meeting, March 1932
1937 PLANNING BOARD BYLAW
Voted: To adopt the following bylaw.
Section 1.
A Planning Board is hereby established under the provisions of M.G.L. (Ter.Ed.) Chapter 41, §81A,
as added by Chapter 211 of the Acts of 1936, to consist of five members to be elected by official
ballot at the annual Town Meeting in the year 1938, one for a term of one year, one for a term of
two years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of four years and one for a term of five years
and thereafter their successors one at the annual Town Meeting in each year for terms of five years
each.
Section 2.
In addition to the powers and duties provided for by law, said board shall have all the powers and
duties of the present Planning Board under existing bylaws of the Town.
Section 3.
The existing Board of Appeals under the building and zoning bylaws shall be the Board of Appeals
required by §81Z of said Chapter 41.
Article 20, Town Meeting, March 1937
See also M.G.L. Chapter 41, §70
1947 PLANNING BOARD BYLAW AMENDMENT
Voted: That the membership of the Planning Board be increased from five to seven
members, the two additional members to be elected at the next annual Town Meeting, one for a
term of four years and one for a term of five years and thereafter their successors to be elected for
terms of five years each.
Article 26, Town Meeting, March 1948
See also M.G.L. Chapter 41, §§71-81Y and M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §6
NOTE:
§2 of the Town Charter (accepted by the Town in 1955 and effective March 12, 1956) changed the Planning Board from elected
to appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
POSTING OF SIGNS BYLAW
No person shall paint, put upon or in any manner affix to any fence, tree, pole, rock, or
other object which is the property of another in any of the public places or ways in said
Town any words, signs, placards, advertisements, or posters, without first obtaining the
written consent of the owner of such fence, tree, pole, rock or other object.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PRIVATE DIGGING OF ROADS BYLAW
Voted: That the bylaw known as the “Private Digging of Roads” bylaw enacted under
Article 16 of the 1923 annual Town Meeting be repealed in its entirety, and the following substituted
in its place.
Section 1.
No public way shall be dug up nor opening made therein for any purpose, nor shall any material be
dumped or placed thereon or removed therefrom, nor obstruction or structure placed thereon or
removed therefrom, nor any alteration made, nor shall any tree be planted thereon or removed,
without first obtaining a written permit from the Commissioners of Public Works (acting as the
Road Commissioners), and then only in accordance with its regulations.
Section 2.
The permit shall require any person, public utility, contractor, or corporation to maintain suitable
barriers and safety devices to protect travelers from injury; to save harmless the Town from any and
all liability by reason of any act of omission or commission suffered or done by such person, public
utility, contractor, or corporation; and to restore all disturbed portions of the way to its prior
condition at the sole expense of the applicant.
Section 3.
No permit shall be issued until the applicant demonstrates compliance with provisions of M.G.L.
Chapter 82, §40.
Section 4.
The Commissioners of Public Works shall require the applicant to:
1. Provide proof of liability insurance to limits established by the Town indemnifying the Town
against any claims whatsoever arising from the application, and
2. Performance bond or deposit in lieu thereof in such form and penal sum and with such surety as
commissioners deem proper to comply with the requirements of the permit.
Section 5.
The Commissioners of Public Works shall prepare and issue such written regulations including a
schedule of fees which insure that the Town would not be adversely affected by the cost of
maintenance caused by the applicant and such penalties as are appropriate to assure compliance with
this bylaw.
Article 47, Town Meeting, April 8, 1992
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PRIVATE WAYS IN WHITE POND WATERSHED—
TEMPORARY REPAIRS BYLAW
The Department of Public Works is authorized to make temporary repairs to the publicly-traveled,
currently improved private ways laid out or created prior to February 28, 1938 in the White Pond
watershed area, said publicly-traveled, currently improved private ways being named Granby Street,
Mitchell Road, White Avenue, Seymour Street, Tracy Street, Dover Street, Bolton Street, Darton
Street, Eaton Street, Shore Drive and Fern Street.
Temporary repairs may be undertaken on a way subject to this bylaw, or to a contiguous portion of
such a way which begins or ends at an intersection or conjunction with another way, only following
the delivery to the Department of Public Works of a petition signed by the owner(s) of not less than
sixty (60%) percent of the lots which abut such ways. The petition shall identify the requested
repairs with reasonable specificity and may suggest an allocation of any associated betterment
assessments among benefited parcels.
The specific type and extent of repairs to be made to any of the ways subject to this bylaw and the
maximum cost of such repairs shall be proposed by the Department of Public Works and approved
by the Public Works Commission at or following a public hearing. The Department of Public
Works is authorized to include in its work proposal such repairs as may be reasonably necessary to
improve the drainage of the ways and to mitigate storm water runoff into White Pond. Repairs
undertaken pursuant to this bylaw shall be planned and made with due regard for the special
character of the neighborhood and the character of the way in question, particularly the proximity of
homes, driveways and landscaping to the road within the way. Repairs shall be undertaken at the
earliest convenience of the Department of Public Works.
The Town of Concord is authorized to apportion, divide, reassess, abate and collect betterment
assessments upon benefited parcels within a limited and determinable area based on a proportionate
share of the cost of such repairs, all in accordance with Chapter 80 of the Massachusetts General
Laws or in any other equitable manner provided by law. A cash deposit shall not be required for
such repairs.
The repairs are required by public necessity, including but not limited to:
i. the necessity of providing adequately drained ways so as to reduce ecologically harmful runoff
into White Pond, an important natural resource to the Town of Concord;
ii. the necessity of providing adequate, passable ways from public ways to residences, Town
facilities and resources including the White Pond well and Town conservation land;
iii. the relative ease of administration of the repair program given that the ten (10) private ways
subject to this bylaw serve approximately 100 owners located in a distinct, densely populated
neighborhood; and
iv. the lack of reasonably achievable alternative means of accomplishing such repairs given the fact
that the ways subject to this bylaw were laid out or created before the enactment of a subdivision
control bylaw in the Town of Concord.
The liability limit of the Town of Concord on account of damages caused by such repairs shall be
the same liability limit as may be provided from time to time under the law applicable to Town ways.
The ways subject to this bylaw, namely Granby Street, Mitchell Road, White Avenue, Seymour
Street, Tracy Street, Dover Street, Bolton Street, Darton Street, Eaton Street, Shore Drive and Fern
Street have been open to public use for a term of not less than 50 years.
This bylaw shall continue in full force and effect
i. unless and until it is repealed; or
ii. unless and until the Town of Concord adopts a bylaw governing repairs made by the Town of
Concord to the private ways subject to this bylaw as well as to additional private ways in the
Town of Concord, provided that any such successor bylaw shall by its terms specifically refer to
and repeal or supersede this bylaw.
Article 18, Town Meeting, April 1996
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PROGRESSIVE REMOVAL OF UTILITY POLES AND
OVERHEAD WIRES REQUIRED BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town adopt a bylaw in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 166,
§22D, as follows.
Section 1.
Any utility having poles, overhead wires or associated overhead structures which are located
upon, along or across any public or other way or ways within the Town shall, in accordance
with the schedule and timing set forth below in this Section 1, remove such poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures. Any utility in providing replacement facilities of
any poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures required to be removed
shall install customer’s service facilities.
Using existing conduit, Main Street from the intersection with Forest Ridge Road to the
intersection with Harrington Avenue, by April 30, 2004;
Using existing conduit, Harrington Avenue from the intersection with Main Street to the
intersection with Old Marlborough Road, by April 30, 2004;
Using existing conduit, Old Marlborough Road from the intersection with Harrington
Avenue to the intersection with Old Road to Nine Acre Corner, by April 30, 2004;
Using existing conduit, Virginia Road from the intersection with Old Bedford Road to
the Town line, by December 31, 2004;
Using existing conduit, Main Street from the intersection with Keyes Road to the intersection
with Old Road to Nine Acre Corner by May 31, 2006;
Using existing conduit, the entire length of Stow Street by May 31, 2006;
Using existing conduit, the entire length of Everett Street by May 31, 2006;
Using existing conduit, Sudbury Road from the intersection with Main Street to the intersection
with Stow Street by May 31, 2006;
For all other projects, 12 months after receiving notice by Certified Mail Return Receipt
Requested from the Concord Municipal Light Plant.
Section 2.
Any utility which fails to remove any poles and overhead wires and associated overhead
structures as required by this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand
dollars and not more than five thousand dollars for each consecutive fifteen-day period during
which such failure continues.
Section 3.
Any utility may enter into, and from time to time amend, and perform a cooperation agreement
with the Town, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 166, §22E. No utility which enters into a
cooperation agreement under said §22E shall be deemed to have violated this bylaw during
the term the payments provided in the cooperation agreement are to be made, so long as the
utility shall not be in default under said cooperation agreement.
Section 4.
Commencing one (1) year from the original effective date of this bylaw, any utility affected
hereby shall impose and collect a surcharge of two percent (2%) on its total billing to each
customer located in the Town to apply towards the cost of construction required under this
bylaw, provided said utility is not in violation of the provisions of this bylaw.
Section 5.
This bylaw implements M.G.L. Chapter 166, §22D, and shall be construed in a manner consistent
with the definitions in §§22A and 22I of Chapter 166.
Article 29, Town Meeting, April 1987
Article 27, Town Meeting, April 2003
Note:
This bylaw became effective on January 1, 1989, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 166, §22N. The utility
surcharges of 2% became effective January 1, 1990.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
PUBLIC CEREMONIES & CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE BYLAW
Section 1.
There is hereby established a Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee to be
appointed by and responsible to the Board of Selectmen and whose powers, duties and
responsibilities are as hereinafter provided.
Section 2.
Immediately following the effective date of this bylaw, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
a Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee consisting of seven (7) members. The
initial terms of office of the aforedesignated committee members shall be for one, two,
three, four and five years respectively as designated by said Board of Selectmen. Upon the
expiration of each of the aforesaid terms, appointments to this committee shall each be for a
term of five years. Members of this committee shall be registered voters of the Town of
Concord and veterans as defined by §21 of Chapter 31 of the Massachusetts General Laws
(Ter.Ed.) of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The committee shall have the power to
fill vacancies in its own membership for the remainder of the calendar year then current at
the expiration of which the Board of Selectmen shall fill the unexpired term, if any exists.
Article 39, Town Meeting, March 1952
Article 31, Town Meeting, April 1983
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
RECREATION COMMISSION REVOLVING FUND
Voted: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule
Amendment, adopt the following bylaw regarding a Recreation Commission revolving fund in the
Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving fund
(hereinafter called “Recreation Fund”) for its Recreation Commission (hereinafter called
“Commission”). All receipts of the commission from wholly or partially self-supporting recreation
and park services of the Town shall be credited to the Recreation Fund. The Recreation Fund shall
be kept separate from any other monies or funds of the Town, and shall be expended only for those
purposes outlined below.
Section 2.
The money in the Recreation Fund will be used solely for the maintenance and support of recreation
and park facilities and services of the Town, including purchase of equipment and salaries of
employees.
Section 3.
Expenditure of money from the Recreation Fund may be made by the Town Manager without
further appropriations. The Town Accountant shall submit annually a report of the Recreation
Fund to the Selectmen, the Finance Committee, and the Recreation Commission.
Section 4.
Nothing in this bylaw shall prevent the Town from appropriating funds for purposes of public
recreation or entertainment as now or hereafter authorized by law. Nothing in this bylaw shall
prevent the Town from accepting gifts or grants of money or property for purposes of public
recreation or entertainment.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the
Town present and voting thereon at the annual Town Meeting or any special Town Meeting called
for the purpose. The receipts of the department for the year in which this bylaw is accepted will be
retained by the department and will constitute the working capital to establish the fund. This bylaw
supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict with it.
Article 3, Town Meeting, June 1979
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
REFUSE DISPOSAL BYLAW
No person shall put in any of the public places or ways in said Town any ashes, filth,
rubbish, glass, wood, timber, stones or other articles.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
(see also M.G.L. Chapter 270, §16)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
REGULATION OF VEHICLES BYLAW
VOTED: to adopt the following bylaw for the regulation of vehicles.
Section 1.
Upon the approach of any vehicle or apparatus of the Fire, Police or Light Department of
the Town of Concord, answering an alarm of fire, or emergency call, and sounding a bell or
siren, the driver of any vehicle other than a vehicle of the aforesaid departments, or an
ambulance of any health department or hospital on an emergency call, shall drive as close as
possible to the right curb and stop, and shall not follow within six hundred (600) feet of the
said vehicle or apparatus of said Fire, Police, or Light Departments. No vehicle, except by
direction of the Fire Chief or officer of the said Fire Department shall approach or park
within six hundred (600) feet of a fire at any time.
Section 2.
No person shall stop any vehicle on any street in front of or opposite to and within fifty (50)
feet of any fire station.
Section 3.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this bylaw, or who shall fail or refuse
to comply therewith, shall be liable to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense.
Article 12, Town Meeting, March 1924
Article 63, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SALE OF REAL PROPERTY BYLAW
No sale of land, building or other real property owned by the Town, or any department thereof, the
value of which in the opinion of the Selectmen amounts to $1,000.00 or more, shall be made unless
prior to the Town Meeting at which such sale is authorized:
a. a written appraisal of the property has been made by one or more competent appraisers and
copies of the appraisal delivered to the Selectmen and Planning Board and;
b. the Selectmen have received from the Planning Board its written recommendations on the
disposition of the property, and unless subsequent to the Town Meeting at which such sale
is authorized, an advertisement has been published in a local paper at least 30 days in
advance of the date of sale.
Article 23, Town Meeting, March 1960
(see also MGL, Chapter 30B and APP#34, Rental and Sale of Town Property, 8/27/82)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS BYLAW
A Town bylaw regulating the sale, vending, and distribution of tobacco within the Town as follows:
Section 1. DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE
whereas: cigarette smoking is the chief avoidable cause of death in this country, and
whereas: medical and scientific evidence demonstrates that tobacco usage is addictive and causes
serious health problems, and
whereas: the Surgeon General has concluded that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are habitforming
in the same sense as are drugs such as heroin and cocaine, and
whereas: most cases of tobacco use begin during childhood and adolescence, now
therefore: this bylaw needs to protect the public health by further restricting the sale, vending, and
distribution of tobacco in Concord.
Section 2. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this bylaw, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. BUSINESS AGENT: An individual who has been designated by the owner or operator of
any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said establishment.
B. EMPLOYEE: Any individual who performs services for an employer.
C. EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or other
organized group of individuals, including Concord or any agency thereof, which uses the
services of one (1) or more employees.
D. MINOR: Any individual who is under the age of eighteen (18).
E. PERMIT HOLDER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products
directly to consumers who applies for and receives a tobacco sales permit or any person who
is required to apply for a tobacco sales permit pursuant to this bylaw, or his or her business
agent.
F. PERSON: An individual, employer, employee, retail store manager or owner, or the owner
or operator of any establishment engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products
directly to consumers.
G. SELF SERVICE DISPLAY: Any display from which customers may select a tobacco
product without assistance from an employee or store personnel, excluding vending
machines.
H. TOBACCO PRODUCT: Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco bidis, snuff or
tobacco in any forms.
I. VENDING MACHINE: Any automated or mechanical self service device, which upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form or payment, dispenses cigarettes or any other
tobacco product.
Section 3 – PERMITS
A. No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco at retail within the Town of Concord
without first obtaining a tobacco sales permit issued annually by the Concord Board of
Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, non-mobile location in the Town
of Concord are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco products in the specified
location in Concord.
B. As part of the tobacco sales permit application process, the applicant will be provided with
this bylaw. Each applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant has
read said bylaw and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any and all employees
who will be responsible for tobacco sales regarding both state laws regarding the sale of
tobacco and this bylaw.
C. Each applicant is required to provide proof of a current tobacco sales license issued by the
Massachusetts Department of Revenue before a tobacco sales permit can be issued.
D. The fee for a tobacco sales permit shall be determined by the Concord Board of Health
annually. All such permits shall be renewed annually by June 1st.
E. A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling tobacco.
F. Each tobacco sales permit shall be displayed at the retail establishment in a conspicuous
place.
G. No tobacco sales permit holder shall allow any employees to sell cigarettes or other tobacco
products until such employee reads this bylaw and state laws regarding the sale of tobacco
and signs a statement, a copy of which will be placed on file in the office of the employer,
that he/she has read the bylaw and applicable state laws.
H. A tobacco sales permit is non-transferable. A new owner of an establishment that sells
tobacco must apply for a new tobacco sales permit. No new permit will be issued unless and
until all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are satisfied in full.
I. Issuance of a tobacco sales permit shall be conditioned on an applicant’s consent to
unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her retail establishment to ensure compliance with
this bylaw.
J. A tobacco sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder has failed to pay all fines
issued and the time period to appeal the fines has expired.
Section 4 – PROHIBITED ACTS
A. No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products to be sold to a minor; or
not being the minor’s parent or legal guardian, give tobacco products to a minor. Each
person selling or distributing tobacco products shall verify the age of the purchaser by means
of government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer’s date of birth that
the purchaser is 18 years old or older. Verification is required for any person under the age
of 27.
B. All tobacco vending machines are prohibited.
C. No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco products
D. No person may sell or cause to be sold or distribute or cause to be distributed, any cigarette
package that contains fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
E. All self service displays of tobacco products are prohibited. All humidors including, but not
limited to, walk-in humidors must be locked. The only exception is self service displays that
are located in facilities where the retailer ensures that no person younger than eighteen (18)
years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time.
Section 5 – POSTING
In conformance with and in addition to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 270, Section 7, a copy
of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 270, Section 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner
or other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to sell tobacco products at retail.
The notice shall be provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the Concord Board of Health. The notice shall be at least 48 square inches and shall be posted
conspicuously by the permit holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner so
that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. The notice shall
directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than
four (4) feet or greater than nine (9) feet from the floor.
Section 6 – VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Violations of the bylaw may be enforced as provided by the provisions of Town bylaws
relating to “Town Bylaws, Violations of,” including the use of non-criminal disposition.
B. Except when otherwise provided by law, prosecutions for offenses under this bylaw shall
be made by a constable, police officer, chief sanitarian of the Board of Health or their
Agent(s). Any citizen who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the bylaw may do
so by contacting the Concord Board of Health or its designated agent(s) and the Board
shall investigate.
C. Fines for violations shall be in accordance with Appendix A of the Town’s Non-
Criminal Disposition Bylaw.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and/or his or her business agent to
ensure compliance with Section 4A of this bylaw pertaining to his or her distribution of
tobacco. The violator shall receive:
1. In the case of a first violation, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100)
2. In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the date of the current
violation, a fine of two hundred dollars ($200) shall be assessed and the tobacco sales
permit shall be suspended for seven (7) consecutive business days.
3. In the case of three or more violations within a 24 month period, a fine of three
hundred ($300) shall be assessed and the tobacco sales permit shall be suspended for
thirty (30) consecutive business days.
E. Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this bylaw shall result in the
suspension of the tobacco sales permit for thirty (30) consecutive business days.
F. The Concord Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to suspend a tobacco
sales permit, which notice shall contain the reasons therefore and establish a time and
date for a hearing which date shall be no earlier than seven (7) days after the date of said
notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing and shall be notified of the Board of Health’s decision, and the reasons
therefore in writing. After the hearing, the Concord Board of Health will suspend the
tobacco sales permit if the Board finds that a sale to a minor occurred. For purposes of
such suspensions, the Board shall make the determination notwithstanding any separate
criminal or non-criminal proceedings brought in court hereunder or under the
Massachusetts General Laws for the same offense. All tobacco products shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension of the tobacco sales permit.
Failure to remove all tobacco products shall constitute a separate violation of this bylaw.
G. All other violations of this bylaw will be subjected to fines of fifty ($50) dollars per
violation.
Section 7. SEPARABILITY
Each part of these regulations is constructed as separate to the extent that if any section, item,
sentence, clause, or phrase is held invalid for any reason, the remainder of the regulations shall
continue in full force and effect.
Article 51, Town Meeting, May 1991
Amended by Article 47, Town Meeting, April 1995
Amended by Article 66, Town Meeting, April 2002
Amended by Article 66, Town Meeting, April 2010
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SEWER DEPARTMENT REVOLVING FUND
Voted: That the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule
Amendment, will adopt the following bylaw regarding a Sewer Department Revolving Fund in the
Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving fund
(hereinafter called “Sewer Fund”) for its Sewer Department (hereinafter called “Department”). All
receipts of the Department shall be credited to the Sewer Fund. This Sewer Fund shall be kept
separate from any other monies or funds of the Town, and shall be expended only for those
purposes outlined below.
Section 2.
There shall be a fixed schedule of prices or rates established by the Public Works Commission acting
as the Sewer Commissioners for sewer use which shall not be changed more often than once each
year. Changes in the rates shall not be made unless the proposed new rates are first published in
newspapers in general circulation in Concord and considered at a public hearing held for this
purpose. The schedules of prices and rates shall be established to yield a zero balance after the
payment of all operation and maintenance expenses, principal and interest on outstanding debt, and
accrued depreciation reserve not to exceed two per cent of the cost of the plant per annum. The
cost of the plant will be determined by the Town Manager and approved by the Sewer
Commissioners and be based upon the capitalization of all land structures, treatment facilities,
collection and transmission systems, machinery and equipment, and all other classifications
comprising the total Department. If a surplus exists then the schedule of prices or rates will be
revised to maintain a zero balance. The sewage discharged by the Town of Concord in its public
buildings, shall be charged for in accordance with the prices of the fixed schedules.
Section 3.
The income from user fees and jobbing services shall be received by the Town Collector, and shall
be used by the department to pay the annual expenses of the plant, to make payments on the
indebtedness of the plant, and to set up the depreciation fund which will be kept and managed as a
separate fund for reconstruction, renewals, extensions, improvements, major repairs, enlargements,
additions or similar purposes. The general authority to manage and expend the fund for the ensuing
year by the Town Manager will require approval by the Town at the annual Town Meeting. The
accounting system to be used for keeping the department accounts will be the State system of
accounts.
Interest earned on monies raised by the issuance of bonds and notes in anticipation of receipt of
state or federal grants shall be received by the Town Treasurer and credited to said Sewer Fund to
be expended in the same manner as other income of the fund.
Section 4.
Nothing in this act shall prevent the Town of Concord from appropriating funds for repairs,
improvements, extensions or additions to the sewer system or indebtedness of the plant over and
above those programmed under the revolving fund. These appropriations will be treated as special
deposits on the department books and administered by the Town Manager for the specific purposes
for which they were appropriated. Any balance after completion of a project will be returned to the
General Fund of the Town by the department.
Nothing in this act shall prevent the Town of Concord by a two-thirds (2/3) vote at an annual Town
Meeting from transferring funds from the accumulated depreciation fund of the department to
reimburse the Town for funds which may be appropriated and used for department projects as
outlined herein. The Department is expressly allowed to accept grants or gifts for Department
projects.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the
Town present and voting thereon at the annual Town Meeting or any special Town Meeting called
for the purpose. The receipts of the department for the fiscal period beginning July 1, 1976 will be
retained by the department and will constitute the working capital to establish the fund. This bylaw
supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict to it.
Section 6.
If this bylaw is accepted, it may only be revoked by the Town by a majority vote of the qualified
voters of the Town present and voting thereon at the annual or any special Town Meeting called for
the purpose three years after the year in which the bylaw is accepted.
Article 37, Town Meeting, May 1976
Article 35, Town Meeting, April 8, 1985
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SEWER IMPROVEMENT FUND BYLAW
Voted: That the Town adopt the following bylaw concerning a Sewer Improvement Fund,
pursuant to the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule Amendment.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury a separate revolving fund (the
“Fund”) for the purposes herein specified. The Fund shall be kept separate from any other monies
or funds of the Town, and shall be expended only for those purposes herein specified.
Section 2.
The Public Works Commissioners, acting as Sewer Commissioners, shall assess a sewer
improvement fee for all connections to the Town sewer system which will generate a sewage flow
rate in excess of the flow rate contemplated for the relevant property in the Facilities Planning Study
prepared by Camp, Dresser and McKee, dated May, 1984, or any amendments thereto approved by
a Town Meeting or any subsequent study approved by appropriate authorities. The sewer
improvement fee assessed shall equal the estimated cost of constructing, reconstructing, and
expanding sewer lines, treatment plants, and other related facilities or reducing infiltration or inflow
to handle an incremental amount of sewage equal to such excess flow.
Section 3.
There shall be a schedule of costs of constructing such sewer facilities as are described in Section 2
hereof, expressed in dollars per gallon of daily flow rate, established by the Commissioners, which
schedule will not be established until the proposed schedule is first published in a newspaper in
general circulation in the Town and considered at a public hearing held for such purpose.
Section 4.
All sewer improvement fees collected shall be deposited into the Fund. Monies deposited into the
Fund shall be used only for the purposes set forth in Section 2 hereof, as may be determined by the
Commissioners. The Commissioners are expressly allowed to accept grants or gifts for deposit into
the Fund.
Section 5.
The sewer improvement fees imposed hereunder shall be in addition to any other fees permitted by
law, including without limitation, sewer connection fees.
Article 25, Town Meeting, April 3, 1989
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SMOKE FREE WORKPLACE BYLAW
Section 1. Purpose
The Town of Concord does hereby find and declares that the purposes of this ordinance are (1) to
protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in food establishments; (2) to protect
the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air in such establishments; and (3) to recognize that
the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke.
Section 2. Authority
This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Concord under its Home Rule powers, its police powers to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, and its authority under Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, §21.
Section 3. Severability
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase and any other portion of this bylaw shall be construed
as separate to the end that if any portion thereof shall be held invalid for any reason, then the
remainder of the bylaw shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 4. Definitions
As used in this bylaw, the following words shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires
otherwise:
4.1 “Compensation” – money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from an employer in return
for work performed or services rendered.
4.2 “Employee” – an individual or person who performs a service for compensation for an employer’s
workplace, including a contract employee, temporary employee, and independent
contractor who performs a service in the employer’s workplace for more than a de minimus
amount of time.
4.3 “Employer” – an individual, person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, organization,
school, college, university or other educational institution or other legal entity whether
public, quasi-public, private, or non-profit which uses the services of one (1) or more employees
at one (1) or more workplaces, at any one (1) time, including the Town of Concord.
4.4 “Enclosed” – a space bounded by walls, with or without windows or fenestrations, continuous
from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one (1) or more doors, including but not limited to
an office, function room or hallway.
4.5 “Outdoor space” – an outdoor area, open to the air at all times and cannot be enclosed by a
wall or side covering.
4.6 “Retail Tobacco Store” – an establishment which is required to posses a retail food permit
whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco
products and paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in
which the entry of persons under the age of 18 is prohibited at all times, and maintains a
valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the Concord
Board of Health.
4.7 “Smoking” – or “Smoke” – the lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product
or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco or non-tobacco product designed
to be combusted and inhaled.
4.8 “Smoking Bar” – an establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail sale of tobacco
products for consumption by customers on the premises and is required by Mass General
Law Ch., 270, Section 22 to maintain a valid permit to operate a smoking bar issued by the
Massachusetts Department of Revenue. “Smoking Bar” shall include, but not be limited to,
those establishments that are commonly known as “cigar bars” and “hookah bars”.
4.9 “Workplace” – an indoor area, structure or facility or a portion thereof, at which one (1) or
more employees perform a service for compensation for an employer, other enclosed spaces
rented to or otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has the right or authority
to exercise control over the space.
4.10 “Work space or work spaces” – an enclosed area occupied by an employee during the course
of his employment.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL, Ch. 270, Section 22 and/or 105
CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions herein conflict with MGL, Ch. 270, Section 22 and
105 CMR 661, the definition contained in this bylaw shall control.
Section 5. Prohibitions
5.1 It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke free environment for all
employees working in an enclosed workplace.
5.2 Smoking is hereby prohibited in Concord in accordance with MGL, Ch. 270, Section 22
(commonly known as the “Smoke-free Workplace Law).
Pursuant to MGL, Ch. 270, Section 22(j) smoking is also hereby prohibited in Tobacconist Shops
(“Smoke Shops”), Smoking Bars, and Nursing Homes
Section 6. Enforcement
6.1 This bylaw shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its designees.
6.2 Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and enforcement with the
Board of Health, the local inspection department of the equivalent.
6.3 The Board of Health shall have the authority to enforce this bylaw through the use of violation
notices, administrative orders, or civil and criminal court actions. Violations may result
in fines and other lawful penalties listed in this bylaw.
Section 7. Penalties and Remedies
7.1 Violations are subject to a fine in accordance with Appendix A of the Town’s Non-Criminal
Disposition Bylaw
7.2 Each calendar day on which violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
7.3 Violations of Section 5.2 shall be disposed of by a civil penalty using the non-criminal
method of disposition procedures contained in Section 21 D of Chapter 40 of Massachusetts
General without an enabling ordinance or bylaw. The disposition of fines assessed shall be
subject to Section 188 of Chapter 111.
7.4 Violations of Section 5.3 may be disposed of by a civil penalty using the non-criminal
method of disposition procedures contained in Section 21D of Chapter 40 of Massachusetts
General Law.
7.5 If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle, or vessel violates this
bylaw repeatedly, demonstrating egregious noncompliance as defined by regulation of the
Department of Public Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend the license to operate
and shall send notice of the revocation or suspension to the Department of Public
Health.
Section 8. Severability
Each part of these regulations are constructed to be separate, such that if any section, sentence, item,
clause, or phrase is held invalid for any reason, the remainder of the regulations shall continue in full
force and effect.
Section 9. Conflict with other Laws and Regulations
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4 of this bylaw, nothing in this bylaw shall be deemed to
amend or repeal applicable fire, health or other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it
is prohibited by such fire, health, or other regulations.
Article 48, Town Meeting, April 1995
Article 68, Town Meeting, April 2003
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
Article 67, Town Meeting, April 2010
NOTE:
The name of this bylaw was previously called “Smoking in Food Establishments Bylaw,” with the name changed under Article
67 of the Annual Town Meeting of April 2010. Note also that Section 10 of this bylaw, approved at the April 2010 Annual
Town Meeting, was subsequently disapproved by the Attorney General and has therefore been deleted.
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES BYLAW
VOTED: to enact a bylaw to limit smoking in certain public places as follows.
Section 1.
It shall be unlawful to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in any form in the Town of
Concord in the following places:
a. in any place of assembly, waiting room, auditorium, cafeteria, rest room, lobby, elevator, or
corridor of any school operated by the Town of Concord;
b. in school buses and other vehicles of public transportation, owned, leased or operated by the
Town of Concord;
c. in any public building at any meeting, notice of which is required to be posted and which is open
to the public.
Section 2.
“No Smoking” signs shall be prominently posted, by the person in charge of the premises, in areas
in which smoking is declared unlawful by Section 1.
Section 3.
Violations of this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine for each offense as specified in Appendix A of
the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the
Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town
Meeting, as amended.
Article 62, Town Meeting, May 1975
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SNOW AND ICE DISPOSAL BYLAW
Voted: No personal shall put any snow or ice in any public place or upon any part of
a public street or sidewalk. Whoever shall violate this bylaw shall pay a fine as specified in
Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter
40, §21D and the Bylaw for Con-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article
47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 43, Town Meeting, March 1963
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SNOW AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town acting pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90B, as
amended by §2 of Chapter 589 of the Acts of 1970, adopt a bylaw “Snow and Recreational
Vehicles.”
Section 1.
No person shall operate a snow vehicle or recreation vehicle, as defined in §20 of Chapter 90B of
the M.G.L. on or within the limits of any park, playground or other public property except with the
consent of the Board of Selectmen nor operate any snow vehicle or recreation vehicle on any private
property except with the consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof.
Section 2.
Any person violating any provision of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine for each offense as
specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L.
Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article
47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 20, Town Meeting, March 1971
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SOLICITING BYLAW
Regarding Commercial Agents, Selling Agents, Solicitors and
Canvassers Who Do Business Door-to-Door in Concord
VOTED: that the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments
to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home
Rule Amendment, and under the police powers granted to it by the General Laws of the
Commonwealth, adopt the following bylaw regarding commercial agents, selling agents,
solicitors and canvassers who do business door-to-door in the Town.
Section 1.
The practice of going in and upon private residences of the Town by commercial agents,
selling agents, solicitors and canvassers, transient vendors and itinerant merchants for the
purpose of soliciting orders for services or for sale of goods, wares and merchandise by
means of samples, lists, catalogues or otherwise, without having been requested or invited to
do so by the owners or occupants of said private residences, is prohibited and hereby
declared a nuisance.
Section 2.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to officers or employees of the town, county,
state or federal governments; hawkers and peddlers registered by the state and the Town
under appropriate laws and regulations; candidates for public office or political parties
recognized by the Commonwealth; religious organizations for the purpose of spreading the
teachings of their religious beliefs, but not for the purpose of selling or soliciting; and nonprofit,
charitable organizations upon registration by the President or Treasurer with the
Chief of Police. Such registrations must be renewed yearly.
Section 3.
Violations of this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine for each offense as specified in
Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter
40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article
47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
Article 40, Town Meeting, May 1977
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FUND BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments
to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home
Rule Amendment, adopt the following bylaw establishing a solid waste disposal fund in the
Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving fund
(the “Solid Waste Disposal Fund” or the “Fund”) for its Solid Waste Disposal Department
(the “Department”). All receipts of the Department shall be credited to the Solid Waste
Disposal Fund. The Fund shall be kept separate from any other monies or funds of the
Town, and shall be expended only for those purposes outlined in the bylaw.
Section 2.
There shall be a fixed schedule of prices or rates established by the Public Works
Commission for solid waste disposal (the “schedule”) which schedule shall not be
established until the proposed schedule is first published in a newspaper in general
circulation in the town and considered at a public hearing held for this purpose. No price or
rate in the schedule shall be fixed at less than the cost of disposing of solid waste as such
may be determined by the Town Manager and approved by the Public Works Commission.
The schedule shall be established to yield a zero balance after the payment of all operation
and maintenance expense, principal and interest on outstanding debt, if any, and an accrued
reserve for replacement of plant and for sanitary landfill closure, including perpetual
monitoring and leachate removal, the cost of which will be determined by the Town
Manager and approved by the Public Works Commission, and shall be based upon the actual
capitalization, land, structures, disposal systems, environmental monitoring, leachate
removal, machinery and equipment, and anything else comprising the Department. Refuse
disposed of by the Town from its public facilities and by the public school departments shall
be charged for in accordance with the schedule beginning July 1, 1990.
Section 3.
The income from tipping fees, user charges, jobbing and any appropriation shall be received
by the Town Collector, and shall be used by the Department to pay the annual expenses of
the landfill facilities, to make payments on the indebtedness of the landfill facilities, and to
set up the depreciation and sinking fund accounts which will be kept and managed as
separate funds for reconstruction, renewals, extensions, improvements, major repairs,
enlargements, additions or similar purposes. The general authority to manage and expend
the fund for ensuing year by the Town Manager will require approval by the Town at the
annual Town Meeting. The accounting system to be used for keeping the Department
accounts will reflect on a monthly basis, the status of all accounts and the financial position
of the Department.
Section 4.
Nothing in this act shall prevent the Town from appropriating monies for repairs,
improvements, extensions, additions or maintenance of refuse disposal systems over and
above those programmed under the Fund. Such appropriations will be treated as special
deposits in the Department and will be administered by the Town Manager for the specific
purposes for which they were appropriated. Any balance remaining after completion of the
project will be returned to the General Fund by the Department. Nothing in this act shall
prevent the Town by a two-thirds (2/3) vote at an annual Town Meeting from transferring
accumulated monies in the Fund in order to reimburse the Town for monies which may be
appropriated and used for Department projects as outlined herein. The Department is
expressly allowed to accept grants or gifts for Department projects.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of
the Town present and voting thereon at the annual Town Meeting or any special Town
Meeting called for this purpose. This bylaw supersedes any bylaw which may be in conflict
with it.
Section 6.
If this bylaw is accepted, it may be revoked by the Town only by a majority vote of the
qualified voters of the Town present and voting thereon at the annual or any special Town
Meeting called for this purpose three or more years after the year in which the bylaw is
accepted.
Article 27, Town Meeting, April 1989
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TERMS OF OFFICE BYLAW
The terms of office of the moderator, the selectmen, and the members of the school
committee shall be as stated in Section 1 of the Act passed by the General Court in
the year 1952 entitled “An Act Establishing A Selectmen-Manager Form of Government
for the Town of Concord.” Said terms shall begin at noon on the day following
the final adjournment of the annual Town Meeting succeeding their election,
and shall extend to noon on the day following the final adjournment of the annual
Town Meeting following the election of their successors.
Article 20, Town Meeting, March 1960
(see also Town Charter, Section 1)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUETTS
TOURIST BYLAWS
LICENSING OF TOURIST VEHICLES BYLAW
No person shall use a carriage or other vehicle for the transportation of tourists for hire
without first obtaining a license so to do from the Selectmen, which license shall be issued
for a definite time, and shall be revocable by the Selectmen within that time.
Article 16 (Sub-Article 8), Town Meeting, April 1905
TOURIST GUIDE LICENSE BYLAW
No person shall, in any of the public places in said Town, solicit tourists to ride in carriages
or other vehicles, to take meals, to employ guides, or to buy any articles without first obtaining
a license so to do from the Selectmen, which license shall be issued for a definite time
and shall be revocable by the Selectmen within that time.
Article 16 (Sub-Article 9), Town Meeting, April 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN COLLECTOR BYLAW
Voted: That the following bylaw be adopted, pursuant to §38A of Chapter 41 of the
M.G.L.:
a. The Collector of Taxes shall collect under the title of Town Collector, all accounts
due the Town, excepting interest on investments of the sinking or trust funds.
b. If it shall seem advisable to the Town Collector that suit, or suits, should be
instituted and prosecuted in the name of the Town, in connection with the collection
of an account or accounts due the Town, he shall so advise the Board of Selectmen,
who shall have authority as agents of the Town to institute and prosecute the same.
c. All accounts due the Town when this section takes effect, and all accounts coming
due thereafter shall forthwith be committed by the several boards and officials of the
Town to the Town Collector for collection hereunder.
Article 20, Town Meeting, March 1935
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN COUNSEL BYLAW
VOTED: to repeal the 1988 “Town Counsel Residency” bylaw in its entirety and adopt the
following bylaw.
Section 1.
The Town Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, shall annually in
May, and whenever a vacancy shall exist, appoint some competent lawyer who shall be
admitted to the Massachusetts Bar to act as the Town Counsel. The term of office shall
begin on the first day of June of each year and shall continue until a successor is appointed
and qualified. Town Counsel may be removed by the Town Manager, subject to the
approval of the Board of Selectmen, at the pleasure of the Town Manager.
Section 2.
With the approval of the Town Manager and the Board of Selectmen, the Town Counsel
shall act as legal adviser to the Town and to all Town officers, boards and committees in
connection with the performance of their public duties. Town Counsel shall prosecute,
defend and compromise any and all suits, claims, actions and proceedings on behalf of or
against the Town, its officers, boards and committees or in which the interest of the Town
are or may be involved. Town Counsel when requested by the Town Manager, may
represent the Town at any hearing in which it is or may become interested before any
committee of the General Court. Nothing herein shall preclude the Town Manager, with the
approval of the Board of Selectmen, from retaining special counsel whenever in the opinion
of the Town Manager it is for the best interest of the Town, provided that the retention of
special counsel is not prohibited by law and an appropriation when necessary is made or
funds are otherwise available for such purpose.
Article 45, Town Meeting, April 1992
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN MEETING BYLAWS
TOWN MEETING BYLAW – TWO-THIRDS VOTE COUNT
At any Special or Annual Town Meeting, on matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute, a
count of the vote need not be taken unless the vote as declared by the Moderator is immediately
questioned by seven or more voters as provided in General Laws, Chapter 39, §15.
Article 4, Town Meeting, April 1997
***************
TOWN MEETING NOTICE BYLAW
Notice of Town Meetings shall be given by posting an attested copy of the Warrant calling
the same at the Concord Town House and in at least one public location in each precinct in
Concord, at least seven days before the day appointed for an annual Town Meeting, and at
least fourteen days before the day appointed for any special Town Meeting. A copy of the
Warrant of any Town Meeting shall also be sent by mail or otherwise to every household in
Concord, and upon request, to places of religious assembly in Concord, at least seven days
before an annual Town Meeting, and at least fourteen days before a special Town Meeting,
and the return of the officer that he has complied by this bylaw shall be conclusive that he
has done so.
Article 16 (Sub-Article 1), Town Meeting, March 1905
Article 49, Town Meeting, April 1981
Article 30, Town Meeting, April 2004
(see also MGL Chapter 39, §10)
***************
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING NOTICE BYLAW
That the Town vote to instruct the Board of Selectmen that any Warrant for a special Town
Meeting shall be held open for at least 10 days except in case of an emergency or other compelling
circumstances when the Selectmen shall state in writing that a situation exists which
makes it undesirable to hold the Warrant open for the entire 10 day period. Public notice of
the closing date of such Warrant shall be given promptly to the citizens of the Town.
Article 3, Town Meeting, June 1974
RECONSIDERATION OF A VOTE AT THE SAME
TOWN MEETING
A vote at a Town Meeting which is properly subject to reconsideration or rescission later at
the same Town Meeting may be reconsidered or rescinded thereat only on motion of any
voter made:
a) at the same session as the vote to be reconsidered or rescinded, at any time before final
action has been taken on the article in the Warrant under which the vote to be reconsidered
or rescinded was adopted, and on all other articles which by vote of the Meeting
were considered together with said article, or within 20 minutes thereafter; or
b) at an adjourned session, provided that notice that reconsideration or rescission will be
moved thereat is given to the Moderator prior to the adjournment of the session at
which the vote is taken; or
c) at any time before final dissolution of the Meeting, with the consent of the Board of Selectmen
or the Finance Committee.
Article 14, Town Meeting, March 1965
Article 17, Town Meeting, May 1974
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN RECORDS MANAGEMENT BYLAW
Whereas a new archival facility has been constructed at the Concord Free Public Library; and
whereas the Town and the Library have agreed that certain Town records will be removed from the
Town House and permanently stored in the new Library vault; and whereas proper records
management is necessary to preserve those documents having legal, administrative, fiscal or
historical value for use by Town officials and the public;
The Board of Selectmen, upon recommendation of the Director of the Concord Free Public
Library, shall designate a Library employee as Municipal Archivist. The Municipal Archivist shall
have the responsibility for the physical oversight of the Town Records stored in the Library vault,
including access to the records.
Legal custody, with its concomitant responsibility for the preservation, maintenance, disposition and
dissemination of records, shall remain with the officer in charge of the department or the clerk of
the entity to which the records accrue, as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 66, §6. For the purpose of
said §6, Town officers serving as staff to boards, committees and commissions shall have custody of
the records of these entities; the clerks of Town entities without staff shall serve as records
custodians. Upon dissolution of any such ad hoc board, committee or commission, the clerk of said
entity shall surrender the records of that entity to the Town Clerk who shall make provision for the
proper archival processing of said records.
Town officers having legal custody of municipal records shall be trained in records management
techniques and procedures. The Town Clerk shall advise Town officers and clerks of boards,
committees and commission having custody of Town records about current records management
practices and procedures.
Public access to Town records in the Library vault shall be governed by the provisions of M.G.L.
Chapter 66 and 950 CMR 32.00 (Public Records Access Regulations).
The Town Clerk and other departmental officers having legal custody of municipal records stored at
the Library may deputize the Municipal Archivist to certify copies of such records. Such designation
shall be recorded with the Town Clerk.
Town officers and clerks of unstaffed boards, committees or commissions, upon leaving office, shall
surrender the records under their supervision to their successors and shall make oath before the
Town Clerk that such records have been delivered; the Town Clerk shall make record of such oath
as prescribed in M.G.L. Chapter 66, §14.
Article 42, Town Meeting, April 4, 1990
M.G.L. Chapter 66, §§6 and 14
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TRASH PICKUP BYLAW
No person shall put out trash for pickup within six feet of a traveled way or a Town right-ofway
more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of the scheduled or contracted
pickup, and all empty containers must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after said
pickup.
Article 45, Town Meeting, April 1984
Article 63, Town Meeting, April 2006 (replaced entire text of 1984 bylaw)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TREE BYLAW
No person shall tie any horse to any of the trees in any of the public places or ways in said
Town, or affix any signs, placards, advertisements, or posters, to said trees.
Article 16, Town Meeting, March 1905
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
TREE PRESERVATION BYLAW
1. PURPOSE
The intent of the Tree Preservation Bylaw (Tree Bylaw) is to encourage the preservation
and protection of trees on residential lots during significant demolition and/or
construction activity by (a) designating areas of a lot where trees must be protected, and
(b) requiring mitigation for trees removed via replanting or collection of fees to support
the Town’s tree planting and maintenance efforts.
2. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Tree Bylaw, the following definitions shall apply:
2.1 Caliper: Diameter of a tree trunk (in inches). For trees up to and including four (4)
inches in diameter, the caliper is measured six (6) inches above the existing
grade at the base of the tree. For trees larger than four (4) inches in diameter, the
caliper is measured twelve (12) inches above the existing grade at the base of
the tree.
2.2 Certified Arborist: A professional arborist possessing current certification issued
by the International Society of Arboriculture (I.S.A.) and/or the Massachusetts
Arborist Association (M.A.A.).
2.3 Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk four and one-half
(4.5) feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. If a tree splits into
multiple trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet above the existing grade, the
DBH shall be considered to be the measurement taken at the narrowest point
beneath the split.
2.4 Invasive Species: Any plant listed on the most recent version of the
Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List as published by the Massachusetts
Department of Agriculture.
2.5 Protected Tree: Any existing tree with a DBH of six (6) inches or greater that has
any portion of its trunk within a Tree Yard at grade level. Invasive Species (as
defined herein) shall not be considered Protected Trees.
2.6 Reviewing Agent: Any agent delegated in writing by the Town Manager to
administer and implement the Tree Bylaw.
2.7 Tree Preservation Fund: An account established pursuant to (M.G.L. 44 § 53E½)
for the deposit of contributions in lieu of tree replanting as required by this Tree
Bylaw.
2.8 Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan: A plan submitted to the Reviewing Agent for
approval prior to the commencement of demolition and/or construction on a
property on which a Protected Tree is located.
2.9 Tree Removal: Mechanical demolition of a living tree, or any act (a) that has
caused a tree to die within the previous 12 months or (b) is likely to cause
significant decline or death as determined by the Reviewing Agent.
2.10 Tree Save Area: The area surrounding all Protected Trees, sufficiently large to
ensure the health of the Protected Tree(s), including their trunks, crowns, and
root systems.
2.11 Tree Yard: The minimum front, side and rear yard setback area of a parcel in a
residential zoning district as specified in Zoning Bylaw Table III.
3. TOWN OF CONCORD TREE FUND
There is hereby established a Town of Concord Tree Preservation Fund (“Tree Fund”)
pursuant to M.G.L. 44 § 53E½. Any contributions collected per Section 5.2(b) of this
Tree Bylaw shall be deposited in the Tree Fund, and shall be used solely for the
purpose of buying, planting and maintaining trees within residential neighborhoods in
the Town.
4. SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
4.1 Within the residential districts, it is prohibited to remove a protected tree during
construction or within 12 months prior to application for a demolition or building
permit for:
(a) Demolition of an existing structure of 250 gross square feet or greater;
(b) Construction of any building or structure on a vacant lot; or
(c) Construction of one or more structures or additions to structures on a lot that
increases the Gross Floor Area by 50% or greater, excluding basements,
open or screened porches and decks.
4.2 The requirements of this Tree Bylaw shall not apply to:
(a) The subdivision of land under Town of Concord Subdivision Rules and
Regulations;
(b) Those areas of property under the jurisdiction of the Wetlands Protection Act
(Chapter 131 and 310 CMR);
(c) Public Shade Trees pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 87;
(d) Emergency projects necessary for public safety, health and welfare, as
determined by the Reviewing Agent or the Town Tree Warden;
(e) Trees severely damaged as the direct result of a natural disaster;
(f) Trees that are hazardous as determined and confirmed in writing by a
Certified Arborist, and;
(g) Trees currently infected by a disease or insect infestation of a permanent
nature, as determined and confirmed in writing by a Certified Arborist.
5. TREE PROTECTION & MITIGATION
5.1 Protection: Each Protected Tree to be retained on property planned for demolition
and/or construction activity shall be protected by the establishment of a fencedoff
Tree Save Area. The Tree Save Area shall be delineated within the submitted
Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan, shall be installed prior to any demolition or site
work, and shall remain in place until work is completed on the property, excluding
final landscaping. The applicant shall submit written documentation, prepared,
dated and signed by a Certified Arborist, to the Reviewing Agent confirming that
the required Tree Save Area has been installed as identified in the Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan before work on the property commences.
5.2 Mitigation: The removal of a Protected Tree(s) from a property in connection with
one or more of the circumstances set forth in Section 4.1 shall require mitigation
based upon aggregate DBH of Protected Tree(s) removed. Mitigation shall be
achieved by satisfying one or a combination of the following provisions:
(a) Replanting of Trees: For each inch of DBH of the Protected Tree(s) removed,
no less than one-half inch of caliper of new tree(s) shall be replanted in
accordance with the following:
(1) Each new tree must have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches;
(2) Such replanting, either on the applicant’s land or on land abutting the
applicant’s land with the express written approval of the owner of such
abutting land, shall occur prior to the issuance of a Final Certificate of
Occupancy, or be otherwise assured at such time to the satisfaction of the
Reviewing Agent in a manner consistent with the Rules and Regulations;
(b) Contribution to the Town of Concord Tree Preservation Fund: The Planning
Board shall establish a Tree Fund contribution schedule with approval by the
Select Board assigning a value per inch of DBH of Protected Tree(s) to be
removed and not otherwise mitigated. Tree Fund contributions shall be
received by the Town prior to the issuance of all applicable permits.
Mitigation measures shall be identified in the submitted Tree Protection and
Mitigation Plan. The removal or proposed removal of a Protected Tree(s) that has
been mitigated for, in conjunction with a previous applicable permit, shall not
require additional mitigation under subsequent permits, unless such mitigation
has not been completed or otherwise assured.
5.3 Unauthorized Removals: The removal of any Protected Tree not identified on the
Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan shall require mitigation at the rate specified in
Section 5.2. In addition, any person removing any Protected Tree not identified
on the Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan in violation of this bylaw shall be subject
to a non-criminal disposition fine as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for
Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for
Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town
Meeting, as amended. Any such fines shall be paid to the Town of Concord.
5.4 Plan Review and Permit Issuance:
(a) Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan Submittal: Prior to the issuance of a permit
in connection with one or more of the circumstances set forth in Section 4.1
on property on which a Protected Tree is located or was located within twelve
(12) months prior to application, the owner of the property shall submit a Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan to the Reviewing Agent along with the applicable
application and fee.
(b) Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan Requirements: The submitted Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan shall be a to-scale survey or site plan that
indicates the applicable Tree Yard, existing improvements, proposed
construction, Protected Trees, Tree Save Area and preservation and
maintenance procedures in accordance with the Rules and Regulations in
effect at the time. It must also specify any tree removals and proposed
mitigation measures per Section 5.2.
(c) Re-Submittal: If demolition or construction has not commenced within twelve
(12) months of the date that a Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan was
submitted for a property, or if removal of a previously unidentified Protected
Tree is necessary during the course of construction, an amended Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan shall be submitted identifying any changes from
the previous plan and associated mitigation measures.
(d) Reviewing Agent Action: If the Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan is consistent
with the protection and mitigation requirements contained herein and any
established Rules and Regulations, and applicable Tree Fund contributions
have been submitted, the Reviewing Agent may issue any applicable permit
or notify the appropriate Town Department. If the proposal does not meet or
satisfy these requirements, the Reviewing Agent shall notify the applicant and
the appropriate Town Department that all applicable permits shall not be
issued until the requirements are met. If the Reviewing Agent fails to act on an
application within thirty (30) days after the application has been made, it shall
be deemed to be approved.
5.5 Maintenance of Protected and Replanted Trees:
(a) Protected Trees: Each Protected Tree retained shall be maintained in good
health for a period of no less than twenty-four (24) months from the date of
Final Inspection, or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy if applicable.
Should such tree die or significantly decline in the opinion of the Reviewing
Agent within this twenty-four (24) month period, the owner of the property
shall be required to provide mitigation consistent with the requirements for
the removal of a Protected Tree as contained herein within nine (9) months
from said determination.
(b) Replanted Trees: All new trees planted to mitigate the removal of Protected
Tree(s) shall be maintained in good health for a period of no less than twentyfour
(24) months from the date of planting. Should such tree die within this
twenty-four (24) month period, the owner of the property shall be responsible
for replacing the tree with a tree equal to or greater than the size of the
original Replanted Tree at installation; such replacement tree shall be planted
within nine (9) months of the death or serious decline of the original
Replanted Tree.
6. ADMINISTRATION
6.1 Enforcement: The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized to enforce all of
the provisions of the Tree Bylaw.
6.2 Appeals: Any person who has been aggrieved by refusal, order, or decision of the
Reviewing Agent or Building Commissioner, may appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 20 days from the date of such refusal, order, or decision.
7. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Planning Board may promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations which pertain to
the administration of this Tree Bylaw, and shall file a copy of said rules in the office of
the Town Clerk. Such rules may prescribe the size, form, contents, style, and number of
copies of plans and specifications, the procedure for the submission and approval of
such plans, and the procedure for determining final compliance with these regulations.
The adoption or amendment of Rules and Regulations shall be after a public hearing to
receive comments on the proposed or amended Rules and Regulations. The public
hearing shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general local circulation, at least 14
days prior to the date of the public hearing.
And to amend Appendix A of the Non-Criminal Disposition Bylaw by adding the
following:
Bylaw Fine Schedule Fine Allowed Enforcement
Agency
Tree
Preservation
Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd & each subsequent
offense
$100
$200
$300
Building
Commissioner
Article 40, Town Meeting, April 2017
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE SYSTEMS BYLAW
VOTED: to enact the following bylaw relating to underground fuel storage systems.
Section 1. Authority, Purpose, and Definitions
1. Authority
This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Concord under its home rule powers, its police
powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and its authority under
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, §21, Chapter 111, §31, and Chapter 148, §§9 and
13.
1.2 Purpose
This bylaw is intended to control the use and maintenance of underground fuel storage
systems used to store fuel oil in order to
a) protect the groundwater, groundwater recharge areas, surface waters and the natural
environment of the Town against contamination resulting from underground tank leaks
due to tank corrosion, improper installation or other causes, and
b) assure public health and safety through the proper management of fuel oil.
1.3 Definitions
1.3.1 “Effective Date” – means the date on which this bylaw is approved at Town
Meeting.
1.3.2 “Fire Chief” – means the Fire Chief of the Town of Concord and shall include any
designee of the Fire Chief.
1.3.3 “Fuel Oil” – means any liquid hydrocarbon product, other than gasoline, including
without limitation home heating oil, number 2 fuel oil, and diesel oil.
1.3.4 “Owners or Operators” – means each and every person who alone or severally
with others has legal title to any property on which is located any underground fuel
storage system subject to this bylaw; or a tenant, licensee or person in possession,
who has care, charge or control of any such property, in any capacity including
without limitation as agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate
of the holder of legal title; or agent, trustee or a person appointed by a court of
competent jurisdiction; or a mortgagee in possession of such property. Each and
every such person is bound to comply with the provisions of this bylaw as if he were
an owner.
1.3.5 “Storage” – means the holding of any fuel oil for more than 24 hours.
1.3.6 “Storage System” – means one or more tank(s), and all connecting pipes, valves, or
other devices appurtenant thereto.
1.3.7 “Underground Fuel Storage System” – means a system in which ten percent
(10%) or more of the volume of tanks, connecting pipes, valves or other devices are
buried below the surface of the ground unless otherwise specified by the Board of
Health. An underground fuel storage system shall not include (a) storage systems
used to store motor fuel (including diesel) for commercial purposes, (b) a storage
system situated upon or above the surface of the floor in an underground area, such
as the basement of a home, or an underground vault having cement floor and
cement sides.
Section 2. Registration of Existing Underground Fuel Storage System
2.1 Within six months of the effective date of this bylaw, the owner or operator of each
underground fuel storage system shall file with the Fire Chief a form setting forth the size,
type, age (with proof of age), contents and location of such system and pay a one-time
registration fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the registration. This form
shall be made available to the public by the Fire Chief. The age of the underground fuel
storage system is to be measured from the date it was first installed. If the owner cannot
document the age of the system to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, it shall be presumed to
have been installed seventeen years prior to the effective date of this bylaw. Upon
satisfactory completion of the registration form and payment of the registration fee, the Fire
Chief shall issue to the owner a registration tag, which shall be affixed by the owner to the
fill pipe. Any changes in the information contained in the initial registration application,
including any change in the use of the underground fuel storage system, shall be reported
immediately by the owner to the Fire Chief.
2.2. Beginning six months after the effective date of this bylaw, each distributor of fuel oil who
adds fuel oil to an underground fuel storage system without a registration tag shall notify the
Fire Chief within 48 hours of such request of the existence and location of such system. It
shall not be considered a violation of any provision of this bylaw for a fuel oil distributor to
add fuel oil to an underground fuel storage system without a registration tag, provided the
distributor notifies the Fire Chief in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
Section 3. Installation of Underground Fuel Storage System
3.1 In the absence of a variance granted by the Board of Health pursuant to Section 4, no
underground fuel storage systems shall be installed in the Town of Concord after the
effective date of this bylaw.
Section 4. Variances
4.1 The Board of Health may, after receiving comment from the Fire Chief, and after a public
hearing, vary the application of this bylaw in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by the Board of Health, at the applicant’s expense, at
least ten days prior thereto, by certified mail to all abutters to the property on which the tank
is located, and also shall be given by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town. The notice shall include a statement of the variance sought and the reasons therefor.
Any grant or denial of a variance shall be in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the
reasons for the grant or denial. If granted, a variance from the provisions of Section 3.1
regarding the time for removal will give an owner an additional three years to comply with
the Bylaw’s removal requirements. Only one three-year variance will be available for any
underground fuel storage system.
4.2 In considering the variance request, the Board of Health shall take into consideration factors
such as the type of the proposed underground fuel storage system, direction of the
groundwater flow, soil conditions, depth to groundwater, size, shape and slope of the lot,
and proximity of existing and potential water supplies. No variance shall be granted unless
the Board of Health finds that the variance, as granted, would result in substantially the same
degree of environmental protection as required by this bylaw.
Section 5. Administration and Enforcement
5.1 This bylaw shall be administered by the Fire Chief.
5.2 Any owner or fuel oil distributor who violates any provision of this bylaw shall be
subject up to a fine for each offense as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for the
Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-
Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as
amended. Each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Upon request of the Board of Health, the Town Manager may take legal action as
may be necessary to enforce this bylaw.
Section 6. Severability
6.1 Each provision of this bylaw shall be construed as separate, to the end that if any part or
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall continue
in full force and effect.
Section 7. Conflict with APP #22
7.1 To the extent of any discrepancy between this bylaw and the relevant provisions of
Administration Policy and Procedure #22, this bylaw shall control.
Article 43, Town Meeting, April 1993
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
(see also APP #22, Storage of Inflammable Materials and Explosives, 6/19/80)
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town adopt the following bylaw relating to the keeping of unregistered motor
vehicles.
1. Except as may be provided herein, not more than one unregistered motor vehicle shall be
placed, stored or kept on property except property used for business or industrial purposes. No
unregistered motor vehicle shall be stored, placed or kept on a “paper street” or a private way.
All privately owned unregistered motor vehicles shall be stored, placed and kept on private
property.
2. Subject to the conditions herein set forth, the Board of Selectmen may issue a permit authorizing
an applicant to place, store or keep more than one such motor vehicle on such property.
3. Any such permit may be issued by the Board of Selectmen only after said board has
a. held a public hearing on the application therefor, fourteen days' notice of the time, place and
subject matter of which has been given at the expense of the applicant
(i) by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and
(ii) by registered or certified mail to the last known address of all owners of land abutting
upon the property in question as appearing upon the assessors' most recent tax
list, and
b. determined that the presence of more than one such motor vehicle on such property
(i) will not constitute a danger to the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town,
and
(ii) will not create or continue a condition detrimental and injurious to the neighborhood
in which the property in question is located.
4. Each such permit that may be issued by said board
a. shall be issued as a personal privilege of the applicant and not as a grant attached to and
running with the land, and
b. shall include a reasonable time limit but not for a period longer than five years, and
c. may specify a location on the property where such motor vehicle or vehicles will not be exposed
to the view of abutting residents or the general public.
5. This bylaw does not apply
a. to motor vehicles in enclosed buildings, or
b. to motor vehicles on property where the principal business use is a farm, garden or nursery
use provided such motor vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business.
6. The enforcing authority under this bylaw shall be the Concord Police Department.
7. The enforcing authority shall give written notice of any violation of this bylaw to the person
committing the violation. Thirty days after receipt of such notice of violation, the person receiving
the notice shall be liable to a penalty for each separate offense as specified in Appendix A of
the Regulations for the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the
Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town
Meeting, as amended. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Article 52, Town Meeting, March 1966
Article 21, Town Meeting, March 1971
Article 64, Town Meeting, April 2006
TOWN OF CONCORD, MASSACHUSETTS
SALE OF DRINKING WATER IN SINGLE-SERVE PET BOTTLES BYLAW
Section 1. Sale of Drinking Water in Single-Serving PET Bottles
It shall be unlawful to sell non-sparkling, unflavored drinking water in single-serving polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) bottles of 1 liter (34 ounces) or less in the Town of Concord on or after January
1, 2013.
Section 2. Exemption for Emergencies
Sales occurring subsequent to a declaration of an emergency adversely affecting the availability
and/or quality of drinking water to Concord residents by the Emergency Management Director or
other duly-authorized Town, Commonwealth or United States official shall be exempt from this
Bylaw until seven days after such declaration has ended.
Section 3. Enforcement Process
Enforcement of this Bylaw shall be the responsibility of the Town Manager or his/her designee.
The Town Manager shall determine the inspection process to be followed, incorporating the process
into other town duties as appropriate. Any establishment conducting sales in violation of this Bylaw
shall be subject to a non-criminal disposition fine as specified in Appendix A of the Regulations for
the Enforcement of Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal
Disposition of Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended. Any
such fines shall be paid to the Town of Concord.
Section 4. Suspension of the Bylaw
If the Town Manager determines that the cost of implementing and enforcing this Bylaw has
become unreasonable, then the Town Manager shall so advise the Board of Selectmen and the
Board of Selectmen shall conduct a Public Hearing to inform the citizens of such costs. Subsequent
to the Public Hearing, the Board of Selectmen may continue this Bylaw in force or may suspend it
permanently or for such length of time as they may determine.
And to amend Appendix A of the Non-Criminal Disposition Bylaw by adding the following:
Bylaw Fine Schedule Fine Allowed Enforcement
Agency
Drinking Water in
Single-Serving PET
Bottles Bylaw
1st offense
2nd offense
3rd & each
subsequent offense
Warning
$25.00
$50.00
Town Manager’s
Designee
Passed by Counted Majority Vote
(403 voting in favor; 364 opposed)
Annual Town Meeting, April 25, 2012
Approved by Attorney General –September 5, 2012
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
WATER DEPARTMENT REVOLVING FUND BYLAW
VOTED: that the Town, acting under the provisions of Article II of the Amendments to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, commonly called the Home Rule
Amendment, will adopt the following bylaw regarding a Water Department Revolving Fund in the
Town of Concord.
Section 1.
The Town of Concord hereby establishes in the Town Treasury an individual revolving fund
(hereinafter called “Water Fund”) for its Water Department (hereinafter called
“Department”). All receipts of the Department shall be credited to the Water Fund. This
Water Fund shall be kept separate from any other monies or funds of the Town, and shall be
expended only for those purposes outlined below.
Section 2.
There shall be a fixed schedule of prices or rates established by the Public Works
Commission acting as the Water Commissioners for water which shall not be changed more
often than once each year. Changes in the rates shall not be made unless the proposed new
rates are first published in newspapers in general circulation in Concord and considered at a
public hearing held for this purpose. No price or rate in said schedule shall be fixed at less
than production cost as it may be determined by the Town Manager and approved by the
Water Commissioners. The schedules of prices and rates shall be established to yield a zero
balance after the payment of all operation and maintenance expense, principal and interest
on outstanding debt, and an accrued reserve for replacement not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the cost of the plant per annum. The cost of the plant will be determined by the Town
Manager and approved by the Water Commissioners, and be based upon the actual
capitalization of all land, structures, reservoirs, transmission systems, distribution systems,
machinery and equipment, and all other classifications comprising the total department. If a
surplus exists then the schedule of prices or rates will be revised to maintain a zero balance.
The water used by the Town of Concord in its public buildings shall be charged for in
accordance with the prices of the fixed schedules.
Section 3.
The income from sales, jobbing and the above mentioned appropriation shall be received by
the Town Collector, and shall be used by the department to pay the annual expenses of the
plant, to make payments on the indebtedness of the plant, and to set up the depreciation and
sinking fund accounts which will be kept and managed as separate funds for reconstruction,
renewals, extensions, improvements, major repairs, enlargements, additions or similar
purposes. The general authority to manage and expend the fund for the ensuing year by the
Town Manager will require approval by the Town at the annual Town Meeting. The
accounting system to be used for keeping the department accounts will be the Uniform
System of Accounts, prescribed by the Department of Public Utilities for private water
companies, which will reflect on a monthly basis, the status of all accounts and the financial
position of the department.
Interest earned on monies raised by the issuance of bonds and notes in anticipation of
receipt of state or federal grants shall be received by the Town Treasurer and credited to said
fund to be expended in the same manner as other income of the fund.
Section 4.
Nothing in this act shall prevent the Town of Concord from appropriating funds for repairs,
improvements, extensions or additions to the water system over and above those
programmed under the revolving fund. These appropriations will be treated as special
deposits on the department books and administered by the Town Manager for the specific
purposes for which they were appropriated. Any balance after completion of the project will
be returned to the General Fund by the department. Nothing in this act shall prevent the
Town of Concord by a two-thirds (2/3) vote at an annual Town Meeting from transferring
funds from the accumulated sinking fund of the department to reimburse the Town for
funds which may be appropriated and used for department projects as outlined herein. The
department is expressly allowed to accept grants or gifts for department projects.
Section 5.
This bylaw shall take effect upon its acceptance by a majority vote of the qualified voters of
the Town present and voting thereon at the annual Town Meeting or any special Town
Meeting called for the purpose. The receipts of the department for the year in which this
bylaw is accepted will be retained by the department and will constitute the working capital
to establish the fund. This bylaw supersedes any bylaw which is in conflict to it.
Section 6.
If this bylaw is accepted, it may only be revoked by the Town by a majority vote of the
qualified voters of the Town present and voting thereon at the annual or any special Town
Meeting called for the purpose three years after the year in which the bylaw is accepted.
Article 38, Town Meeting, May 1974
Article 6, Town Meeting, April 1981
Article 36, Town Meeting, April 1985
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
WATER USE RESTRICTION BYLAW
Section 1. Authority
This Bylaw is adopted by the Town of Concord under its police powers to protect public health and
welfare and its powers under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, §21 et seq and implements
the Town’s authority to regulate water use pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41,
§69B. This bylaw also implements the Town’s authority under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
40, §41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued by the Department
of Environmental Protection.
Section 2. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare
whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Emergency by providing for enforcement of any
duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the Town or by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 3. Definitions
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or other entity.
State of Water Supply Emergency shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency declared by the Department
of Environmental Protection under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 21G, §§15-17.
State of Water Supply Conservation shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation declared by the
Town pursuant to Section 4 of this Bylaw.
Water Users or Water Consumers shall mean all public and private users of the Town’s public water system,
irrespective of any person’s responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular
facility.
Section 4. Declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation
The Town, through its Public Works Commissioners, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation
upon a determination by a majority vote of the Commission that a shortage of water exists
and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers.
Public notice of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given under Section 6 of the
Bylaw before it may be enforced.
Section 5. Restricted Water Uses
A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following
restrictions, conditions or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water
supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public notice
required under Section 6.
a) Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering – Outdoor watering by water users with odd numbered addresses
is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with even numbered addresses
is restricted to even numbered days.
b) Outdoor Watering Ban – Outdoor watering is prohibited.
c) Outdoor Watering Hours – Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low demand,
to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation and public notice
thereof.
d) Filling Swimming Pools – Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
e) Automatic Sprinkler Use – The use of an outdoor sprinkler system which turns on and off automatically
is prohibited.
Section 6. Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation: Notification of
DEP
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the Town as part of
a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of
the State of Water Supply Conservation. Any restriction imposed under Section 5 shall not be effective
until such notification is provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 7. Termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation: Notice
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Public Works
Commissioners, upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification
of the termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the same manner
required by Section 6.
Section 8. State of Water Supply Emergency: Compliance with DEP Orders
Upon notification of the public that a declaration of a State of Water Supply Emergency has been
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, no person shall violate any provision, restriction,
requirement, condition of any order approved or issued by the Department intended to
bring about an end to the State of Water Supply Emergency.
Section 9. Penalties
Any person violating the Bylaw shall be liable to the Town in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation
and $100.00 for each subsequent violation which shall inure to the Town. Fines shall be recovered
by indictment, or on complaint before the District Court, or by non-criminal disposition in
accordance with §21D of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws. Each day of violation
shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 10. Severability
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other portion or
provision thereof.
Section 11. In-Ground Irrigation System Restrictions
a) All automatic lawn watering systems connected to the public water supply must be equipped
with a timing device that can be set to make the system conform with the Town’s time of use
outdoor watering restrictions.
b) All automatic lawn watering systems must be equipped with some type of moisture sensing device
that will prevent the system from starting automatically when not needed.
c) All automatic lawn watering systems must be installed with an approved backflow prevention
device. Said device will be inspected initially and periodically thereafter by the Town.
d) Any person or entity who now has, or who intends to install an automatic lawn watering system
in the future, must notify the Water and Sewer Division of the existence of said system, or of
their intention to install a new system prior to the actual installation. All systems, those currently
in existence as well as any installed in the future, must comply with all Rules and Regulations of
the Division.
e) Any system not in conformance with the above rules may be disconnected from the public water
supply system.
Article 28, Town Meeting, April 1995
Article 47, Town Meeting, April 2002
Article 58, Annual Town Meeting, April 2013
Town of Concord
TOWN OF CONCORD
MASSACHUSETTS
WETLANDS BYLAW
ARTICLE 58. Upon a MOTION made and duly seconded, the following was VOTED BY AN
OVERWHELMING MAJORITY AND SO DECLARED BY THE MODERATOR:
To amend the Wetlands Bylaw by making the following revisions (proposed new text is italicized, bolded, and
underlined, and proposed deleted text is italicized, bolded, and struck out for the warrant only).
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the Town of Concord’s wetlands, water resources, flood prone areas,
and adjoining upland areas including three major rivers, the Assabet, Sudbury, and Concord and their
tributaries by prior review and regulation of activities deemed by the Concord Natural Resources
Commission (the Commission) likely to have a significant or cumulative effect on resource area values. These
resource area values include, but are not limited to, the following:
public or private water supply
groundwater
flood control
erosion and sedimentation control
storm damage prevention
water quality
prevention and control of pollution
fisheries
wildlife habitat
rare species habitat including rare plant and
animal species
agriculture
deemed important to the community (collectively, the “wetland resource area values protected by this
Bylaw”).
This Bylaw is subject, however, to the rights and benefits accorded to agricultural uses and structures of all
kinds under the laws of the Commonwealth and other relevant Bylaws of the Town of Concord.
2. Jurisdiction
Except as permitted by the Commission or as provided in this Bylaw or its Regulations hereunder, no person
shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into, or otherwise alter the following
resource areas:
2.1 any freshwater wetland, marsh, wet meadow, bog, swamp, flat, bank, or beach bordering on any
reservoir, lake, pond, perennial or intermittent stream, river, brook, or creek; and adjoining lands out
to a distance of 100 feet known as the Buffer Zone;
2.2 any land under the aforementioned waterways and waterbodies;
2.3 any Certified Vernal Pool and adjoining lands out to a distance of 100 feet known as the Vernal
Pool Habitat;
2.4 any perennial stream, river, brook, or creek; the land thereunder; and adjoining lands out to a
distance of 200 feet known as the Riverfront Area, and;
2.5 any Land Subject to Flooding
(collectively the “resource areas protected by this Bylaw”).
2
Concord Wetlands Protection Map
The Natural Resources Commission may refer to, and amend from time to time, a “Concord Wetlands and
Certified Vernal Pool Protection Map” which shall be designed to illustrate the wetland resource areas
(including Certified Vernal Pools) that may be jurisdictional under this Bylaw. The map is to be used as a
general guide only. Field observations and/or engineering calculations shall control in determining
jurisdiction under this bylaw.
3. Exemptions
The following exemptions shall apply and no application or permit is required for:
3.1 The following activities in the 100-foot Buffer Zone (which includes the 25-foot No-Disturb Zone)
or the 200-foot Riverfront Area provided the activity is not within any other resource area; there is
no regrading; no trees greater than 6 inches diameter breast height are removed; there is no
alteration to additional resource areas; and erosion and sedimentation controls are used as needed or
as determined by the Commission or agent of the Commission:
a. Maintaining and repairing existing buildings and structures (excluding repaving) provided
that:
i. the footprint remains the same;
ii. there is no additional alteration of any resource areas; and
iii. there is no heavy equipment or stockpiling within 50 feet of resource areas;
b. Constructing, maintaining, and repairing unpaved pedestrian walkways for private use
provided no use of fill material;
c. Maintaining and repairing existing stonewalls;
d. Maintaining and constructing new fencing provided that:
i. it is greater than 50 feet from the edge of the wetland boundary or 50 feet from
the mean annual high water line of a perennial stream (whichever is farther);
ii. it does not constitute a barrier to wildlife movement (i.e. the fence is greater than
6 inches from the ground surface);
e. Stacking cordwood;
f. Conversion of lawns to decks, sheds, patios, and pools that are accessory to residential
structures, provided the activity, including any discharge pipes, is located more than 50 feet
from the mean annual high water line or bordering vegetated wetland (whichever is farther).
The conversion of such uses, or other impervious surfaces accessory to existing single family
houses to lawn or natural vegetation is also allowed;
g. Activities, such as monitoring wells, exploratory borings, soil sampling, and surveying, that
are temporary, have negligible impacts as determined by the Commission, and are necessary
for planning and design purposes;
h. Planting native species of trees, shrubs, or groundcover (excluding turf lawns).
i. Vista pruning, provided the activity is located more than 50 feet from the mean annual high
water line within a riverfront area or from bordering vegetated wetland, whichever is farther.
3.2 The following activities are exempt in any resource area and Buffer Zone:
a. Routine mowing (including river meadows) and maintenance of lawns, gardens, and
landscaped areas (including tree pruning), in existence on the effective date of this Bylaw or
which are created after such date in accordance of the terms of this Bylaw;
b. Work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural use as
defined by the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations as 310 CMR 10.00; and
c. Removal of dead and dying trees, as confirmed by the Natural Resource Director or a
certified arborist and documented to the Commission within 30 days of removal; and
d. Fencing around existing vegetable gardens that is flush or below ground.
3.3 Emergency Projects
Permits shall not be required for emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health and
safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be
performed by an agency of the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; provided that
3
advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission prior to commencement of work
or within 24 hours after commencement; provided that the Commission or its agent certifies the
work as an emergency project; provided that the work is performed only for the time and place
certified by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and provided
that within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit application shall be filed
with the Commission for review as provided by this Bylaw, if deemed necessary by the Commission.
Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the Commission, the Commission may, after
notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration
and mitigation measures.
3.4 Utilities and Roads
Permits shall not be required for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing
or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to
provide electric, gas, water, sewer, telephone, telegraph, or other telecommunication services,
provided that written notice has been given to the Commission 14 days prior to commencement of
work, and provided that the work conforms to any performance standards and design specifications
in Regulations adopted by the Commission.
The applications and permits required by this Bylaw shall not be required for maintaining and
repairing existing and lawfully located existing roads (excluding bridges and culverts) provided that:
a. there is no increase in impervious surface;
b. there is no additional alteration of resource areas;
c. written notice has been given to the Division of Natural Resources 14 days prior to
commencement of work;
d. erosion and sedimentation controls are used as necessary.
4. Definitions
Except as otherwise provided in this Bylaw or the Regulations hereunder, the definitions of terms and the
procedures in this Bylaw shall be as set forth in the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131 §40) and
Regulations (310 CMR 10.00), as now in effect. In addition, the following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and implementation of this Bylaw.
The term “abutter” shall include all landowners and individual condominium owners.
The term “alter” shall include, without limitation, the following activities when undertaken to, upon, within or
affecting resource areas protected by this Bylaw:
4.1 Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials of any kind;
4.2 Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution,
sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood retention characteristics;
4.3 Drainage, or other disturbance of water level or water table;
4.4 Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material which may degrade water quality;
4.5 Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation;
4.6 Driving of piles, erection or expansion of buildings or structures of any kind;
4.7 Placing of obstructions or dam-like objects in water;
4.8 Destruction of plant life including removal of trees and shrubs;
4.9 Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other physical, biological, or chemical
characteristics of any waters;
4.10 Any activities, changes, or work which may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any body of
water or groundwater;
4
4.11 Incremental activities that have, or may have, a cumulative adverse impact on the resource areas
protected by this Bylaw.
The term “structure” shall mean any manmade component whether above, on, or below ground. It
may include, but not be limited to, any new surface or sub-surface component such as buildings,
foundations, sheds, decks, garages, fences, barns, tenni8s courts, underground tanks and irrigation
systems, swimming pools, and driveways, due to its potential to alter wetland resource area values.
The term “vernal pool” is defined as any confined basin or depression which has been certified by the
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of the resource area for vernal pools shall be the mean
annual high-water line defining the depression.
The term “vernal pool habitat” is the area within 100 feet of a Certified Vernal Pool, which provides essential
habitat for vernal pool species to complete their life cycle.
The term “vista pruning” means the selective thinning of tree branches or understory shrubs to establish a
specific “window” to improve visibility. Vista pruning does not include the cutting of trees limbs which
would reduce the leaf canopy to less than 90% of the existing crown cover and does not include the mowing
or removal of understory brush.
5. Applications and Fees
5.1 Application.
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform activities subject to this Bylaw.
This application shall include the information and plans set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the
Commission.
5.2 Request for Determination of Applicability.
Any person desiring to know whether a proposed activity or an area is subject to this Bylaw may in
writing request a determination from the Commission. The Commission shall accept a Request for
Determination of Applicability (RDA) under the Wetlands Protection Act as a request under this
Bylaw. Such a request for determination shall contain information and plans specified by the Rules
and Regulations of the Commission. The Commission shall issue its order or determination in
writing within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless the applicant authorizes an
extension in writing. If the Commission determines that a proposed activity is subject to this Bylaw
and issues a positive RDA, the applicant may file for approval as outlined in §§ 6.0 – 7.0 of this
Bylaw.
5.3 Request for Wetland Resource Area Approval.
Any person desiring to certify, for purposes of this Bylaw, the limits of resource areas on a site may
file a request for approval of resource area boundaries. This application shall include such
information and plans as are set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Commission to describe
and define the wetland resource areas. The Commission shall accept an Abbreviated Notice of
Resource Area Delineation (ANRAD) under the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131 §40) as
similar request under this Bylaw. Alternatively, the Commission may accept a Request for
Determination of Applicability to determine partial resource area boundaries. The suitability
of this approach will be determined by the Commission.
5.4 Independent Consultants.
The Commission may, at the expense of the applicant, retain an independent consultant for the
purpose of providing the Commission with data, analysis, or other information deemed by the
Commission to be reasonably necessary or appropriate to assist the Commission in reviewing the
application or rendering its decision, in conformity with the provisions of M.G.L. Ch. 44 §53G and
Rules and Regulations of the Commission. This is intended only to assist in reviewing large or
complex projects.
6. Notice and Hearings
6.1 Notice.
5
Any person filing a Notice of Intent, Abbreviated Notice of Intent, or Abbreviated Notice of
Resource Area Delineation, or an amendment to any of the above permits with the Commission at
the same time shall give written notice thereof, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand
delivered, to all abutters at their mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and
abutters to the abutters within 100 feet of the property line of the applicant, including any in another
municipality or across a body of water. The notice shall state a brief description of the project or
other proposal and the date of any Commission hearing or meeting date if known. The notice to
abutters also shall include a copy of the application or request, with plans, or shall state where copies
may be examined and obtained by abutters. An affidavit of the person providing such notice,
with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission. When a
person filing any application is other than the owner, the request shall be sent by the person
making the request to the owner and notice of the hearing and the determination shall be sent
by the Commission to the owner as well as to the person making the request.
6.2 Public Hearing.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application and a public meeting on the
Request for Determination of Applicability, with written notice given at the expense of the applicant,
at least five business days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in Concord. The
Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days from receipt of a completed permit
application unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant. The Commission shall have
authority to continue the hearing to a specific date announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the
hearing, which may include the need for additional information or plans required of the applicant or
others as deemed necessary by the Commission. In the event that the applicant objects to a
continuance or postponement, the hearing shall be closed and the Commission shall take action on
such information as is available.
a. In order to provide sufficient review time the Commission may continue a public hearing or
public meeting if new information is submitted by the applicant, or applicant’s agent, less
than seven (7) business days before the scheduled public hearing or public meeting.
b. The Commission may combine its hearing under this Bylaw with the hearing conducted
under the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131 §40) and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
7. Permits and Conditions
7.1 Administrative Approvals.
Activities considered minor in scope and that would predictably have no measurable or cumulative
impact upon the resource areas protected by this Bylaw, may be reviewed and permitted by the
Natural Resource Director.
7.2 Decision.
If the Commission, after a public hearing and consideration of the general and specific factors set
forth below, determines that the activities which are subject to the application, or the land and water
uses which will result therefrom, are likely to have a significant individual or cumulative effect on the
resource area values protected by this Bylaw, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the
hearing, unless the applicant authorizes an extension in writing, shall issue or deny a permit for the
activities requested. The decision shall be in writing.
7.3 Factors.
In making such a determination, the Commission shall take into account the following factors:
a. the extent to which the applicant has avoided, minimized and mitigated any such effect;
b. any loss, degradation, isolation, and replacement or replication of such protected resource
areas elsewhere in the community and the watershed, resulting from past activities, whether
permitted, unpermitted or exempt; and
c. foreseeable future activities.
6
Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial,
as presented at the public hearing.
7.4 Specific Factors.
a. Buffer Zone
In reviewing activities within the Buffer Zone, the Commission shall presume the Buffer Zone is
important to the protection of other resource areas because activities undertaken in close
proximity have a high likelihood of adverse impact, either immediately, as a consequence of
construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation or existence of the activities.
These adverse impacts from construction and use can include, without limitation, erosion,
siltation, loss of groundwater recharge, poor water quality, and loss of wildlife habitat.
b. Riverfront Area
In reviewing activities within the Riverfront Area, the Commission shall presume the Riverfront
Area is important to all the resource area values unless demonstrated otherwise, and no permit
issued hereunder shall permit any activities unless the applicant, in addition to meeting the
otherwise applicable requirements of this Bylaw, has proved by a preponderance of the credible
evidence that (1) there is no practicable alternative to the proposed project with less adverse
effects, and that (2) such activities, including proposed mitigation measures, will have no
significant adverse impact on the areas or values protected by this Bylaw. The Commission shall
regard as practicable an alternative which is reasonably available and capable of being done after
taking into consideration the proposed property use, overall project purpose (e.g., residential,
institutional, commercial, or industrial), logistics, existing technology, costs of the alternatives,
and overall project costs.
c. Resource Area Loss
To prevent resource area loss, the Commission shall require applicants to avoid alteration
wherever feasible; to minimize alteration; and, where alteration is unavoidable and has been
minimized, to provide full mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication of
wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans, professional design, proper
safeguards, adequate security, and professional monitoring and reporting to assure success,
because of the high likelihood of failure of replication.
d. Certified Vernal Pools
The Commission shall presume that all areas meeting the definition of “vernal pools” under §4.0
of this Bylaw, including the adjacent Vernal Pool Habitat, perform essential habitat functions.
This presumption may be overcome only by the presentation of credible evidence which, in the
judgment of the Commission, demonstrates that the area does not provide essential habitat
functions. Any formal evaluation should be performed by an individual who at least meets the
qualifications under the wildlife habitat section of the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310
CMR 10.00).
e. Setbacks
The Commission shall presume that any activity or alteration within 25 feet of any freshwater
wetlands, marshes, wet meadows, bogs, swamps, springs, banks, beaches, reservoirs, lakes,
ponds, and lands under water bodies, intermittent streams, brooks and creeks, and perennial
rivers and streams, has a significant individual or cumulative impact upon the resource area
values protected by this Bylaw and shall be prohibited.
i. This presumption may be overcome where applicant can clearly demonstrate with credible
evidence the proposed activity or alteration would have no individual or cumulative impact
upon any of the resource area values protected by this Bylaw in accordance with the
Regulations hereunder. Alternatively, the Commission may waive the setback if it
determines that an applicant satisfies the waiver requirements in §7.7.
ii. The following shall not be subject to this setback presumption: Routine maintenance,
repairs and construction on legally preexisting structures so long as there is no expansion
7
in the structure; the installation of public or private utilities along or within legally
existing roadways and driveways; continuation of a legally preexisting use; or the
construction and maintenance of publicly maintained trails that restrict the use of
motorized vehicles. Maintenance, repairs, and construction shall be subject to all other
requirements under this Bylaw and its Regulations hereunder.
7.5 Conditions.
Upon the issuance of a permit, the Commission shall impose conditions it deems necessary or
desirable to protect said wetland resource area values, and all activities shall be conducted in
accordance with those conditions.
7.6 Denial.
Where no conditions are adequate to protect said resource area values, the Commission is
empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of this Bylaw. The Commission
may also deny a permit:
a. for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the Commission;
b. for failure to comply with the procedures, design specifications, performance standards, and
other requirements in Regulations of the Commission; or
c. for failure to avoid, minimize or mitigate unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the
resource area values protected by this Bylaw.
7.7 Waivers.
The Commission may waive specifically identified and requested procedures, design specifications,
performance standards, or other requirements set forth in its Regulations, provided that:
a. the Commission finds in writing after said public hearing that there are no reasonable conditions
or alternatives that would allow the proposed activity to proceed in compliance with said
Regulations;
b. that avoidance, minimization and mitigation have been employed to the maximum extent
feasible; and either
c. the project, considered in its entirety, would result in a net benefit of resource area
values; or
d. that the waiver is necessary to accommodate an overriding public interest or to avoid a decision
that so restricts the use of the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without
compensation.
7.8 Expiration of Permit.
A permit, Determination of Applicability (DOA), or Order of Resource Area Delineation (ORAD)
shall expire three years from the date of issuance. The Commission may extend a permit for one or
more periods of up to three years each, upon written request from the applicant made at least 30 days
prior to the expiration of the permit.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission in its discretion may (a) issue a permit expiring five
years from the date of issuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual
notification of time and location of work is given to the Commission, and (b) extend such permit for
one or more periods of up to five years each, upon written request from the applicant made at least
30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may identify
requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of years, indefinitely, or until permanent
protection is in place, and shall apply to all present and future owners of the land.
7.9 Revocation of Permit.
For good cause the Commission may revoke any permit, DOA, or ORAD or any other order,
determination or other decision issued under this Bylaw after notice to the holder, the public,
abutters, and town boards, pursuant to §6.0, and after a public hearing.
7.10 Amendment of Permit.
8
Amendments to any permit shall be handled in the manner set out in the Wetlands Protection Act
Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and policies thereunder. For good cause, the Commission may also
modify its determination of any resource area boundary delineation established in an ORAD at the
time of issuance of any Order of Conditions for any activity or project on the same site; the issuance
of an ORAD shall not be considered final action on such a boundary delineation request.
7.11 Recordation of Permit.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the permit issued by the Commission
with respect to such work has been recorded in the Middlesex (South) Registry of Deeds or, if the
land affected is registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the Middlesex (South)
Registry of Deeds, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the Commission that the
document has been recorded. If the applicant fails to perform such recording, the Commission may
record the documents itself and require the Applicant to furnish the recording fee therefore, either at
the time of recording or as a condition precedent to the issuance of a COC.
8. Regulations
After public notice at least 14 days prior to public hearing, the Natural Resource Commission may
promulgate such Rules and Regulations to effectuate the purpose of this Bylaw, effective when voted and
approved by a majority vote of Town Meeting, and filed with Town Clerk. Failure by the Commission to
promulgate such Rules and Regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act
to suspend or invalidate the effect of this Bylaw.
9. Compliance
9.1 Scope.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter resource areas protected
by this Bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise
fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply with a permit or an
enforcement order issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
9.2 Entry.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately
owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this Bylaw and may make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission deems necessary, subject to the
constitutions and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth.
9.3 Enforcement.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this Bylaw, its Regulations, and permits issued
thereunder by letters, phone calls, electronic communication and other informal methods, violation
notices, non-criminal citations under M.G.L. Ch. 40 §21D, and civil actions. Any person who
violates provisions of this Bylaw may be ordered to restore the property to its original condition and
take other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, or both.
9.4 Legal Action.
Upon request of the Commission, the Town Manager, Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel may
take legal action for enforcement under civil law.
9.5 Fines.
The Natural Resources Director or other designee of the Town Manager may issue a fine for each
offense as specified in this Bylaw and in Appendix A of the Regulations for the Enforcement of
Town Bylaws under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D and the Bylaw for Non-Criminal Disposition of
Violations adopted under Article 47 of the 1984 Town Meeting, as amended.
As long as any person in violation demonstrates a reasonable, good faith effort to comply with this
Bylaw, the Natural Resources Director shall refrain from issuing fines. However, the Natural
Resources Director shall resort to issuing fines when the violator ceases to demonstrate a reasonable,
good faith effort toward achieving compliance. This provision does not preclude the Natural
9
Resources Director from issuing fines and the Commission from simultaneously ordering mitigation
or restoration of the affected resource area(s).
a. Fine Schedule
Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw, Regulations, permits, or administrative
permits issued hereunder, may be subject to the following fine schedule:
i. $100 per day for the first offense;
ii. $200 per day for the second offense;
iii. $300 per day for the third and subsequent offense.
Each day or a portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense, and each provision of the Bylaw, Regulations, or permit violated shall constitute a
separate offense, provided, however, that the accelerating penalty schedule for second, third and
subsequent offenses set forth above shall not apply to continuing violations or violations of
multiple bylaw provisions arising out of the same activity.
b. Appeals.
In addition to the appeal provisions under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D, persons fined may appeal
in writing to the Commission within 21 days. The Commission shall vacate fines where
compliance has been established or, their issuance is inconsistent with the interests of this Bylaw.
The Commission shall suspend fines as long as the person in violation demonstrates a
reasonable, good faith effort toward obtaining compliance. The Commission may restore
suspended fines at any time during an existing violation. This provision does not preclude the
issuance of fines in conjunction with orders for restoration or mitigation.
10. Burden of Proof
Except where a higher burden of proof is specified in this Bylaw or Regulations adopted by the Commission,
the applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the work
proposed in the permit application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon the
resource area values protected by this Bylaw. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission
supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with
conditions.
11. Appeals
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the superior court in an action filed within 60 days
thereof, in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 249 §4 as amended .
12. Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act
This Bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home
Rule statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131 §40), as amended, and
Regulations (310 CMR 10.00), as amended thereunder.
13. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision
thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit, approval or determination which previously has been issued.
Provided that this Bylaw shall not be applicable to activity that is the subject of a Notice of Intent filed with
the Commission pursuant to the provisions of said Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131 §40) before
May 6, 2009.
Article 43, Town Meeting, April 29, 2009
Approved by Attorney General September 8, 2009
Amended Article 58, April 24, 2013
Approved by Attorney General September 25, 2013

Amended through
Town Meeting
APRIL 2018
ZONING BYLAW
TOWN OF CONCORD, MASSACHUSETTS
i
TOWN OF CONCORD ZONING BYLAW
PREFACE
This volume contains the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Concord, Massachusetts, adopted at the Special Town Meeting of April 1977, and as subsequently amended.
Amendments to the Zoning Bylaw are listed in the Table of Amendments following the Appendix. This table, the Table of Contents, the introduction entitled "Laws and Regulations Governing Land Use", the marginal notes and the Appendix are included for convenience of reference only and are not part of the Bylaw.
For uniformity and legibility, all section titles are capitalized, printed in bold type, and numbered sequentially. A uniform system of capitalization and indentation has been used, and obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Language enclosed in brackets [ ] was added by the editor for clarity.
ii
TOWN OF CONCORD ZONING BYLAW
INFORMATION RELATING TO
LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE
Land use in the Town of Concord is subject to regulation under various Town Bylaws and Statutes of the Commonwealth. Included among these are the Concord Zoning Bylaw, adopted pursuant to Chapter 40A, "The Zoning Act" of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the following:
The Laws of Concord set forth the Select Board’s Rules and Regulations, Standing Votes and Town Charter Bylaws including the Sign Bylaw, which is administered by the Building Commissioner.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations set forth the Planning Board's procedures and standards to be followed in the subdivision of land and the construction of ways.
State Building Code sets forth the regulations, administered by the Building Commissioner, relative to the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal, inspection, issuance and revocation of permits or licenses, installation of equipment, classification and definition of buildings and structures and use or occupancy thereof.
State Architectural Access Board Rules & Regulations are designed to make public buildings accessible to, functional for, and safe for use by persons with disabilities as administered by the Building Commissioner and State Architectural Access Board.
State Environmental Code - Title 5 sets forth the minimum standards for the protection of public health and the environment when use of individual systems for the disposal of sanitary sewage is needed because in areas where municipal sewage systems are not available.
Historic Districts set forth the boundary of the Historic Districts for the preservation and protection of buildings, places and districts of historic or literary significance in such districts through the development and maintenance of appropriate settings as administered by the Historic Districts Commission in the Historic Districts Guidelines.
Demolition Review Bylaw establishes a uniform process for preserving and protecting significant building and structures as administered by the Historical Commission.
State Wetlands Protection Act & Rivers Protection Act are administered by the Natural Resources Commission and provide for public review of proposed projects which involve construction or any land alteration in or near wetlands, water resources, adjacent upland areas, the 100-year floodplains, land subject to periodic isolated flooding, or land within 200 feet of a perennial river.
Wetlands Bylaw sets forth to protect Concord’s wetlands, water resources, flood prone areas, Certified Vernal Pools, and adjoining upland areas including three major rivers and their tributaries, administered by the Natural Resources Commission.
Select Board supervises use of Town land, adopts regulations on diverse matters such as metered parking, acts on public utility petitions, and is the local licensing authority for liquor, entertainment, and similar activities.
Tree Preservation Bylaw encourages the preservation and protection of trees on residential lots for certain construction activities or mitigation for trees removed via replanting or collection of fees. The Tree Preservation Bylaw Rules and Regulations lay out the rules and regulations that the Building Commissioner and Reviewing Agent use to administer the Bylaw.
iii
TOWN OF CONCORD ZONING BYLAW
PREFACE............................................................................................................................ i
LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE............................................. ii
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS............................................... 1
1.1 Authority.................................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Purpose....................................................................................................................... 1
1.3 Definitions.................................................................................................................. 1
1.4 Changes in Numbering …………………………………….………………………..4
SECTION 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ................................................................. 5
2.1 Classification of Districts........................................................................................... 5
2.2 Zoning Map................................................................................................................ 6
2.3 Zoning Map Interpretation......................................................................................... 6
SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS......................................................................................... 9
3.1 General Provisions ..................................................................................................... 9
3.2 Provisions Applicable to Section 4, Table I............................................................... 9
3.3 Formula Business ……………………………………………………………….. 9
SECTION 4. CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL USES .................................................. 13
4.1 Extensive Uses ......................................................................................................... 13
4.2 Residential Uses....................................................................................................... 14
4.3 Institutional Uses ……………………………………………..………………..…..17
4.4 Governmental and Utility Use ............................................................................... 19
4.5 Business Uses .......................................................................................................... 19
4.6 Industrial Uses ......................................................................................................... 21
4.7 Restricted and Prohibited Uses ................................................................................ 22
4.8 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium………………………………....22
TABLE I - PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS………..…………………………24
SECTION 5. ACCESSORY USES ........................................................................................ 26
5.1 General Provisions ................................................................................................... 26
5.2 Provisions Applicable to Table II ............................................................................ 26
5.3 TABLE II - ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS ……………………………….27
5.4 Temporary Accessory Uses ...................................................................................... 31
iv
TOWN OF CONCORD
ZONING BYLAW
SECTION 6. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS .................................................................33
6.1 Dimensions .............................................................................................................. 33
6.2 Interpretation............................................................................................................ 33
6.3 Special Dimensional Exceptions.............................................................................. 37
TABLE III - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.................................................... 41
SECTION 7. SPECIAL PROVISIONS ................................................................................. 45
7.1 Nonconforming Uses ............................................................................................... 45
7.2 Flood Plain Conservancy District ............................................................................ 46
7.3 Wetlands Conservancy District................................................................................ 50
7.4 By-Pass District ....................................................................................................... 50
7.5 Earth Removal ......................................................................................................... 51
7.6 Groundwater Conservancy District.......................................................................... 52
7.7 Off-street Parking, Loading, and Design Standards ................................................ 58
TABLE IV - MINIMUM PARKING……………………………..……………….58
7.8 Personal Wireless Communications Facility…………………………………….....67
7.9 Large-Scale Solar Facility…………………… ……………………………………77
7.10 Public Service Corporation Overlay District (PSCOD)..…………….…………… 81
SECTION 8. RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND.......................................................................... 85
8.1 Purpose..................................................................................................................... 85
8.2 Standards.................................................................................................................. 85
8.3 Limitation on Subdivision ...................................................................................... 86
8.4 Other Restrictions .................................................................................................... 86
8.5 Dedication of Land to the Town.............................................................................. 86
8.6 Procedure for Approval............................................................................................ 86
8.7 Special Permit .......................................................................................................... 86
SECTION 9. RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT ................................................ 87
9.1 Purpose..................................................................................................................... 87
9.2 Standards.................................................................................................................. 87
9.3 Procedure for Approval............................................................................................ 89
9.4 Optional Special Provisions for Affordable Housing by the Board ........................ 90
9.5 Amendments Without Public Hearing..................................................................... 92
v
TOWN OF CONCORD ZONING BYLAW
SECTION 10. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD).................................... 93
10.1 Purpose..................................................................................................................... 93
10.2 Standards.................................................................................................................. 93
10.3 Special Provisions.................................................................................................... 97
10.4 Application for Special Permit; ............................................................................ 100
Reports and Recommendations; Issuance of Special Permit
SECTION 11. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ............................................. 103
11.1 Enforcement........................................................................................................... 103
11.2 Building Permit...................................................................................................... 103
11.3 Certificate of Occupancy ....................................................................................... 103
11.4 Board of Appeals ................................................................................................... 103
11.5 Rules and Regulations............................................................................................ 104
11.6 Special Permit ........................................................................................................ 104
11.7 Variance ................................................................................................................. 105
11.8 Site Plan Review.................................................................................................... 105
11.9 Bylaw Construction ............................................................................................... 108
11.10 Validity and Separability .................................................................................... 108
GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE ZONING ACT .....................................................A-1
SUMMARY OF ZONING HISTORY IN CONCORD ................................................. B-1
INDEX.............................................................................................................................C-1
CONCORD ZONING
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
vi
1
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 Authority
The Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw is adopted pursuant to and under the authority of
"The Zoning Act" of the Commonwealth ofMassachusetts, Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
1.2 Purpose
The purpose of this Bylaw is to implement the zoning powers granted to the Town of Concord under the Constitution and Statutes of the Commonwealth and includes but is not limited to, the following objectives: to lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply, drainage, sewage disposal, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings, including conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to preserve and increase amenities; and to preserve and enhance the development of the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of the community.
1.3 Definitions
In this Bylaw the following terms shall have the following meanings:
1.3.1 Abandoned, abandonment: The visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner or occupant to discontinue or abandon a particular nonconforming use or structure, including, but not limited to, such actions as removal of equipment or furnishings customarily incident to a particular use without their immediate replacement, or the replacement of a nonconforming use or structure with a conforming use or structure.
1.3.2 Affordable housing: A dwelling unit that by deed restriction is and will remain (a) for sale and sold at a selling price that will result in an annual shelter cost (which for this purpose shall include, to the extent required by the applicable federal, state or local program, real estate taxes, insurance and mortgage interest) of not more than thirty percent (30%) of the annual household income of a qualified affordable housing unit purchaser; or (b) available for rent and rented at an annual rent (which for this purpose shall include, to the extent required by the applicable federal, state or local program, an appropriate, allowance for utilities to the extent they are not otherwise included in the rent) that will result in an annual shelter cost of not more than thirty percent (30%) of the annual household income of a qualified affordable housing unit tenant; and/or, (c) a dwelling unit that qualifies and that will be included in the Affordable Housing Inventory for the Town of Concord that is maintained by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development or any successor entity.
2
CONCORD ZONING
A qualified affordable housing unit purchaser or a qualified affordable housing unit tenant with respect to a unit is an individual or household with total annual income which qualified such purchaser or tenant under the appropriate provisions of the federal, state or local program applicable to the unit.
1.3.3 Board: The Town of Concord Board of Appeals.
1.3.4 Building: A structure, whether portable or fixed, enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, having a roof, and built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering whether or not permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed, where the context requires, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
1.3.5 Building Code: The State Building Code of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as the same may be amended from time to time. Terms used in this Bylaw shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in the Building Code unless the context of usage in this Bylaw clearly indicates another meaning.
1.3.6 Bylaw: Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw. All sections and subsections refer to sections and subsections of this Bylaw unless otherwise specifically stated.
1.3.7 Dwelling: A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for human habitation.
1.3.8 Dwelling unit: A structure or portion thereof providing complete, independent, and private living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
1.3.9 Family day care: A private dwelling which receives for temporary custody not more than six children, including participating children living in the residence, provided said dwelling and day care provider have received a license from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to provide family day care, as defined in G.L.c.28A. For purposes of this bylaw, a family day care home is a customary home occupation.
1.3.10 Formula business: A type of business activity that maintains two or more of the following standardized features:
1. array of services and/or merchandise, or menu
2. trademark, logo, service mark or symbol
3. décor, architecture, layout or color scheme
4. uniforms
5. sign
and these features are the same as or substantially the same as fifteen or more such establishments, regardless of ownership or location. Formula businesses shall not include post offices, churches, schools, government facilities, grocery stores or accessory uses.
3
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
1.3.11 Frontage: A continuous portion of a sideline of a street between the side lines of a lot, which provides safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian access from said street to the principal use of a lot.
1.3.12 Gross floor area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two (2) buildings, not including any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, eight inches (6'8").
1.3.13 Home occupation: A non-residential use of a dwelling unit that is subordinate but compatible to residential use.
1.3.14 Large family day care: A private dwelling which receives for temporary custody up to ten children, including participating children living in the residence, provided said dwelling an day care provider have received a license from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to provide family day care, as defined in G.L.c28A. For purposes of this bylaw, a family day care home is a customary home occupation.
1.3.15 Lot: An area of land in one ownership with definitive boundaries ascertainable from a recorded deed or recorded plan.
1.3.16 Mobile medical facility: a trailer or other mobile structure that has been modified by the installation of specialized medical testing equipment as a medical center and laboratory.
1.3.17 Multi-unit dwelling: A structure containing more than two (2) dwelling units. This term shall include, but is not limited to, triplex, quadraplex, and townhouse structures containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
1.3.18 One ownership: Undivided ownership of a lot by one or more natural or legal persons, whether title thereto be joint, in common, or by the entirety.
1.3.19 Planning Board: The Town of Concord Planning Board.
1.3.20 Record, or recorded: Title to a lot as disclosed by a deed recorded in the Middlesex title issued by the Land Court and registered in the Land Court section of such Registry, or record title disclosed by any and all pertinent public records.
1.3.21 Single-family detached dwelling: A structure containing one dwelling unit designed for and used exclusively as a single housekeeping unit.
1.3.22 Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A single-family dwelling unit attached to another single-family dwelling unit by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling unit located on a separate lot.
1.3.23 Storage Trailers: An enclosed metal storage container that was designed principally for the transport of goods or materials.
4
CONCORD ZONING
1.3.24 Street: An improved public way laid out by the Town of Concord, the Middlesex County Commissioners or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or a way which the Concord Town Clerk certifies is maintained by public authority and used as a public way, or a way in existence having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to accommodate the vehicular traffic anticipated by reason of the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. A way shall not be a "street" with respect to any lot which does not have appurtenant to it a recorded right of access to and over such way for vehicular traffic.
1.3.25 Structure: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, recreational tramway, mast for radio antenna or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the context requires, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
1.3.26 Two-family dwelling: A structure, located on a single lot, containing two (2) dwelling units each of which is totally separated from the other either by an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall except for a common stairwell, or by a common vertical wall. This definition includes the duplex dwelling.
1.3.27 Use, accessory: Any use which (1) is subordinate to a principal use, (2) is secondary in physical area, intensity of use, and purpose to the principal use served, and (3) is customarily incidental to the principal use.
1.3.28 Use or structure, Nonconforming: A use or structure, lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Bylaw or any subsequent amendment hereto, which does not conform to one or more provisions of this Bylaw.
1.3.29 Use, principal: The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is permitted to be used, occupied or maintained under this Bylaw.
1.4 Changes in Numbering
The Town Clerk is authorized to make non-substantive changes to the numbering of this Bylaw and future amendments hereto in order to make numbering conform to the numbering format of this Bylaw.
5
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
SECTION 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
2.1 Classification of Districts
For the purpose of this Bylaw, the Town of Concord is hereby divided into the following classes of zoning districts:
Residential Districts Residence AA ResidenceA Residence B Residence C
Commercial Districts
Business
West Concord Village (WCV) West Concord Business (WCB)
Concord Center Business (CCB)
Thoreau Depot Business (TDB)
Nine Acre Corner Business (NACB) Limited Business
#1@Elm Street and Route 2
#2@59 Walden Street
#3@Monument Square
#4@Walden Street and Route 2
#5@Main Street at the Sudbury River
#6@Main Street and Old Road to Nine Acre Corner
#7@106 Main Street
#8@68 Commonwealth Avenue
Medical-Professional
North of Route 2
South of Route 2
Industrial Districts
West Concord Industrial
Industrial
Industrial Park A (IP A) Industrial Park B (IP B) Limited Industrial Park
Limited Industrial Park #1@2229 Main Street
Limited Industrial Park #2@Main Street and Forest Ridge Road
Conservancy Districts Flood Plain Groundwater Wetlands
By-Pass District
Personal Wireless Communication Facilities District
Public Service Corporation Overlay District
6
CONCORD ZONING
2.2 Zoning Map
Location and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown on the following identified zoning maps as the same may be hereinafter amended, which maps are herein collectively referred to as "The ZoningMap".
Zoning Districts, Town of Concord, 2012 (Scale 1" = 100').
Flood Plain Conservancy District, Town of Concord, January 1, 2015 (Scale 1”=1000’ consisting of a single sheet). The general boundaries of the Flood Plain Conservancy District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Concord designated as Zone A, AE and AH, on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Concord are panel numbers 25017C0244F, 25017C0263F, 25017C0264F, 25017C0356F, 25017C0357F, 25017C0358F, 25017C0359F, 25017C0366F, 25017C0367F, 25017C0376F, 25017C0377F, 25017C0378F, 25017C0379F, 25017C0381F, 25017C0383F, 25017C0386F and 25017C0387F dated July 7, 2014, with panels 25017C0378F and 25017C0379F revised by Letter of Map Revision dated August 14, 2015. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 7, 2014 and Letter of Map Revision dated August 14, 2015. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk.
Groundwater Conservancy District, Town of Concord, January 4, 2010 (Scale 1" = 1000' consisting of a single sheet).
Public Service Corporation Overlay District, the Town of Concord, January 2, 2013 (no scale), consisting of a single sheet.
Wetlands Conservancy District, Town of Concord, 1976 (Scale 1" = 100' consisting of 122
sheets).
Wireless Communication Facility(s) Overlay District, Town of Concord, April 26, 2004
(Scale 1” = 1000’ consisting of a single sheet).
The Conservancy Districts and the Wireless Communication Facility(s) Overlay District are overlay districts whose boundaries are superimposed on the Residential, Commercial, Industrial and By-Pass Districts established by this Bylaw. Said zoning maps are hereby made part of this Bylaw and shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
2.3 Zoning Map Interpretation
For purposes of interpretation of The ZoningMap, the following shall apply:
2.3.1 Zoning boundaries, which appear to follow streets, railroads or rivers and streams, shall coincide with the centerline thereof.
2.3.2 Zoning boundaries, which appear to follow a property or lot line, the exact location of which is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, shall coincide with the actual property or lot line.
7
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
2.3.3 Zoning boundaries, which appear to run parallel to the sidelines of streets or railroads, shall be regarded as parallel to such sidelines.
2.3.4 Where a zoning boundary divides a lot at the time such zoning boundary was first adopted, the regulations for either district may, upon the issuance of a special permit from the Board with the advice of the Planning Board, be extended thirty (30) feet into the other district, provided that, in a case where the less restrictive portion of the lot is to be extended into the more restrictive portion, the lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district.
2.3.5 The exact boundaries of the Flood Plain Conservancy District shall be the location on the ground of the 100-year flood contours shown on the FPCD maps or the Middlesex County FIRMs, and as determined by an actual field survey. Supplementary information concerning flood elevations and the limits of the floodway may be found in the Middlesex County “Flood Insurance Study" booklet dated July 7, 2014 and Letter of Map Revision dated August 14, 2015 and published by the Federal EmergencyManagement Agency.
8
CONCORD ZONING
[This page has been intentionally left blank]
9
USE REGULATIONS SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS
3.1 General Provisions
No land shall be used or building or other structures erected or modified in any district for any use not set forth in Section 4, Table I and denoted either with the word "yes" or by the letters "SP", except accessory uses permitted pursuant to Section 5 and nonconforming uses as provided in subsection 7.1. It is the intent of this Bylaw to prohibit in any district any use, which is not specifically permitted, as well as any use, which is denoted in Section 4, Table I, by the word "no".
3.2 Provisions Applicable to Section 4, Table I
Existing and future uses of land, buildings, or structures shall be allocated among the categories set forth in Section 4, Table I. Each use set forth in the principal use column of Table I shall be defined by reference to the subsection of Section 4 appearing next to such principal use, and each such use shall be subject to any conditions or limitations that are set forth in Table I or in the applicable subsection.
3.2.1 A use listed in Section 4, Table I, is permitted in any district under which it is denoted by the word "yes". If denoted by the letters "SP", the use is permitted only if the Board, or the Planning Board where it is specifically designated in this Bylaw, grants a special permit as provided herein and makes such specific findings as may be required by this Bylaw in respect of such use.
3.2.2 The word "yes" followed by one or more numerals in the Limited Business column denotes that the use is permitted only in the Limited Business District corresponding to such numeral(s). If no numeral appears, the use is permitted in all Limited Business Districts in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw.
3.2.3 A use listed in Section 4, Table I, subsection 4.3 Institutional Uses, subsection 4.5 Business Uses and subsection 4.6 Industrial Uses, other than parking and loading, is permitted in the Industrial Park Districts and Limited Industrial Park District only when conducted entirely within one or more buildings.
3.2.4 Site plan approval in accordance with subsection 11.8 is required for a use where the letter "R" appears and is not required where the letters "NR" appear.
3.3 Formula Business
3.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of regulating the number, location, and visual features of formula businesses in the West Concord Business District and the West Concord Village District is to maintain the unique, small-scale, small-town character and the quality of life for all Concord residents by preserving the individuality and distinctive appeal of the West Concord Business and the West Concord Village districts. Preservation of the existing
10
CONCORD ZONING
character, diversity, variety and scale of West Concord’s Business and Village districts is also vital to the continuation of West Concord’s ability to attract both residents and visitors. West Concord’s Business and Village districts currently provide a mix of unique businesses, architecture, signage, and graphic and other design elements, which gives West Concord a distinctive visual appearance and small-scale eclectic ambiance. These goals are evidenced in the Comprehensive Long Range Plan of 2005, the Village Centers Study of 2007, the Call to Action of 2008, the West Concord Task Force Public Survey of 2009, in committee and public comment in public meetings and public forums of the West Concord Task Force and in the West Concord Master Plan of 2010.
3.3.2 Limitation on the number of formula businesses in the West Concord Business District and the West Concord Village District combined: Limiting the number of formula businesses will allow the West Concord Business District and the West Concord Village District to avoid the proliferation of businesses that are homogenous, visually obtrusive, and often have a high impact on infrastructure, will safeguard West Concord’s historical relevance, and will ensure that Concord residents and tourists continue to have unique dining, retail and service experiences inWest Concord.
The total number of formula businesses in the West Concord Business District and the West Concord Village District combined is limited to ten. When the total existing number is equal to or greater than ten, no new formula businesses can be established until and unless an existing formula business closes, adapts so that it no longer qualifies as a formula business, or relocates outside of the West Concord Business or West Concord Village Districts. If a business in current operation becomes a formula business by means of additional locations being established, this business shall count toward the total number of formula businesses, but shall not be considered as a formula business being established.
3.3.3 Special permit required: The establishment of a new formula business or expansion or relocation of an existing formula business in the West Concord Business District and the West Concord Village District shall require the grant of a special permit as defined in Section 11.6 from the Planning Board.
3.3.4 Additional criteria for establishment, expansion, or relocation of a formula business in the West Concord Business District and West Concord Village District:
(a) The formula business is designed and operated in a manner that preserves the community’s distinctive small-town character;
(b) The formula business contributes to the diversity of uses to assure a balanced mix of businesses available to serve residents and visitors;
(c) The formula business does not result in an over-concentration of formula businesses in its immediate vicinity;
(d) The formula business use, together with the design and any improvements, is compatible with the existing architecture and unique aesthetic appearance of the district;
11
USE REGULATIONS
(e) The formula business shall not increase the intensity of use on the site to a level that will adversely impact land uses in the area, pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or the public welfare; and
(f) No drive-through facilities are allowed.
3.3.5 Determination: A formula business may adapt its business activities in consultation with the Building Inspector so that the proposed establishment no longer qualifies as a formula business as defined in subsection 1.3.10.
12
CONCORD ZONING
[This page has been intentionally left blank]
13
PRINCIPAL USES
SECTION 4. CLASSIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL USES
4.1 Extensive Uses
4.1.1 Forestry - Cultivating and harvesting of forest products.
4.1.2 Farming, or agriculture – Farming in all of its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural or horticultural commodities, the growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, the raising of livestock including horses, the keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise, the keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle and other domesticated animals used for food purposes, bees, fur-bearing animals, and any forestry or lumbering operations, or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operations, including preparations for market, delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for transportation to market. Horticulture shall include the growing and keeping of nursery stock and the sale thereof. Said nursery stock shall be considered to be produced by the owner or lessee of the land if it is nourished, maintained and managed while on the premises.
4.1.3 Greenhouse and Farm Stand- Commercial greenhouse, salesroom, or stand for the sale of nursery, garden agricultural or farming products, including facilities for the sale of produce, wine and dairy products, provided that either during the months of June, July, August and September of each year or during the harvest season of the primary crop raised on land of the owner or lessee, 25 percent of such products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner or lessee of the land on which the facility is located, or at least 25 percent of such products for sale, based on either gross annual sales or annual volume, have been produced by the owner or lessee of the land on which the facility is located and at least an additional 50 percent of such products for sale, based upon either gross annual sales or annual volume, have been produced in Massachusetts on land other than that on which the facility is located, used for the primary purpose of commercial agriculture, aquaculture, silviculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture, whether by the owner or lessee of the land on which the facility is located or by another, except that all such activities are only permitted on parcels of 5 acres or more or; parcels 2 acres or more if the sale of products produced from the agriculture, aquaculture, silviculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture use on the parcel annually generates at least $1,000 per acre based on gross sales dollars in area not zoned for agriculture, aquaculture, silviculture, horticultures, floriculture or viticulture.
4.1.4 Earth removal - See subsection 7.5.
4.1.5 Conservation use -Wildlife management, boating, fishing and hunting.
4.1.6 Private recreation - Country club, riding academy, playground and tennis, fishing, boating, skating, swimming, fitness clubs and similar facility for organized athletic activities.
14
CONCORD ZONING
4.2 Residential Uses
4.2.1 Single-family dwelling: No more than one dwelling unit shall be located upon a lot except as provided in subsections 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4.
4.2.2 Two-family or additional dwelling unit:
4.2.2.1 The Board may grant a special permit for the alteration and use of a building existing at the time its lot is placed in a single residence district for not more than two (2) dwelling units, provided the gross floor area, excluding basements, open or screened porches, and decks, of any additions shall not exceed in all one-fifth of the gross floor area, excluding basements, open or screened porches, and decks, of the existing building. Any additions to create an additional dwelling unit pursuant to this section shall be integral to and part of the existing building, without use of a tunnel or pergola, and share a common wall or floor with the existing building.
4.2.2.2 For the purpose of providing small additional dwelling units to rent without adding to the number of buildings in the Town or substantially altering the appearance of the Town and for the purpose of enabling owners of single-family dwellings larger than required for their present needs to share space and the burdens of homeownership, the Board may grant a special permit for one additional dwelling unit in a single-family dwelling for which a final certificate of occupancy was issued at least two years prior to an application for said permit, or if no such certificate was issued, which was legally occupied prior to such date, provide that:
(a) The area of the lot on which the single-family dwelling is located shall not be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet;
(b) The dwelling unit shall be located within the single-family dwelling as it existed two years prior to the date of application for the special permit;
(c) The dwelling unit shall be a use incidental to the single-family dwelling and shall occupy no more than one-third of the gross floor area (as of two years prior to the date of application for the special permit) of the single-family dwelling exclusive of any garage, shed or similar structure of accessory use attached to the single- family dwelling;
(d) The dwelling unit shall have a minimum gross floor area of three hundred fifty
(350) square feet;
(e) No more than one such dwelling unit shall exist within the single-family dwelling;
(f) No more than minimum exterior alterations shall be made to the single-family dwelling;
(g) Either the dwelling unit or the single-family dwelling shall be occupied by the owner of the property except for bona fide temporary absences;
15
PRINCIPAL USES
(h) Floor plans of the dwelling unit and the single-family dwelling, with a site plan showing the location of the single-family dwelling on the lot, have been filed with the Building Inspector prior to or at the time of application to the Board;
(i) Application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be made to the Building Inspector and no use or occupancy shall be allowed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building Inspector;
(j) A site plan, at a measurable scale, shall be submitted with the application to the
Board showing the location and arrangement of parking spaces on the property;
(k) Parking for the dwelling unit and the single-family dwelling shall be provided on the property as required in Table IV. Minimum Parking;
(l) Confirmation that the property is served by Town sewer or, alternatively, confirmation that the on-site subsurface disposal system is adequate to accommodate any increased flows generated by the additional dwelling unit.
(m)Additional landscaping and fencing may be required to provide visual and auditory protection to adjacent properties;
(n) The special permit expires upon the sale or transfer of the equity interest in the property to another owner. A new owner may seek a special permit from the Board, and the Board may grant a special permit, for continued use of the dwelling unit provided that the property is in compliance with all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw.
4.2.3 Combined business/residence: A dwelling unit or units may be located on the same lot where commercial uses are conducted provided that:
4.2.3.1 Each such unit is structurally part of the commercial building, having common walls, foundation, roof and floor;
4.2.3.2 For development of four (4) or more units, at least twenty percent of the dwelling units (and no less than one unit) are available as affordable housing;
4.2.3.3 Open space shall be provided on the lot (apart from any paved area) equal to twice the gross floor area of the residential portion of the building. Any deck, balcony or rooftop garden shall be considered as open space if its floor area is more than twenty-five (25) square feet. The Board may grant a special permit to allow less than the required amount of open space if the Board finds that the proposed combined business/residence development is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that it will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place.
4.2.3.4 Except in Limited Business District #2, in a combined business/residence building where more than ten percent of the dwelling units are available as affordable housing, the Board may grant a special permit to allow less than the required amount of open space, an increase in the height of the building to forty (40) feet and/or a decrease in the number of parking spaces if the Board finds that the proposed combined business/residence development is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that it will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place.
16
CONCORD ZONING
4.2.4 Combined industrial/business/residence: A dwelling unit or units and retail store(s) may be located on the same lot where industrial uses and non-retail business uses are conducted provided that:
4.2.4.1 Each such dwelling unit and retail store (including grocery store) is structurally part of an industrial/non-retail business building(s), having at least a common foundation and roof.
4.2.4.2 At least twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units (and no less than one unit) are available as affordable housing; however, if at least ten (10) percent of the industrial use and/or non-retail business use is available at an affordable rent or lease as determined by the Board, then the number of required affordable dwelling units may be reduced from twenty (20) percent to no less than ten (10) percent.
4.2.4.3 In a combined industrial/business/residence project, one or more retail store(s) or grocery store(s) may be allowed as a principal use, but in the aggregate they shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area.
4.2.4.4 In a combined industrial/business/residence project, the industrial and non-retail business uses combined shall be not less than thirty percent (30%) of the total gross floor area.
4.2.4.5 No residential dwelling units shall be located on the ground/first floor.
4.2.4.6 If located in the West Concord Industrial District, the design of the structure and the site for the combined industrial/business/residence project shall adhere to the recommendations of the West Concord Design Guidelines. A special permit shall be issued under this section only if the Board shall find that the combined industrial/business/residence use is in harmony with or advances the recommendations and intent of the 2010 West Concord Master Plan and the criteria listed in Section 11.6 Special Permit.
4.2.4.7 In a combined industrial/business/residence project where at least ten percent of the dwelling units are available as affordable housing and at least ten percent of the industrial or non-retail business use area is available at an affordable rent or lease, the Board may grant a special permit to allow an increase in the height of the building to forty (40) feet, as defined in Section 6.2.11, if the Board finds that the proposed combined industrial/business/residence project is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that it will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
4.2.5 Residential compound: A limited subdivision of land for single-family dwellings in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.
4.2.6 Residential cluster development: Single-family dwelling in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.
4.2.7 Planned residential development: Single-family detached or attached dwelling or multi-unit structures of all types in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.
4.2.8 Boarding house: A single-family detached dwelling in which permanent lodging is provided for consideration to more than three (3) persons unrelated to the owner or proprietor. The term "boarding house" shall include dormitories.
17
PRINCIPAL USES
4.2.9 Hotel, Extended-stay hotel and Motel: An establishment providing four (4) or more rooms or suites for transient lodging accommodations (which may include a kitchen area). Rooms or suites in an extended-stay hotel shall not qualify as a principal residence. The lot on which a hotel, extended-stay hotel or motel is located shall contain open space of not less than twice the gross floor area of the hotel or motel in addition to any area required for parking or vehicular access.
4.3 Institutional Uses
4.3.1 Educational: Use of land, buildings and structures for providing learning in a general range of subjects on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions of bodies politic or by a recognized religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational entity which may include athletic facilities, dormitories, administrative offices and similar facilities and activities whose purpose is substantially related to furthering learning.
4.3.2 Child care facility: An establishment licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for the purpose of operating either 1) a day care center, which provides daily care for children under the age of seven (7) years, or sixteen (16) years if such children have special needs; or 2) a school age child care program, which provides supervised group care for children enrolled in kindergarten or older children who are not more than fourteen (14) years of age, or sixteen (16) years of age if such children have special needs, provided that:
4.3.2.1 In the residential districts, such activities shall be permitted only on (a) a lot which, with all its structures, conforms to the requirements of the Bylaw, or (b) a lawfully nonconforming lot or structure as to which the area of the lot is not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet;
4.3.2.2 In the residential districts or on lots which are not in a residential district but are adjacent to a residential district, no outdoor play area (an area designed or set aside for children in a child care facility for recreation or play) shall be located closer to a lot line than the minimum yard setback requirements for a principal use in the district in which it is located;
4.3.2.3 In all districts, the open space between the defined outdoor play area or structure and the property line(s) adjacent to residential districts or residential uses shall be screened with such fence, wall, hedge, or landscaping to provide a dense year-round screen as the Planning Board shall designate.
4.3.3 Religious: Use of land, buildings and structures for public worship carried on by a recognized religious sect or denomination which may include religious instruction, maintenance of a convent, parish house and similar facilities and activities whose purpose is substantially related to furthering the beliefs of such sect or denomination.
4.3.4 Philanthropic: Charitable or nonprofit library, museum, art gallery or other similar use.
4.3.5 Hospital and nursing home: Hospital and nursing home, provided that in Limited Business Distr. #6 only nursing, rest or convalescent home and hospital parking shall be permitted.
18
CONCORD ZONING
4.3.6 Assisted living residence: A structure, or structures, used to provide assistance with the activities of daily living in a residential setting for people who require such services. Assistance with activities of daily living means the provision of physical support, aid or assistance with bathing, dressing/grooming, ambulating, eating, or other similar tasks. An assisted living residence may have central dining facilities, lounges, meeting rooms, laundry rooms, greenhouses, exercise rooms and recreational areas, libraries, offices, medical facilities for diagnosis and out-patient services for residents only and such other common areas or facilities or accessory uses for the residents may be desired. An assisted living residence is a facility that is eligible for certification as an assisted living residence by the Executive Office of Elder Affairs pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 19D and shall conform with the following:
4.3.6.1 A unit as defined byM.G.L. Chapter 19D shall be a “dwelling unit” as defined by this Bylaw.
4.3.6.2 There shall be retained in perpetuity for conservation or passive recreation use an area of common open space equal to at least thirty percent (30%) of the lot area.
4.3.6.3 A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total number of assisted living units shall be a mix of affordable units for persons who qualify as low, moderate or upper- moderate income and assets. In determining the number of affordable units required, a fractional unit of 0.5 or more shall be considered a whole unit. The minimum percentage of affordable assisted living units shall be maintained as affordable units for the duration of the use of the property under this Section 4.3.6.
4.3.6.4 To the extent determined to be feasible by the Board (taking into consideration legal and economic constraints, including limitations imposed by financing sources) said affordable assisted living units required in subsection 4.3.6.3 shall be made available to eligible Concord residents, and persons related to such residents by consanguinity or affinity, prior to offering such units to other eligible persons
4.3.7 Cemetery
4.3.8 Lodge and club: Private lodge or club operated for members or employees.
4.3.9 Registered Marijuana Dispensary: A non-profit facility or location that has been registered by the Department of Public Health where medical marijuana is grown, processed and/or made available to a qualifying patient or a personal caregiver, provided that:
4.3.9.1 A registered marijuana dispensary shall not be located within three thousand feet (3,000’) of an elementary school, middle school, high school, or public library in existence at the time of enactment of the zoning bylaw amendment establishing this use.
19
PRINCIPAL USES
4.4 Government and Utility Uses
4.4.1 Town of Concord Municipal Use: use of any building, facility and/or area owned or leased by the Town of Concord for the general use and welfare of the Town, its inhabitants or businesses located within the Town.
4.4.2 Underground utility: underground facilities, equipment, and/or structures that are necessary for conducting a public service provided by a public or private utility.
4.4.3 Aboveground utility: aboveground facilities, equipment, and/or structures that are necessary for conducting a public service provided by a public or private utility, except for large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations.
4.4.4 Municipal Use that is not by the Town of Concord: use of any building, facility and/or area for a public purpose by any other town that is not the Town of Concord.
4.5 Business Uses
4.5.1 Retail store: Sale and display of merchandise within a building. Sale of ready-to- consume foods and beverages in disposable containers for consumption outside the building will be permitted only as an accessory use to the principal retail operation. Provided, however, in the West Concord Business District a retail store shall not occupy more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and in the West Concord Village District a retail store shall not occupy more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area of which not more than 3,500 square feet shall be public retail space, unless a special permit is granted to allow a larger retail store by up to twenty percent (20%). A special permit shall be granted by the Planning Board only upon a written determination as provided in Section 11.6 and that the larger retail store serves a public purpose or has a public benefit.
4.5.2 Personal service shop: Barber or beauty shop, laundry or dry-cleaning shop, shoe repair shop or self-service dry cleaning or laundry shop or similar service shop.
4.5.3 Craft shop: Shop or studio of an artist, potter, sculptor, silversmith, wood carver or similar craftsman, provided that in the Business District all work and storage shall be conducted within a building and no more than five (5) full-time workers, or their equivalent, shall be employed on the premises.
4.5.4 Restaurant: Restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom or similar establishment whose principal business is the sale of prepared foods or beverages and whose principal method of operation includes either (1) service by a restaurant employee to a table or counter where the food or beverage is consumed, or (2) a cafeteria-type operation where foods and beverages are consumed within the restaurant building. Provided, however, in the West Concord Business District a restaurant shall not occupy more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area; and, provided further, in the West Concord Village District a restaurant shall not occupy more than
4,000 square feet of gross floor area, unless a special permit is granted to allow a larger restaurant in the West Concord Village District by up to thirty percent (30%), in which case a maximum of 4,800 square feet may be located on the ground/first floor. A special permit shall be granted by the Planning Board only upon a written determination as provided in Section
11.6 and that the larger restaurant serves a public purpose or has a public benefit.
20
CONCORD ZONING
4.5.5 Indoor amusement: Theater, motion picture house, bowling alley, dance hall or other indoor amusement or assembly hall operated for profit.
4.5.6 Outdoor amusement: Golf driving range, miniature golf course or similar outdoor amusement operated for profit but not including motor-driven amusements.
4.5.7 Funeral home: Undertaking or funeral establishment.
4.5.8 Repair shop and building trade: Repair shop for household appliances, radio and television sets, office equipment, bicycles, lawn mowers and similar equipment, caterer and shop of a builder, carpenter, electrician, mason, painter, plumber or roofer or similar occupation associated with the building trades, provided that in the Business District all work and storage shall be conducted within a building and no more than five (5) full-time workers, or their equivalent, shall be employed on the premises.
4.5.9 Veterinary and kennel: Veterinary, kennel and place for boarding and caring for animals.
4.5.10 Financial and business office: Bank, loan agency or business office.
4.5.11 Professional office: Office of a doctor, lawyer, accountant, architect, engineer, real estate broker, or similar professionals.
4.5.12 Medical center and laboratory: Center for medical, dental, clinical and public health service and supporting service for the foregoing, such as office and laboratory.
4.5.13 Auto service station: Sale of motor vehicle fuel and related products and services, including a car wash.
4.5.14 Auto repair shop: Establishment for the repair, maintenance, and painting of automobiles or similar light motor vehicles (maximum ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight and 172-inch wheel base), provided that all but minor repairs shall be conducted wholly within a building sufficiently sound-insulated to confine disturbing noise to the premises.
4.5.15 Vehicular dealerships: Salesroom and related dealership facilities for automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trucks, off-road vehicles or farm implements.
4.5.16 Boat sales and rental: Rental, sale, storage, maintenance and repair of small boats, and equipment and accessories customarily incidental to their normal operation, including outboard motors and boat trailers.
4.5.17 Parking facility: Commercial parking lot or parking garage.
4.5.18 Transportation services: The parking or storage of ground transportation vehicles, including but not limited to buses, ambulances, limousines, taxis, liveries, wagons, carriages, or other ground transportation vehicles. The primary purpose of the business must be to provide transportation services to passengers, whether the vehicle be motorized or animal drawn. All vehicles stored or parked upon the premises must be registered or licensed.
21
PRINCIPAL USES
4.5.19 Grocery Store: A retail establishment where more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offers home care and personal care products and which occupies at least
5,000 square feet but not more than 35,000 square feet of gross floor area. Provided, however, in the West Concord Village District a grocery store shall not occupy more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4.6 Industrial Uses
4.6.1 Warehouse: Warehouse or other building for the storage or wholesale marketing of materials, merchandise, products, or equipment. In the Limited Industrial Park District, warehouse shall be permitted (1) in buildings for which a building permit was issued prior to February 14, 1980, or (2) in office, R&D or light manufacturing buildings provided the gross floor area of the warehouse shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of the entire building.
4.6.2 Storage yard, open-air sales: Lumber yard, fuel storage plant, contractor's yard, used car lot or other open-air establishment for the storage, distribution, or sale at wholesale or retail, of materials (excluding salvage materials), merchandise, products or equipment.
4.6.3 R&D and Light Manufacturing: Research and Development (R&D) or light manufacturing including general offices with research, testing, training, light manufacturing or warehouse facilities for computer, telecommunication, photographic, instrumentation, biomedical or similar high-technology or light manufacturing uses. In all cases, light manufacturing shall be (1) limited to fabrication, assembly, processing and packaging employing only electric or other substantially noiseless and inoffensive power, and (2) free from neighborhood disturbing agents including dust, fumes, odors, emissions, smoke, vapor, light, vibration and noise. In the Business District no more than five (5) full-time workers or their equivalent shall be employed in light manufacturing on the premises.
4.6.4 Manufacturing, packaging, processing and testing: Printing or publishing plant, bottling works, manufacturing establishment, or other assembling, packaging, finishing or processing use.
In the Business District, only manufacturing of products primarily for sale at retail on the premises shall be conducted, and no more than five (5) full-time workers or their equivalent shall be employed on the premises.
In the Limited Industrial Park District, manufacturing, packaging, processing and testing uses shall be permitted only within the confines of a building for which a building permit was issued prior to February 14, 1980.
22
CONCORD ZONING
4.7 Restricted and Prohibited Uses
4.7.1 Prohibited uses: Salvage yard, junk yard, and all open-air storage of junk, waste products and salvage materials (including non-operable automobiles) are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts of the Town as are trailer and mobile home, trailer camp, mobile home park, trailer and mobile home sales and service, billboard, outdoor movie theater, commercial dump, slaughterhouse, rendering plant, fertilizer plant, race track, commercial extraction of sand, gravel or minerals and all other uses which would be obnoxious, hazardous or injurious to the neighborhood or to property in the vicinity are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts in the Town as are all uses not specifically permitted by this Bylaw.
Drive-in or fast food restaurants are expressly prohibited. A drive-in or fast food restaurant is defined as any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods or beverages in a ready-to-consume state, for consumption within the building or off-premises, and whose principal method of operation includes: (1) sale of foods and beverages in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; or (2) service of food and beverages directly to a customer in a motor vehicle.
4.7.2 Restrictions: Without limiting the generality of subsection 4.7.1 or any other section of this Bylaw or of any other Town Bylaw, all manufacturing, packaging, processing, testing, business and commercial activity shall be conducted such as to confine disturbing sounds, fumes, dust, odors and noise to the premises, and no such activity shall be conducted so as to constitute a hazard by reason of the potential for fire, explosion, radiation release or by any bacterial, or viral agent.
4.8 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium
4.8.1 Definition
"Marijuana establishment" shall have the meaning in General Law 94G, Section1.
4.8.2 Purpose
By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law entitled the Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (the “Act”), regulating the control and production and distribution of marijuana under a system of licenses and regulations. Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, a Marijuana Retailer or Establishment is not a permitted use in the Town and any regulations promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission are expected to provide guidance to the Town in regulating marijuana sales and distribution. The regulation of marijuana raises novel and complex legal, planning, and public safety issues and the Town needs time to study and consider the regulation of Marijuana Retail or Distribution centers and address such novel and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of Marijuana Retail sales and distribution and other uses related to the regulation of marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for Marijuana Retail and Distribution so as to allow the Town
23
PRINCIPAL USES
sufficient time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of such structures and uses in the Town and to enact bylaws in a manner consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
4.8.3 Temporary Moratorium
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for “Marijuana Establishments”. The moratorium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of marijuana in the Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding “Marijuana Establishments” and related uses, and shall consider adopting new Zoning Bylaws to address the impact and operation of Marijuana Establishments and related uses.
24
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE I - PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS
Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts
Principal Uses RAA RA RB RC WCV B CCB, TDB,
NACB
WCB LB MP WCI I IPA IPB LIP#1
LIP#2
Site Plan
Approval
4.1 Extensive Uses
4.1.1 Forestry yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.1.2 Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.1.3 Greenhouse yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.1.4 Earth removal SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP NR
4.1.5 Conservation use yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.1.6 Private recreation SP SP SP SP yes yes yes yes1 no yes yes yes yes yes R
4.2 Residential Uses
4.2.1 Single-family dwelling yes yes yes yes no yes no no yes no no no no no NR
4.2.2 Two-family or additional dwelling unit SP SP SP SP no SP SP no SP no no no no no NR
4.2.3 Combined business/residence no no no no yes*** yes yes yes2,3&7 SP no no no no no R
4.2.4 Combined industrial/business/residence no no no no no no no no no SP SP no no no[SP??] R
4.2.5 Residential Compound SP SP SP SP no SP no no no no no no no no NR
4.2.6 Residential Cluster Development SP SP SP SP no SP no no no no no no no no NR
4.2.7 Planned Residential Development SP SP SP SP no SP no no no no no no no no[SP??] NR
4.2.8 Boarding house SP SP SP SP no yes no no no no no no no no NR
4.2.9 Hotel, Extended-stay hotel and Motel no no no no no yes SP yes1 no no no yes no no R
4.3 Institutional Uses
4.3.1 Educational yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes R
4.3.2 Child care facility yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes R
4.3.3 Religious yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes R
4.3.4 Philanthropic SP SP SP SP yes yes yes SP8 yes yes yes yes yes yes R
4.3.5 Hospital and nursing home, provided that in Limited Business
Dist. #6 only nursing, rest or convalescent home and hospital parking shall be permitted.
no no no no no yes no SP6 yes no no no no no R
4.3.6 Assisted living residence no no no no no no no SP8 no no no no no no R
4.3.7 Cemetery yes yes yes yes no yes no no no no no no no no NR
4.3.8 Lodge and club SP SP SP SP SP*** yes SP no no SP yes yes yes yes R
4.3.9 Registered Marijuana Dispensary no no no no no no no no SP no no no no no R
4.4 Governmental and Utility Uses
4.4.1 Town of Concord Municipal Use yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.4.2 Underground Utility yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.4.3 Aboveground Utility yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes NR
4.4.4 Municipal Use not by the Town of Concord SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP R
25
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE I – PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS
Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts
Principal Uses RAA RA RB RC WCV B, CCB,
TDB, NACB
WCB LB MP WCI I IPA IPB LIP#1
LIP#2
Site Plan
Approval
4.5 Business Uses
4.5.1
Retail store
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no**
no**
no
no
no
R
4.5.2
Personal service shop
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
SP
no
no
no
no
R
4.5.3
Craft shop
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.4
Restaurant
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes1
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.5
Indoor amusement
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R
4.5.6
Outdoor amusement
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes1
no
yes
yes
no
no
no
R
4.5.7
Funeral home
no
no
no
no
no
yes
SP
yes3
no
SP
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.8
Repair shop and building trade
no
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.9
Veterinary and kennel
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
SP
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.10
Financial and business office
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes*?
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R
4.5.11
Professional office
no
no
no
no
yes***
yes
yes
yes?
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R
4.5.12
Medical center and laboratory
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
SP6
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
SP
R
4.5.13
Auto service station
no
no
no
no
no
yes
SP
yes1
no
SP
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.14
Auto repair shop
no
no
no
no
no
yes
SP
no
no
SP
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.15
Vehicular dealerships
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.16
Boat sales and rental
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
yes5
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
R
4.5.17
Parking facility
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R
4.5.18
Transportation services
no
no
no
no
no
SP
SP
no
no
SP
SP
yes
yes
yes
R
4.5.19
Grocery Store
no
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
R
4.6 Industrial Uses
4.6.1
Warehouse
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R
4.6.2
Storage yard, open-air sales
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
no
no
SP
SP
no
no
no
R
4.6.3 R&D and Light manufacturing no no no no SP*** yes SP no no yes yes yes yes SP R
4.6.4 Manufacturing, packaging, processing and testing no no no no no yes no no no yes yes yes yes SP R
4.7 Restricted and Prohibited Uses
4.7.1 Prohibited uses no no no no no no no no no no no no no no NR
* 1,2,3,4,6 provided, however, that only business office use shall be permitted in Limited Business District #4.
** Except as provided by Special Permit in a Combined industrial/business/residence building.
***Except no residential use, lodge or club, professional office, or R&D and Light manufacturing shall be permitted on the first floor in the West Concord Village District.
? Except as provided by Special Permit in Limited Business District #8
?? Except as provided by Special Permit for a PRD or a combined/industrial/business/residence in Limited Industrial Park #1District, or by Special Permit for an Alternative PRD in Limited Industrial Park #2.
Note: Numbers listed as a superscript in the LB column indicate the Limited Business District in which the activity may occur; if no number appears the use is permitted in all LB districts (see Section 3.2.2).
26
CONCORD ZONING
SECTION 5. ACCESSORY USES
5.1 General Provisions
Accessory uses shall be permitted on the same lot as the principal use or on a lot adjacent thereto, under the same ownership and in the same zoning district.
Accessory uses are permitted only in connection with lawful principal uses. An accessory use may not, in effect, convert a principal use to a use not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, and in no case shall a necessary component of a principal use be considered as accessory to that principal use.
Where a principal use is allowed under special permit, its accessory use is also subject to the provisions and limitations of that special permit.
5.2 Provisions Applicable to Table II
The uses listed in Table II are considered accessory uses within the definition of Section I of this Bylaw. Each use listed shall be defined by reference to the subsection appearing next to the use and shall be subject to any conditions or limitations set forth in Table II or in the applicable subsection.
A use listed in Table II is permitted in the same district as the principal use if denoted by the word "yes". If denoted by the letters "SP", the use is permitted only if the Board, or the Planning Board where specifically designated in this Bylaw, grants a special permit. If denoted by the word "no", the use is not permitted.
The word "yes" followed by one or more numerals in the Limited Business column denotes that the use is permitted only in the Limited Business District corresponding to such numerals. If no numeral appears, the use is permitted in all Limited Business Districts in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw.
27
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE II - ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
5.3
Accessory Uses
Residential Districts
RAA RA RB RC B
Commercial Districts
CCB
TDB WCB WCV LB MP NACB
Industrial Districts
WCI I IPA IPB LIP LIP
#1 #2
5.3.1 Home recreational facilities
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes no yes
no no no no no no
5.3.2 Noncommercial radio and TV towers and
structures
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP SP
5.3.3 Kennels
SP SP SP SP yes
yes yes yes yes¹ no
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.4 Stables
SP* SP* SP* SP* yes
yes yes yes yes¹ yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.5 Parking or garaging of more than one
commercial vehicle
SP SP SP SP yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.6 Home Occupation
5.3.6.1 Customary home occupation
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.6.2 Special home occupation
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP SP
5.3.7 Farm product sales
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.8 Lodging for farm employees
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.9 Aviation facilities for take-off and
landing
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP SP
5.3.10 Watchman’s apt.
no no no no no
no no no no no
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.11 Workshops and classes
SP SP SP SP yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.12 Lunchrooms and cafeterias
no no no no yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.13 Gift shops, candy counters
SP SP SP SP yes
yes yes yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.14 Scientific research and development
no no no no SP
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP SP SP SP
5.3.15 Tourist home or bed and breakfast
SP SP SP SP SP
SP SP SP no SP
no no no no no no
5.3.16 Personal service shop
no no no no yes
yes yes yes no no
yes yes yes yes yes yes
5.3.17 Seasonal catering
no no no no no
no no no SP5 no
no no no no no no
5.3.18 Common Driveways
SP SP SP SP no
no no no no no
no no no no no no
* Except as permitted pursuant to Section 5.3.4
Note: Numbers listed as a superscript in the LB column indicate the Limited Business District in which the activity may occur (see Section 5.2, Provisions Applicable to Table II).
28
CONCORD ZONING
5.3.1 Home recreational facilities: In the residential districts or for dwellings in the Business or Medical-Professional districts, a swimming pool and any related pool buildings or equipment, tennis court or similar home recreational facility shall be permitted, provided that such facility is used only by the residents of the premises and their guests and shall conform to the minimum yard setback requirements for a principal structure in whatever zoning district it is located. In Planned Residential Developments and in Residential Compounds, such recreational facilities may also be permitted upon common land and common open space, subject to the provisions or limitations of the special permit authorizing such development, particularly with respect to setbacks and to use of the facility by other than residents of the development and their guests.
5.3.2 Radio and television towers and other communication towers and structures: In all districts, the Board by special permit may authorize the erection and maintenance of a radio and television and other communication tower(s), antennas and related structures. In the case of privately owned “dish-type” satellite receiving antennas larger than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter, such antennas may be required to be located behind buildings and/or screened by solid fences or landscaping material so as not to be visible from abutting streets and houses. Such towers, antennas, and related structures in connection with the operation of an amateur radio station may not be denied unless the safety of the public will be endangered. Roof-mounted television antennas not exceeding ten (10) feet in height and dish-type satellite receiving antennas not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in diameter are exempted from the requirements of this provision and are allowed as of right.
5.3.3 Kennels: The Board may, by special permit, authorize the establishment of a kennel in a residential district for the boarding or breeding of dogs, provided that the written consent of the owners of all lots within three hundred (300) feet of the kennel are filed with the Board.
5.3.4 Stables: The Board may, by special permit, authorize the stabling or boarding of horses in a residential district on lots of less than five (5) acres, provided that the written consent of the owners of all lots within three hundred (300) feet of the stable are filed with the Board. No special permit is required for such uses on lots of five (5) acres or more. To the extent that a stable includes breeding and raising of horses and associated activities, such activities shall constitute “commercial agriculture” within the meaning of G.L. c. 40A, §3, if such activities occur: (1) on land zoned for agriculture; (2) on land that is greater than five acres in size; and (3) on land of 2 acres or more if the sale of products from the agricultural use generates $1,000 per acre or more of gross sales.
5.3.5 Garaging or parking of commercial motor vehicles: In residential districts, garaging or parking of one commercial automobile or light commercial vehicle (maximum ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight or one hundred seventy-two (172) inch wheel base) shall be permitted. Garaging or parking of more than one such vehicle or of a larger commercial vehicle(s) may be authorized by the Board by special permit.
Garaging or parking of commercial vehicles in other than residential districts shall be permitted by right but shall be subject to site plan approval requirements.
29
ACESSORY USES
5.3.6 Home Occupation
5.3.6.1 Customary Home Occupation: In all dwellings, a Customary Home Occupation shall be permitted in a dwelling or in an accessory building provided that:
(a) No employee, other than residents of the dwelling, is employed on the premises;
(b) There is no exterior indication, including but not limited to visual or auditory, that the dwelling is used for anything other than residential purposes;
(c) Off-street parking for the dwelling and home occupation is provided and no more than one vehicle, exclusive of those associated with the residential use, is on the premises at any one time;
(d) The average traffic generated per day by the home occupation, exclusive of trips by the residents' vehicles, does not exceed four vehicle trips per day (two trips in and two trips out); and
(e) No sale of retail merchandise is conducted on the premises.
5.3.6.2 Special Home Occupation: In all dwellings, the Board may by special permit authorize a Special Home Occupation in a dwelling or in an accessory building provided that:
(a) Not more than one full-time employee, exclusive of residents of the dwelling, is employed on the premises;
(b) Except for signs, commercial motor vehicles (Section 5.3.5), and related equipment as may be approved by the Board, there is no exterior indication, including but not limited to visual or auditory, that the dwelling is used for anything other than residential purposes;
(c) Off-street parking for the dwelling and home occupation is provided and the Board finds the number of vehicles on the premises at any one time and number of vehicle trips per day, exclusive of the residents' vehicles and trips per day, are consistent with the residential character of the property; and
(d) The home occupation is clearly secondary and incidental to the principal use of the premises.
(e) As determined by the Board, additional landscaping and fencing may be required to provide visual and auditory protection to adjacent properties and areas viewed from the public way.
5.3.7 Farm product sales: Farm product sales are allowed as permitted under subsections 4.1.2 and 4.1.3.
5.3.8 Lodging for farm employees: Lodging for farm employees is allowed as an accessory use to uses permitted under subsections 4.1.2 or 4.1.3.
5.3.9 Aviation facilities: In all districts, the Board by special permit may authorize facilities for the take-off and landing of aircraft (but not the servicing, maintenance or repair thereof) and for the embarkation and disembarkation of passengers when such facilities are secondary to the principal use.
30
CONCORD ZONING
5.3.10 Watchman's apartment: In the Industrial and Industrial Park districts, one dwelling unit shall be permitted for accommodation of a custodian, watchman, or other employee essential to the principal nonresidential use.
5.3.11 Workshops and classes: Seminars, classes and instructional workshops may be conducted as accessory uses in all Commercial and Industrial districts, or in any other district if conducted within a hospital, motel, hotel, extended-stay hotel, nursing home, school or philanthropic or religious institution.
5.3.12 Lunchrooms and cafeterias: Lunchrooms and cafeterias operated primarily for the convenience of employees shall be permitted as accessory uses in all Commercial and Industrial districts, provided that there shall be no exterior advertising.
5.3.13 Gift shops, candy counters: Incidental retail sales of small gift items, toiletries, periodicals, and pre-packaged snacks shall be permitted if conducted solely for the convenience of employees or if conducted within a hospital, motel, hotel, extended-stay hotel, nursing home, school, or philanthropic or religious institution.
5.3.14 Scientific research and development: The Board by special permit may authorize uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a principal use, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related production, provided that the Board finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
5.3.15 Tourist home or bed and breakfast: The Board may, by special permit, authorize the use of a single-family detached dwelling unit for temporary accommodations for overnight guests for a fee, provided that no more than three (3) rooms in any dwelling unit may be used for such accommodations.
5.3.16 Personal service shops: Personal services such as laundry, dry-cleaning, barber shops and shoe repair shall be permitted as accessory to industrial uses, only if conducted solely for the benefit of the employees on the premises.
5.3.17 Seasonal catering: The Board by special permit may authorize the use of a portion of the premises for seasonal catering to customers off-premises. Such seasonal catering shall be limited to the preparation and packaging of food, with delivery and set-up to the extent that it is a customary function of the caterer. Pick-up of food by customers may be permitted if suitable parking is available.
5.3.18 Common Driveways: The Planning Board may by special permit authorize the construction or alteration of a driveway in the residential districts so that the driveway serves more than one lot, provided that each lot served by the common driveway is located in a residential district and is in residential use; and, each lot shall have frontage on a street, and such frontage shall otherwise be suitable to provide safe and adequate vehicular and pedestrian access from the street to the principal use of the lot, and further provided that the common driveway:
(a) serves no more than three lots;
31
ACCESSORY USES
(b) provides safe and convenient access for fire, police, ambulance/rescue and other vehicles to all parcels and residences;
(c) enhances the natural environment by providing one or more of the following: reduced pavement or impervious lot coverage; reduced number of curb cuts on public ways, reduced impact to slopes, ledge outcrops or wetlands;
(d) provides documented assignment of responsibility for maintenance, snow removal and drainage;
(e) is designed in accordance with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations for the Town of
Concord for common driveways;
(f) is constructed no less than fourteen feet in width (or twelve feet with turn-outs) and no more than one-thousand feet in length;
(g) shall not be located within ten feet of a property line of a lot not served by the common driveway; and
(h) shall not serve a dwelling located further than one-thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest fire hydrant.
5.4 Temporary Accessory Uses
5.4.1 Trailer and mobile home
5.4.1.1 In all districts, the Building Inspector may authorize the temporary use of a trailer or mobile home as a construction site office for not more that two (2) years, provided that the authorization shall require the removal of such use within ninety (90) days after completion of the work for which the temporary use was permitted and provided further that, if construction is actively proceeding, the authorization for the trailer or mobile home may be renewed by the Building Inspector for successive one-year periods.
5.4.1.2 In all districts, the use of a trailer or mobile home as a temporary dwelling shall be permitted for not more than seven (7) days in any calendar year, except:
(a) Where the Board of Appeals has by special permit authorized such use for more than seven (7) days, subject to a reasonable time limit; or
(b) Where the owner or occupier of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or other natural holocaust resides in a mobile home on the site of such residence, for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, while the residence is being rebuilt.
Any such trailer or mobile home use shall be subject to the provisions of the state sanitary code.
5.4.1.3 In all districts except the residential districts, the Board may, by special permit, authorize the use of a trailer, modular container transportable by trailer or other similar vehicle or mobile structure as a temporary office for not more than two (2) years provided that adequate parking is provided for the office use.
32
CONCORD ZONING
5.4.1.4 In all districts except the residential districts, the Board may, by special permit, authorize the use of a mobile medical facility for more than two (2) years but not more than ten (10) years provided that adequate parking is provided equivalent to a medical center and/or laboratory use and the site has been designed to accommodate the regular delivery and departure of the trailer.
5.4.2 Storage trailers: Storage trailers are expressly prohibited except that in all districts, the Building Inspector may authorize the temporary use of a storage trailer for storage following a fire or other calamity or during construction or major renovation of a structure of principal use. In no event shall the temporary use exceed twenty-four (24) consecutive months after the issuance of the permit, unless construction, reconstruction or renovation is delayed by seasonal or other considerations. In such instances, the Building Inspector may authorize an extension of the temporary use for up to an additional twenty-four (24) consecutive months. The storage trailer shall be removed from the lot at the end of such time. In no event shall the storage trailer be located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. Storage trailers used for agricultural or educational purposes are exempt from these provisions.
5.4.3 Temporary storage: In all districts, no lot or parcel of land shall be used for the purpose of unenclosed storage of building equipment or supplies ancillary to building, except when a building permit has been issued for said lot or parcel. All such equipment and materials shall be removed ninety (90) days after completion of work for which the building permit was issued.
5.4.4 Christmas tree sales: The sale of Christmas trees shall be permitted under subsections 4.1.2 or 4.1.3 during the months of November and December.
5.4.5 Fairs, bazaars, antique shows, suppers and dances: In all districts, any building or premises owned or operated by a municipal, educational or religious organization or private lodge or club may be used for fairs, bazaars, antique shows, suppers, dances or similar events, provided that: no such event shall continue for more than three (3) days; such event shall take place entirely within a building; and police supervision of parking and traffic shall be provided during the event, unless the Concord Police Chief is of the opinion that such supervision is unnecessary. Events, which do not conform to the provisions of this subsection, may be authorized by the Board by special permit.
33
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 6. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
6.1 Dimensions
Minimum lot area, frontage, lot width, yard, and corner clearance requirements and maximum lot coverage, height and floor/area ratio requirements shall be as prescribed in Section 6, Table III, Dimensional Regulations.
6.2 Interpretation
For purposes of interpretation the following shall apply:
6.2.1 Lot area: In determining lot area, no part thereof within the street lines or within a private way or right-of-way for travel by motor vehicles shall be included. Street lines shall determine lot boundaries.
6.2.2 Minimum lot area:
6.2.2.1 When computing minimum lot area for any lot laid out and submitted for approval by the Planning Board, in accordance with Chapter 41 of the General Laws, after September
1, 1991, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of such lot area required in that zoning district shall be provided by land located outside of the Flood Plain Conservancy District and Wetlands ConservancyDistrict.
6.2.2.2 When the distance between any two (2) points on lot lines is less than fifty (50) feet, measured in a straight line, the smaller portion of the lot which is bounded by such straight line and such lot lines shall not be considered in computing the minimum lot area unless the distance along such lot lines between such two (2) points is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
130’ 40’
130’ 40’
50’ 50’
130’ + 130’ > 150’ 40’ + 40’ < 150’ (Black area is not (Shaded area is used used in minimum in minimumarea area calculation) calculation)
Side line of
right-of-way
Street
Minimum Lot Area
34
CONCORD ZONING
6.2.3 Frontage: Frontage, as defined in Subsection 1.3.11, shall be measured in a continuous line along the sideline of the street between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with said sideline of the street.
6.2.4 Frontage exception: A dwelling in Residence AA, A and B Districts may be constructed on a lot having eighty (80) percent of the minimum lot frontage, provided that the lot width at the nearest point on the front wall of the dwelling to the sideline of the right-of-way shall not be less than the minimum lot frontage and, that the angle formed by the intersection of the side lot line and the sideline of the right-of-way shall not be less than 45 degrees.
LotWidth: (not less than
Required frontage) Res. AA 200' Res. A 150' Res.B 125’
Frontage Exception: (not less Than 80% of required frontage) Res. AA 160’
Res. A 120’ Res. B 100’
6.2.5 Lot width: Each lot shall have, in addition to the required frontage, a width of not less than eighty (80) percent of the required frontage at all points between the sideline of the right-of-way along which the frontage of the lot is measured and the nearest point on the front wall of the dwelling upon such lot and, that the angle formed by the intersection of the side lot line and the sideline of the right-of-way shall not be less than 45 degrees. Such width shall be measured along lines, which are parallel to such sideline.
Lot Frontage:
Res. AA 200' Res. A 150' Res. B 125' Res.C 80'
Lot Width:
Res. AA 160' Res. A 120' Res. B 100' Res. C 64'
6.2.6 Front yards: Front yards shall be measured between the sideline of the right-of-way and the nearest point of any structure, with the exception of uncovered steps and ramps or the construction of walls and fences. In all cases, corner lots shall be considered to have two (2)
35
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
front yards and two (2) side yards. A lot having frontage on two (2) streets shall have two (2)
front yards, each of which shall complywith the requirements of the front yard provisions.
In the West Concord Business and West Concord Village Districts, there shall be a maximum front yard of ten (10) feet, that is, no portion of a building shall be set back from the front lot line by more than ten feet unless a special permit is granted to allow a greater front yard depth. A special permit shall be granted by the Planning Board only upon a written determination as provided in Section 11.6 and that the larger front yard serves a public purpose.
6.2.7 Side yards: Side yards shall be measured from the nearest point of any dwelling or structure to each side lot line, provided that nothing shall prevent the projection of uncovered steps and ramps or the construction of walls and fences. In the residential districts or for single- family dwellings in the Business or Medical-Professional districts, the width of one side yard may be reduced by an amount not to exceed three (3) feet if the width of the other side is correspondingly increased. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a building of accessory use may be placed not less than five (5) feet from a sideline so long as such building is not to be located nearer the sideline of the right-of-way than the rearmost point of the dwelling or any structure attached thereto.
In the Residence C and Residence B Districts, any part of the principal structure that extends into the three (3) foot side yard exception area shall be no greater than fifteen (15) feet in height as defined in subsection 6.2.11. The Board may grant relief from the fifteen foot height limitation in the three (3) foot side yard exception area provided the Board finds that there are no reasonable alternatives available and that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
6.2.8 Rear yards: Rear yards shall be measured from the nearest point of any dwelling or structure attached thereto to the rear lot line provided that nothing shall prevent the projection of uncovered steps and ramps or the construction of walls and fences. In the residential districts or for single-family dwellings in the Business or Medical-Professional districts, no building of accessory use shall be placed nearer to the rear lot line than five (5) feet.
6.2.9 Landscape buffer: Side yards, rear yards and the other lot lines noted in Table III shall be suitably landscaped. Such landscaping shall be designed to reduce the visual impact of the principal use upon adjacent property by the use of trees, shrubs, walls, fences, or other landscape elements. Where the developed area adjoins land developed for residential use, suitable landscaping shall consist of a substantially sight-impervious screen of evergreen foliage at least eight (8) feet in height or planting of shrubs and trees complemented by a sight-impervious fence of at least five (5) feet, but not more than eight (8) feet, in height, or such other type of landscaping as may be required under site plan approval. In all developments, to the extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this Section 6.
6.2.10 Corner clearance: Between the sidelines of the intersecting streets and a straight line joining points on such sidelines ten (10) feet distant from their point of intersection or, in
36
CONCORD ZONING
the case of a rounded corner, a straight line joining the points of intersection of their tangents, no building or structure may be erected and no vegetation may be maintained three (3) feet above the plane through their curb grades.
6.2.11 Height: The height of a building shall be measured as the vertical distance from the mean ground level of each side of the building to either the highest point of the exterior in the case of a flat roof or to the mean average finished grade between the plate and the ridge in the case of a pitched roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy or storage may extend above the height limits herein fixed except wind turbine facilities, which can only exceed the maximum height requirement by special permit granted by the Board.
In the Medical-Professional District south of Route 2, no portion of a building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless such portion sets back from each street and such Medical-Professional District boundary line an amount equal to the sum of (1) the applicable minimum yard requirement and two (2) feet for each foot of height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, provided that in no case shall any portion of a building exceed one hundred ten (110) feet in height.
In the Residence AA, Residence A, Residence C and Residence B Districts, the height of a building shall be measured as the vertical distance from the ‘base elevation’ to the peak of the roof, or the highest point of the exterior in the case of a flat roof. The ‘base elevation’ is the average of the elevations of the ground where the two corners of the lowest foundation wall of any existing structure meet the ground. In the absence of an existing structure, the base elevation shall be the average elevation (measured as indicated in the previous sentence) of the ground at the location on the site where the new building is to be placed, prior to any grading or mounding.
In the Residence AA, Residence A, Residence C, and Residence B Districts, any accessory structure located within the required minimum side or rear yard shall be limited in height to not more than twenty-four (24) feet to the peak of a pitched roof or eighteen (18) feet to the highest point of the exterior in the case of a flat roof.
The Board may grant relief from the above definition for the height of a building in the Residence AA, Residence A, Residence C and Residence B Districts provided the Board finds that a literal application of this requirement would be unreasonable because there are no reasonable alternatives available and that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
In the Residence C and Residence B Districts any part of the principal structure that extends into the three (3) foot side yard exception as defined in subsection 6.2.7 shall be no greater than fifteen (15) feet in height.
In the West Concord Business and West Concord Village Districts, the minimum height of the side and rear portions of a principal building shall be fifteen (15) feet; the front façade shall have a minimum height of eighteen (18) feet.
6.2.12 Maximum lot coverage: The total ground area covered by the principal and accessory structures (and in the I, IP, LIP, and LB#4 and #8 districts, all paved areas) shall not exceed the maximum coverage of the total lot area as noted in Section 6, Table III.
37
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
6.2.13 Maximum floor area ratio: The total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot shall not exceed the maximum square footage per acre of lot area as noted in Section 6, Table III, except as provided in G.L. c.40A, sec. 9C for a child care facility as an accessory use. Excluded from the gross floor area in the Residence Districts are basements, open or screened porches, decks and accessory structures with no permanent foundation or less than 100 square feet in area. The Board may grant relief from the Maximum Floor Area Ratio in the Residence Districts provided the Board finds that a literal application of this requirement would be unreasonable because there are no reasonable alternatives available and that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. Non-residential principal uses in the Residence AA, A, B & C Zone Districts shall be exempt from the Maximum Floor Area Ratio in Table III.
6.3 Special Dimensional Exceptions
6.3.1 Single lot exemption: Any increase in area, frontage, width, yard or depth requirement of this Bylaw shall not apply to a lot for a single-family dwelling which, at the time of recording or endorsement, whichever occurs sooner, was not held in common ownership with any adjoining land, conformed to then existing requirements and had less than the proposed requirements but at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of area and fifty (50) feet of frontage.
6.3.2 Hammerhead lots: In the residential districts, the Board by special permit may authorize hammerhead lots in accordance with the following:
6.3.2.1 Each hammerhead lot shall contain:
(a) A minimum lot area of not less than five (5) times the minimum lot area of the zoning district within which it is situated (Residence C: Fifty thousand (50,000) square feet; Residence B: One hundred thousand (100,000) square feet; Residence A: Two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet; Residence AA: Four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet);
(b) A minimum frontage and a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet;
(c) A minimum front, side, and rear yards of fifty (50) feet; and
(d) An area of land which permits the placement of a circle with a diameter of not less than 200 feet in the Residence C and Residence B Districts and with a diameter of not less than 300 feet in the Residence A and Residence AA Districts without the circumference of said circle intersecting any lot lines and within which circle the planned single-family dwelling shall be located.
6.3.2.2 A special permit shall be granted under this section only if the Board shall find:
(a) The hammerhead lot results in a pattern of development sufficiently advantageous to the Town to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable;
(b) The plan submitted clearly shows the hammerhead lot conforms with all the dimensional regulations provided above and the applicant has demonstrated that access from the lot frontage to the planned single-family dwelling is sufficient for the needs of vehicular traffic;
38
CONCORD ZONING
(c) No more than two hammerhead lots have contiguous frontage; and
(d) A deed restriction has been shown on the plan of land to be recorded providing that the hammerhead lot is subject to a special permit recorded therewith and shall not be further subdivided.
6.3.3 Reduced frontage, lot width, lot area and/or side and rear yard setback lots: For the purpose of preserving existing historically significant structures or dwellings on a lot wholly or partially in the residential district, the Board by special permit may authorize the division of land into two or more building lots so that one or more building lot(s) contains reduced frontage, lot width, lot area and/or side and rear yard setback provided that the existing historically significant structure or dwelling remains on one of the lots created and a standard Approval Not Required Plan or Preliminary Definitive Subdivision plan is submitted showing that the lots could otherwise be created without exceptions from the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
6.3.3.1 The Planning Board shall submit to the Board written recommendations including at least:
(a) An evaluation of the standard Approval Not Required Plan or the Preliminary
Definitive Subdivision Plan,
(b) An evaluation and opinion of the appropriateness of the design for any additional structure in relation to the existing historically significant structure,
(c) An evaluation of the proposed development as to whether the lot layout and design constitute a suitable development for the neighborhood within which it is located, and
(d) A recommendation for the granting or denial of the special permit, including recommendations for modifications, restrictions or requirements to be imposed as conditions for granting the special permit.
6.3.3.2. The Historical Commission shall submit to the Board a written evaluation of the historical significance of the existing structure or dwelling, an opinion of the appropriateness of the proposed lot layout and setbacks requested, and an evaluation or recommendation of the significant structural features that should be included in a preservation plan.
6.3.3.3. A special permit shall be granted under this section only if the Board shall find:
(a) The reduced frontage, lot width, lot area and/or side and rear yard setback lot(s) results in a pattern of development sufficiently advantageous to the Town to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable;
(b) A restriction has been shown on the plan of land to be recorded providing that the reduced frontage, lot area and/or side and rear yard setback lot(s) and any other lots created are subject to a special permit recorded therewith and shall not be further subdivided.
(c) The existing historically significant structure or dwelling shall be preserved consistent with a preservation plan approved as part of or as a condition to the special permit.
39
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
6.3.4 Dedication of Land to the Town of Concord for Municipal or Other Public Uses:
6.3.4.1 In the Limited Industrial Park District, in order to encourage the dedication to the Town of Concord of the fee interest in land for municipal or other public uses, the Board by special permit may authorize:
(a) A reduction in the minimum lot area, frontage, lot width or yard requirements otherwise applicable where a parcel of land is subdivided, a portion is dedicated to the Town for municipal or other public uses, and the remaining land and building(s) do not comply with the requirements in Section 6 Table III - Dimensional Regulations.
(b) An increase in the maximum lot coverage or floor area ratio requirements otherwise applicable where a parcel of land is subdivided and a portion is dedicated to the Town for municipal or other public uses, or where the owner of two or more parcels of land in the Limited Industrial Park District dedicates one or more parcels of such land to the Town for municipal or other public uses, provided in either case that the increased maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio applicable to the land not dedicated to the Town does not exceed either (1) the maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio otherwise applicable to the aggregate of the land dedicated to the Town and the land held by the owner but not dedicated or (2) twice the maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio otherwise applicable to the land not dedicated to the Town.
6.3.4.2 The Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission shall submit to the Board written recommendations including at least an evaluation of the proposed reduction or increase in the dimensional regulations, an evaluation of the land proposed to be dedicated to the Town for municipal or other public uses, and a recommendation as to whether the special permit should be granted.
6.3.4.3 A special permit shall be granted under this section only if the Board shall find:
(a) The proposed reduction in minimum lot area, frontage, lot width or yard requirements and the proposed increase in maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio are consistent with the purposes of this Bylaw generally;
(b) Any proposed increase in the maximum lot coverage or floor area ratio will not result in more development in the Conservancy Districts than would have been permitted but for the operation of Subsection 6.3.4; and
(c) The dedication to the Town of Concord of the fee interest in land for municipal or other public uses results in a pattern of land use sufficiently advantageous to the Town to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable.
6.3.4.4 If a special permit is granted, the Board shall impose a condition that neither the special permit nor the conveyance of land to the Town shall be recorded until the Board of Selectmen vote to accept the proposed dedication of land to the Town for municipal or other public uses. A special permit granted hereunder shall be deemed to have been substantially used upon (1) the vote of the Board of Selectmen to accept the proposed dedication of land
40
CONCORD ZONING
to the Town for municipal or other public uses and (2) upon the recording of both the special permit and the deed to the Town of Concord of the fee interest in the land for municipal or other public uses.
41
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Zoning Districts
Minimum Lot Area in Sq. Ft.
Minimum Lot Frontage in Feet
Frontage Exception in Feet
Minimum Lot Width in Feet
Minimum Front Yard in Feet3
Minimum Side Yard in Feet
Minimum Rear Yard in Feet
Corner Clearance in Feet
Maximum Height in Feet
Maximum Lot Coverage %
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
Residence AA
80,000
200
160
160
40
15
Lesser of: 30' or 25% of lot depth
10
35²
---------
.24+(1200÷ actual lot area in sq. ft.)
Residence A
40,000
150
120
120
40
15
" "
10
35²
---------
.24+(1200÷ actual lot area in sq. ft.)
Residence B
20,000
125
100
100
20
15¹
" "
10
35²
---------
.24+(1200÷ actual lot area in sq. ft.)
Residence C
10,000
80
80
64
20
15¹
" "
10
35²
---------
.24+(1200÷ actual lot area in sq. ft.)
Business
---------
---------
---------
---------
10
none, except where a business or industrial use abuts a residential district: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a landscaped buffer along those side and rear lot lines which abut the residential district unless otherwise specified under site plan approval.
10
35
---------
---------
Concord Center Business
---------
---------
---------
---------
0
none, except where a business or industrial use abuts a residential district: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a landscaped buffer along those side and rear lot lines which abut the residential district unless otherwise specified under site plan approval.
10
35
---------
---------
Thoreau Depot Business
---------
---------
---------
---------
0
none, except where a business or industrial use abuts a residential district: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a landscaped buffer along those side and rear lot lines which abut the residential district unless otherwise specified under site plan approval.
10
35
---------
---------
Nine Acre Corner Business
---------
---------
---------
---------
10
none, except where a business or industrial use abuts a residential district: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a landscaped buffer along those side and rear lot lines which abut the residential district unless otherwise specified under site plan approval.
10
35
---------
---------
1 Refer to Zoning Bylaw Subsection 6.2.7 for Residence C and Residence B Districts.
2 Refer to Zoning Bylaw Subsection 6.2.11 for Residence AA, A, B and C Districts
42
West Concord
Village
---------
---------
---------
---------
0
none, except where a business or industrial use abuts a residential
10
Maximum height 35;
---------
---------
dist.: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a
Minimum
landscaped buffer along those side
height side
and rear lot lines which abut the
and rear 15;
residential district unless otherwise
minimum
specified under site plan approval.
height front
façade 18
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Zoning Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Frontage
Exception
Minimum
Lot Width
Minimum
Front Yard
Minimum Minimum Rear
Side Yard in Yard in Feet
Corner
Clearance
Maximum
Height
Maximum Lot
Coverage %
Maximum
Floor Area
in Sq. Ft.
in Feet
in Feet
in Feet
in Feet3
Feet
in Feet
in Feet
Ratio
West Concord
---------
---------
---------
---------
0
none, except where a business or
10
Maximum
---------
---------
Business
industrial use abuts a residential
dist.: 10’ of which 5’ shall be a
height 35
Minimum
landscaped buffer along those side
height side
and rear lot lines which abut the
and rear 15;
residential district unless otherwise
minimum
specified under site plan approval.
height front
façade 18
Limited Business 1
---------
150
---------
---------
100
100’ from residential district boundary lines.
---------
25
20
---------
2
---------
---------
---------
---------
10
--------- ---------
---------
27.5
---------
---------
3
---------
---------
---------
---------
10
--------- ---------
10
35
---------
---------
4
---------
---------
---------
---------
100
100’ from all lot lines of which
---------
35
35, the same to
---------
20’ shall be a landscaped buffer.
include the gross ground
of all buildings
and all paved
areas.
5
---------
---------
---------
---------
10
--------- ---------
---------
25
50
---------
6
---------
---------
---------
---------
100
100’ from all lot lines of which
---------
35
50, the same to
---------
20’ shall be landscaped buffer.
include all
paved areas and
25% maximum
lot coverage by
all structures.
7
40,000
80
---------
---------
10
10’ from all lot lines of which 5’
---------
35
1
---------
shall be landscaped buffer.
8
5 acres
---------
---------
---------
20
20 20
---------
40 ft., but not
50, the same to
---------
more than three stories
3
In the West Concord Business and West Concord Village Districts, the maximum front yard is ten (10) feet unless a special permit is granted for a greater front yard depth.
include all paved
areas and 25%
maximum lot coverage by all structures.
43
Zoning Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Frontage
Exception
Minimum
Lot Width
Minimum
Front Yard
Minimum
Side Yard in
Minimum Rear
Yard in Feet
Corner
Clearance
Maximum
Height
Maximum Lot
Coverage %
Maximum
Floor Area
in Sq. Ft.
in Feet
in Feet
in Feet
in Feet3
Feet
in Feet
in Feet
Ratio
Medical/Prof.
North of
80
---------
---------
20
15 Lesser of: 30’ or
10
North of
---------
---------
Route 2
25% of lot depth
Route 2:
10,000
35
South of
125
---------
---------
40
15 Lesser of: 30’ or
10
South of
---------
---------
Route 2
25% of lot depth
Route 2:
80,000
35 to 110 in
accordance
with subs.
6.2.11
Industrial
20,000
100
---------
---------
10
10’ in all cases of which 5’ shall
10
35
75, the same to
---------
be landscaped buffer along those
include the
side and rear lot lines which abut
gross ground
the residential districts unless
floor area of all
otherwise specified under site
buildings and
plan approval.
all paved areas,
or open space
equal to 50% of
the gross floor
area of the
building,
whichever is
greater.
Industrial Park A
4 acres
50’ on a
---------
---------
20’ fromthe
20’ except 100’ from property
10
40, but not
50%, the same
---------
and
private
side lines of
lines of parcels zoned residential
more than 3
to include all
Industrial Park B
interior street
private streets
and in residential use, 50’ of
stories,
paved areas and
constructed as
constructed as
which must be a landscaped
excluding
20% maximum
part of the
development of
buffer. No parking areas may be
basements.
lot coverage by
development
a site and 100’
placed within the minimum side
all structures.
of a site or
from existing
or rear yard except where joint
200’ on an
public ways. No
parking areas are permitted by
existing public
parking areas
the Planning Board through site
way.
may be placed
closer than 30’
plan approval.
from the side
lines of any
public way or
20’ fromthe
side lines of
private streets
within the
boundaries of
the Industrial
Park
development.
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
part of a
44
CONCORD ZONING – TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Zoning Districts Minimum Lot Area in Sq. Ft.
Minimum Lot
Frontage in Feet
Frontage Exception in Feet
Minimum Lot Width in Feet
Minimum Front Yard in Feet3
Minimum Side Yard in Feet
Minimum Rear
Yard in Feet
Corner Clearance in Feet
Maximum
Height in Feet
Maximum Lot
Coverage %
Maximum Floor Area Ratio
Limited Industrial Park #1 and Limited Industrial Park #2
5 acres 50’ on a private interior street
within the LIP
development or 200’ on a public way.
--------- --------- 100’ from public ways in existence prior to January 1,
1981 and 50’ from all other streets. No parking area may be placed within the minimum
front yard.
20’ for buildings for which a building permit was issued prior to February 14, 1980 and for any additions thereto, 50’ for all
other buildings and for any additions thereto, and 200’ from property lines of parcels zoned residential and in residential use,
100’ of which must be a landscaped buffer. No parking area may be placed within 20’ of the side and rear lot lines except where joint parking areas are permitted by the Planning Board through site plan approval.
10 40, but not more than 3 stories, excluding basements.
35%, the same to include the gross ground floor area of all buildings and all paved areas.
6,000 sq.ft. gross floor area per acre for
Educational in LIP #2, R&D and light manufacturing uses, or 3,000 sq.ft. gross floor area per acre for other uses.
West Concord
20,000
100
10
10’ in all cases, of which 5’ shall
10
35
75, the same to
---------
Industrial
----------
---------
be landscaped buffer along those
include the
side and rear lot lines which abut
gross ground
the residential districts unless
floor area of all
otherwise specified under site
buildings and
plan approval.
all paved areas,
or open space
equal to 50% of
the gross floor
area of the
building,
whichever
measure of lot
coverage is
greater.
By-Pass --------- 200 --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- ---------
45
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 7. SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.1 Nonconforming Uses
7.1.1 Applicability. This zoning bylaw shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by G.L. c. 40A, s. 5 at which this zoning bylaw, or any relevant part thereof or amendment thereto, was adopted. Such prior, lawfully existing nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no change or substantial extension of such use or any reconstruction, extension or structural change of such structure or any alteration of a structure for its use for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent is undertaken, unless authorized hereunder.
7.1.2 Nonconforming uses. The Board may grant a special permit to change or substantially extend a nonconforming use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such change or substantial extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood.
7.1.3 Nonconforming structures. The Board may grant a special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with this section only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board:
(a) Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed;
(b) Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent.
7.1.4 Variance required. Except as provided in subsection 7.1.5, below, the reconstruction, extension or structural change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to increase an existing nonconformity, or create a new nonconformity, shall require the issuance of a variance. The extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a required yard shall require a special permit from the Board.
7.1.5 Nonconforming single and two family residential structures. Nonconforming single and two family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed upon a determination by the Building Inspector that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or structural change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. Where the proposed extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change does not increase the gross floor area, excluding basements, open or screened porches, and decks, contained within the existing structure by more than fifty percent (50%), the following circumstances shall not be deemed to increase the nonconforming nature of said structure:
(a) extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change to a structure located on a lot with insufficient area which extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, maximum floor area ratio, and building height requirements.
46
CONCORD ZONING
(b) extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change to a structure located on a lot with insufficient frontage which extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, maximum floor area ratio, and building height requirements.
(c) extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required yard or setback areas, where the extension, reconstruction, alteration or structural change will comply with all current setback, yard, building coverage, maximum floor area ratio, and building height requirements.
(d) extension of a structure by more than fifty percent (50%) is based on the aggregate of all expansions undertaken within a consecutive five (5) year period.
In all other cases, the Board may, by special permit, allow such extension, reconstruction, alteration, or structural change where it determines that the proposed modification will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.
7.1.6 Abandonment or non-use. A nonconforming use or structure which has been abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its protected status and be subject to all of the provisions of this zoning bylaw.
7.1.7 Reconstruction after catastrophe or involuntary demolition. A nonconforming structure may be reconstructed within two years after a catastrophe or after involuntary demolition. Such reconstruction shall only proceed if authorized by the Board by special permit after finding that the reconstruction of the structure would not:
(a) Substantially impinge upon any public right-of-way that adjoins the lot on which the structure is to be reconstructed.
(b) Create a danger to public safety by reason of traffic access, flow and circulation; and,
(c) Be out of character with the traditional settlement and construction patterns of the area in which it is to be reconstructed.
7.1.8 Reversion to nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.
7.2 Flood Plain Conservancy District
7.2.1 Definitions.
7.2.1.1 Flood plain: All flood storage areas along the Concord, Sudbury and Assabet Rivers and their tributaries as designated on the “Flood Plain Conservancy District” Map and all special flood hazard areas designated on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zone A, AE, AH.
7.2.1.2 Floodway: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the base flood.
47
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.2.1.3 Floodway data: In Zone A, AE, AH, and along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated the best available Federal, State, local and other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
7.2.1.4 Base flood: A flood known to have occurred in the Town with a frequency of once in one hundred (100) years and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on a particular stream.
7.2.1.5 Base flood elevation data: Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments on parcels greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
7.2.1.6 Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building.
7.2.1.7 Water surface elevation: The height in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of riverine areas.
7.2.2 Purpose.
7.2.2.1 To protect persons and property against the hazards of flood water inundation by assuring the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the rivers and those portions of their tributaries located within the Flood Plain Conservancy District within the Town and by preserving natural floodwater storage areas;
7.2.2.2 To maintain the quality and level of the groundwater table and water recharge areas for existing or potential water supplies; and
7.2.2.3 To protect the Town against unsuitable use or development of areas subject to flooding.
7.2.3 Standards.
7.2.3.1 Within Zone AH on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
7.2.3.2 In Zone AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway within the Town of Concord designated on the Middlesex County FIRM, encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
7.2.3.3 All site plan proposals shall be designed to assure that: a) such proposals minimize flood damage; b) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and, c) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
48
CONCORD ZONING
7.2.4 Uses permitted without review by the Board. The following uses are permitted within the Flood Plain ConservancyDistrict:
7.2.4.1 Wildlife management, boating, fishing and hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
7.2.4.2 Construction and maintenance of at-grade sidewalks, duckwalks, bicycle, equestrian and foot paths or bridges, and unpaved recreation areas which do not alter the existing topography;
7.2.4.3 Flower and vegetable gardens, lawns, pastures, soil conservation, forestry, grazing and farming, including nurseries, truck gardening and harvesting of crops;
7.2.4.4 Construction and maintenance of public and private water supplies, and maintenance or improvement of ponds, ditches, and other water bodies;
7.2.4.5 Construction and maintenance of at-grade roads, driveways, utilities and other associated roadway facilities when access to land which is not situated in the Flood Plain Conservancy District is not possible because of ownership patterns or the provisions of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board;
7.2.4.6 Construction and improvements of public sewers, including accessory facilities used for their operation and maintenance, and improvements to existing roads and systems used in the service of the public, including drainage, electric power (including conversion to underground facilities), gas, telephone, telegraph and other telecommunication devices; and
7.2.4.7 Repairs to septic disposal systems (SDS), including leaching facilities, but excluding any expansion of SDS capacity beyond the minimum design flow for the existing use of the property as required by applicable Board of Health regulations.
7.2.4.8 Any use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development restrictions as may otherwise apply thereto, provided that the land designated as being within the Flood Plain Conservancy District is found to be not, in fact, subject to flooding through a Letter of Map Amendment, Letter of Map Revision or physical map revision submitted to and approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7.2.5 Uses permitted subject to review by the Board. The following uses may be permitted by the Board after notice and a public hearing:
7.2.5.1 Any use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development regulations as may otherwise apply thereto, whether by right or by special permit, provided that all development, including structural and non-structural activities, are in compliance with other State regulations.
49
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.2.6 Procedure for review by the Board.
7.2.6.1 Any person who desires to use land within the Flood Plain Conservancy District for a use permitted subject to review by the Board shall submit a written application for a special permit to the Board, with copies to the Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission. Each such application shall be accompanied by the following submissions:
(a) A written statement detailing the proposed work, the history of flooding at the subject premises and the calculations of the volume of water which will be displaced prepared by a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor;
(b) Development plans, including specific topographic details within the flood plain area, meeting, to the extent applicable, the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board; and
(c) In the case of any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the following agencies shall also be notified:
? Town of Sudbury; Town Manager, 278 Old Sudbury Road, Sudbury, MA
01776
? Town of Acton; Town Manager, 472 Main Street, Acton,MA 01720
? Town ofMaynard; Town Administrator, 195Main Street,Maynard, MA 01754
? Town of Bedford; Town Manager, 10 Mudge Way, Bedford, MA 01730
? Town of Lincoln; Town Administrator, 16 Lincoln Road, Lincoln, MA 01773
? Town of Wayland; Town Administrator, 41 Cochituate Road, Wayland, MA
01778
? NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation, 251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700, Boston, MA 02114-2104
? NFIP Program Specialist, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I,
99 High Street, 6th Floor, Boston,MA 02110; and,
(d) Such additional information as the Board may require.
7.2.6.2 The Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission shall submit to the Board written recommendations including at least:
(a) An evaluation of the proposed use, including its probable effect or impact upon the Town's water supply, the quality of water in the area, the natural flow pattern of watercourses, nearby or pertinent floodwater storage areas or other areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding and the general health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town; and
(b) A recommendation as to whether the special permit should be granted and whether any restrictions should be imposed upon the proposed use as a condition of such permit.
50
CONCORD ZONING
7.2.6.3 If a special permit is granted, the Board shall impose such conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require. The Board shall give due consideration to the reports of the Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission and, where the decision of the Board differs from the recommendations of either, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing.
7.3 Wetlands Conservancy District
7.3.1 Definition: Wetlands are wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, and areas of flowing or standing water. Wetlands are characterized by the presence of wetland soils, hydrology, and the presence of wetland plant communities, which can tolerate the presence of water at or near the ground surface for a significant portion of the year. The Wetlands Conservancy District consists of areas within the Town, which have been mapped as wetlands.
7.3.2 Purpose: The purpose of the Wetlands Conservancy District is to provide preliminary wetlands information in a zoning context for planning purposes without the requirement of delineating actual wetlands in accordance with the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act. Development of a site or property that has wetlands located thereon shall be required to comply with any Order of Conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act and/or the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw.
7.4 By-Pass District
7.4.1 Standards.
7.4.1.1 Prohibited Uses: No building, above ground structure or parking shall be permitted within the By-Pass District.
7.4.1.2 Permitted Uses: The establishment of one vehicular entrance and one exit per lot through the By-Pass District may be authorized by the Board by special permit, provided that the Board shall find that access to a way from a lot located within the By-Pass District cannot be accomplished except through the By-Pass District and that the lot was not created from a larger lot after January 1, 1989. Underground structures may be constructed without review by the Board.
7.4.1.3 By-Pass Dimensional Regulations:
(a) Frontage: In all districts, any lot which gains its minimum lot frontage along Route
2 shall have at least two hundred (200) feet of frontage.
(b) Front, side and rear yards: In all districts where the By-Pass District divides a lot, the yard requirements for such lot shall be measured from the boundary line of the By-Pass District nearest the proposed use.
(c) Landscape buffer: Existing trees, to the extent practicable, shall be retained.
51
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.5 Earth Removal
7.5.1 [Generally] The removal from any property not in public use of soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel or stone (herein, "earth") is prohibited in all districts, except when incidental to and in connection with the construction of a building or street or other activity authorized by this Bylaw. No earth removal permit shall be required for moving earth within the limits of a lot or contiguous lots in the same ownership, provided that no such moving shall take place across or within a street.
7.5.2 Removal of earth permitted without review by the Board. Under the following conditions the removal of not more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth shall be permitted, provided that the Chief of Police has approved the days of operation, the trucking route and type of vehicle to be used on any street for removal of earth and provided further that, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any removal, the Building Inspector has been given written notification of the volume of earth to be removed, the approval of the Chief of Police and a notice of approval by one or more of the following procedures as applicable:
7.5.2.1 Building Permit: Removal by building permit when such removal is at the site of, incidental to and in connection with the excavation and grading necessary for the construction of a principal or accessory use permitted by this Bylaw;
7.5.2.2 Subdivision: Removal by approval of a definitive plan under the Subdivision Control Law when such removal is necessary to construct an approved street or definitive subdivision; and
7.5.2.3 Wetlands Protection Act and the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw: Removal pursuant to an order of conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act (G.L. c. 131 sec.40) and the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw when such removal is incidental to a use permitted without review by the Board in the Flood Plain Conservancy District.
7.5.3 Removal of earth subject to board approval. The removal of earth in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards may be permitted by the Board after notice and a public hearing if the Board finds that:
7.5.3.1 The volume proposed for removal does not exceed the minimum practical removal required to accomplish the construction, development, or improvement in accordance with the plans therefor;
7.5.3.2 The plans submitted in connection with the removal are designed to minimize changes in existing contours to enhance attractive land utilization, effective drainage, suitable road gradients, access or other design considerations; and
7.5.3.3 Effecting the removal will not be detrimental or injurious to abutters or the neighborhood, either by the alteration of existing topography or by a substantial change in the use of the streets in the neighborhood.
52
CONCORD ZONING
7.5.4 Procedure for review by the Board.
7.5.4.1 Any person who desires to remove in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth shall submit a written application for a special permit to the Board. Each such application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor as follows:
(a) A plan of the area from which removal is proposed and a strip one hundred (100) feet wide surrounding said area, showing all manmade features, lot lines, zoning boundaries, vegetative cover, soil characteristics and existing topography;
(b) A plan of the area showing the finished grade and treatment of the site after the proposed completion of the excavation;
(c) The estimated quantity of materials to be removed and topsoil to be stripped and replaced, together with a detailed statement of the hours and days of operation, the trucking route and type of vehicle to be used on any street for the removal of earth, the treatment of the site during operations to reduce dust and mud and, where appropriate, the proposed form of bond; and
(d) Such additional information as the Board may determine.
7.5.4.2 If a special permit is granted, the Board shall impose limitations on the time and the extent of the permitted removal and such other appropriate conditions, limitations and safeguards as the Board deems necessary for the protection of the neighborhood and of the public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the Town and may condition the continuance of the permit upon compliance with regulations of the Board then in force or thereafter adopted. The Board shall require sufficient security, including necessary covenants, to insure compliance with the terms, conditions, and limitations of the earth removal permit.
7.6 Groundwater Conservancy District
7.6.1 Definition: The Groundwater Conservancy District is an overlay district superimposed on existing zoning districts, consisting of those areas within the Town which are delineated on the Groundwater ConservancyDistrict map referred to in subsection 2.2.
7.6.1.1 Commercial fertilizers: Any substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients which is used for its plant nutrient content and which is designed for use, or claimed by its manufacturer to have value in promoting plant growth. Commercial fertilizers do not include unmanipulated animal and vegetable manures, marl, lime, limestone, wood ashes, and gypsum.
7.6.1.2 Discharge: The accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of toxic or hazardous material or waste upon or into any land or water so that such hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the land or waters of the Commonwealth. Discharge includes, without limitation, leakage of such materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems and disposal of such materials into any on-site leaching structure or sewage disposal system.
53
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.6.1.3 Hazardous material: A product, waste or combination of substances which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, toxic, radioactive, or infectious characteristics may reasonably pose a significant, actual, or potential hazard to human health, safety, welfare, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious materials, and all substances defined as “toxic” or “hazardous’ under Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.) Chapter 21C and 21E.
7.6.1.4 Historical high groundwater table elevation: A groundwater elevation that is determined from local historical data and/or USGS monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data.
7.6.1.5 Impervious surface: Material or structure on or above the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil.
7.6.1.6 Landfill: A facility established in accordance with a valid site assignment for the purposes of disposing solid waste into or on the land.
7.6.1.7 Non-sanitary wastewater: Wastewater discharges from industrial and commercial facilities containing wastes from any activity other than collection of sanitary sewage.
7.6.1.8 Open dump: A facility established without a valid site assignment for the purposes of disposing solid waste into or on the land.
7.6.1.9 Septage: The liquid, solid, and semi-solid contents of privies, chemical toilets, cesspools, holding tanks, or other sewage waste receptacles.
7.6.1.10 Sludge: The solid, semi-solid, and liquid residue that results from a process of wastewater treatment or drinking water treatment. Sludge does not include grit, screening, or grease and oil which are removed at the headworks of a facility.
7.6.1.11 Solid waste: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid, liquid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, municipal or household activities that is abandoned by being disposed or incinerated, but does not include hazardous waste, septage, sludge, waste-water treatment facility residuals or compostable or recyclable materials.
7.6.1.12 Treatment works: Any and all devices, processes and properties, real or personal, used in the collection, pumping, transmission, storage, treatment, disposal, recycling, reclamation, or reuse of waterborne pollutants, but not including any works receiving a hazardous waste from off the site of the works for the purpose of treatment, storage, or disposal.
7.6.1.13 Use of toxic or hazardous materials: The handling, generation, treatment, storage, or management of toxic or hazardous materials.
7.6.1.14 Very small quantity generator: Any public or private entity, other than residential, which produces less than 27 gallons (100 kilograms) a month of hazardous waste or waste oil, but not including any acutely hazardous waste.
54
CONCORD ZONING
7.6.1.15 Waste oil retention facility: A waste oil collection facility for automobile service stations, retail outlets, and marinas which is sheltered and has adequate protection to contain a spill, seepage, or discharge of petroleum waste products.
7.6.2 Purpose
7.6.2.1 To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of the Town of Concord;
7.6.2.2 To preserve and protect the Town’s existing and potential sources of public drinking water supplies;
7.6.2.3 To conserve the natural resources of the Town; and
7.6.2.4 To prevent temporary and permanent contamination of the environment.
7.6.2.5 To preserve and protect the existing and potential sources of public drinking water supplies for the towns adjacent to the Town of Concord.
7.6.3 Applicability: Within the boundaries of the Groundwater Conservancy District, land use shall be subject to the provisions of this section in addition to the requirements of the underlying district. Where the line of the Groundwater Conservancy District divides a lot, only that portion of the lot within the district shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
7.6.4 Uses permitted without review by the Board: The following uses are permitted within the Groundwater Conservancy District:
7.6.4.1 Any extensive use and residential use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development regulations as may otherwise apply thereto, whether by right or by special permit, provided that all development, including structural and non-structural activities, are in compliance with Section 7.6 and do not require a special permit as herein after provided in Section 7.6.5;
7.6.4.2 Any institutional use, governmental and utility use, business use and industrial use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development regulations as may otherwise apply thereto, whether by right or by special permit, provided,
(a) all development, including structural and non-structural activities are in compliance with Section 7.6 and do not require a special permit as hereinafter provided in Section 7.6.5; and,
(b) the maximum lot coverage by the total ground area covered by the principal and accessory structures and all paved areas does not exceed 15 percent or 2,500 square feet per lot, whichever is greater.
55
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.6.5 Uses permitted subject to review by the Board: The following uses may be permitted by special permit by the Board after notice and a public hearing:
7.6.5.1 Any institutional use, governmental and utility use, business use and industrial use permitted under Section 7.6.4.2 which exceeds the maximum lot coverage permitted under Section 7.6.4.2(b) provided, in part, that the proposed lot coverage does not exceed the maximum permitted in the underlying district.
7.6.5.2 Storage of sludge and septage;
7.6.5.3 Storage of roadway de-icing chemicals, such as calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives, or other chemicals and the storage of chemical fertilizers or pesticides in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use.;
7.6.5.4 Open air or unenclosed storage of animal manure;
7.6.5.5 Storage of liquid hazardous materials and/or liquid petroleum products when such materials or products are not stored above-ground, on an impervious surface and in a container within a building, or outdoors in covered containers designed and operated to provide secondary containment of such materials or products.
7.6.5.6 The replacement of underground storage tanks or systems for the keeping, dispensing or storing of petroleum products;
7.6.5.7 Floor drains in an industrial or commercial facility and/or a petroleum, toxic, or hazardous materials and/or waste storage area;
7.6.5.8 On-site subsurface disposal which requires a minimum design flow under Title V
in excess of four hundred and forty (440) gallons per day per acre.
7.6.5.9 Any alteration of a structure served by a failed septic system when such alteration is part of the work required to address the failed septic system.
7.6.5.10 Any use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development restrictions as may otherwise apply thereto, provided that the land designated as being within the Groundwater Conservancy District is found by the Board not, in fact, to be within an area contributing to drinking water resources;
7.6.6 Prohibited uses: The following uses and activities are prohibited within the
Groundwater Conservancy District:
7.6.6.1 Uses prohibited under Section 4.7.1;
7.6.6.2 Auto service station with underground storage tanks;
7.6.6.3 Private sanitary landfills and open dumps;
56
CONCORD ZONING
7.6.6.4 Commercial car washes not connected to the municipal sewer system;
7.6.6.5 Commercial and coin-operated laundries and dry-cleaning establishments (where dry-cleaning is done on-site) not connected to the municipal sewer system;
7.6.6.6 Sludge and septage landfills;
7.6.6.7 Storage and/or disposal of chemically treated snow and ice that have been removed from highways and roadways outside the Groundwater Conservancy District;
7.6.6.8 Petroleum, fuel oil and heating oil bulk stations and terminals, other than propane tanks;
7.6.6.9 Facilities for the treatment or disposal of non-sanitary wastewater are prohibited within the Groundwater Conservancy District, with the following exceptions:
(a) Replacement or repair of an existing system is exempt if the existing design capacity is not exceeded;
(b) Treatment works approved by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and designed for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters and operated in compliance with DEP regulations; and
(c) Publicly owned treatment works.
7.6.6.10 Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste are prohibited within the Groundwater Conservancy District, with the following exceptions:
(a) Very small quantity generators;
(b) Household hazardous waste collection centers or collection events;
(c) Waste oil retention facilities; and
(d) Treatment works for the restoration of contaminated ground or surface waters.
(e) Hospitals and other medical facilities in existence and licensed as such by the Department of Public Health, and identified by the Department of Environmental Protection as a “small quantity generator of hazardous waste.”
7.6.6.11 Removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, or any other mineral substances within four feet of the historical high groundwater table elevation is prohibited within the Groundwater Conservancy District, with the following exceptions:
(a) Substances which are removed and redeposited (or suitable alternative material deposited) within 45 days of removal on site to achieve a final grade equal to preexisting ground contours or greater than four feet above the historical high water mark; and
(b) Excavations for the construction of residential building foundations and other structures accessory to the principal residential use and the installation of utilities.
7.6.6.12 Any expansion of a structure served by a failed septic system, unless such expansion is required to address the failed septic system.
57
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.6.7 Procedure for review by the Board
7.6.7.1 Any person who desires to use land within the Groundwater Conservancy District for a use permitted subject to review by the Board shall submit a written application for a special permit to the Board, with copies to the Planning Board, Public Works Commission, the Natural Resources Commission and the Board of Health. Each such application shall be accompanied by the following submissions:
(a) A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fuels, and other potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use;
(b) For those activities using or storing such hazardous materials, a hazardous materials management plan shall be prepared and filed with the Fire Department, and Board of Health. The plan shall include:
i. Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures;
ii. Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces; and
iii. Evidence of compliance with any local, state and/or federal regulations.
(c) Proposed down-gradient location(s) for groundwater monitoring well(s), should the
Board deem the activity a potential groundwater threat.
7.6.7.2 The Planning Board, Public Works Commission, the Natural Resources Commission and Board of Health shall submit to the Board written recommendations including an evaluation that the project:
(a) Minimizes any adverse effects to the existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is available in the Groundwater Conservancy District;
(b) Is designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be developed;
(c) Provides a system of artificial recharge of precipitation that will not result in the degradation of groundwater quality; and
(d) Where a portion of the lot is located partially outside the Groundwater Conservancy District, site design shall, to the extent feasible, locate potential pollution sources, such as on-site disposal systems, outside the district boundaries.
7.6.7.3 If a special permit is granted, the Board shall impose such conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require. The Board shall give due consideration to the reports of the Planning Board, Natural Resources Commission, Public Works Commission and the Board of Health, and where the decision of the Board differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board, the Public Works Commission,
58
CONCORD ZONING
the Natural Resources Commission, or the Board of Health, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing.
7.7 Off-street Parking, Loading, and Design Standards
7.7.1 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to ensure that all uses be provided with sufficient off-street parking and loading facilities to meet the needs of persons employed at or having commerce at such uses; to ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed so as to reduce hazards to pedestrians and drivers; to reduce congestion in the streets; to reduce nuisance to abutters from noise, fumes, and headlight glare ordinarily associated with parking lots; to reduce environmental deterioration to surrounding neighborhoods resulting from the glare, heat, dust, light spillover, light pollution, accelerated storm water run-off, and unattractive views associated with large expanses of pavement and vehicles.
7.7.2 Parking and Loading Regulations
7.7.2.1 Required spaces: Table IV, Minimum Parking, indicates the minimum number of parking spaces required for each principal use.
Principal Use
Extensive Uses:
TABLE IV MINIMUM PARKING
Required Spaces
Greenhouse One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area of inside sales or display room.
Private recreation:
camps One (1) space per employee, plus one (1) space per camp vehicle kept on the premises.
handball, racquetball, tennis courts Three (3) spaces per court plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.
golf courses Five (5) spaces per hole plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (bars, restaurants, etc.)
swimming pool One (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross water area.
fitness clubs One (1) space per two-hundred-fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area.
59
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Principal Use
Extensive Uses Cont.:
Required Spaces
other outdoor recreational facilities
including country clubs One (1) space per four (4) persons generally
expected on the premises at any one time.
Residential Uses:
Single- and two-family dwelling and planned residential development
Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit or one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces per dwelling unit for subsidized low and moderate income housing or elderly housing developments.
Boarding house and tourist home Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space per rentable room or suite.
Hotel, Extended-stay hotel and Motel One (1) space per rentable room or suite, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per four (4) persons to maximum rated capacity of each meeting or banquet room, plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (bars, restaurants, shops, etc.)
Institutional Uses:
Educational:
elementary and middle schools One (1) space per staff member plus one (1)
space per classroom.
senior high school One (1) space per staff member plus one (1)
space per five (5) students.
other nonprofit educational use To be determined by the Building Inspector based upon the most comparable other use in Table IV
60
CONCORD ZONING
Principal Use
Institutional Uses Cont.:
Required Spaces
Child care facility One (1) space for every teacher and employee, one (1) space for visitors plus one (1) space for every six children based on the largest enrollment on site at any given time; the Board or the Planning Board, whichever is
responsible for site plan approval, may allow a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for the purposes of improving site utilization but not to increase permitted enrollment if the number of spaces provided is adequate to provide one space for every teacher and employee and to support, without
detriment to the neighborhood, drop-off and pick-up areas for the maximum number of children arriving and departing the facility at any one time in accordance with a parking and traffic management plan approved by the Planning Board. In the case of a parking and traffic management plan, the Planning Board shall have the authority to monitor compliance and to amend the plan as necessary to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in the plan.
Religious One (1) space per four (4) seats or one (1) space per four (4) persons to maximum rated capacity of the hall or meeting room.
Philanthropic (community and recreation centers, libraries and museums)
One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area.
Assisted living residence 0.35 parking spaces per dwelling unit, plus one (1) parking space per two employees during the largest shift, plus one (1) space per company vehicle kept on the premises.
Hospital One (1) space per two (2) beds plus three (3) spaces per staff doctor plus one (1) space per other employee on the largest shift.
Nursing home One (1) space per two (2) beds.
Lodge or club One (1) space per four (4) persons to maximum rated capacity of the facility.
61
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Business Uses:
Retail store One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet gross floor area.
Personal service shop and craft shop Three (3) spaces per operator in a barber or beauty shop; otherwise one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.
Restaurant One (1) space per three (3) seats rated capacity, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.
Indoor amusement One (1) space per four (4) persons to maximum rated capacity of the facility.
Outdoor amusement:
driving range One (1) space per tee.
miniature golf One (1) space per hole.
skating rink or other outdoor amusements
One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross area of facility plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.
Funeral home One (1) space per four (4) patron seats.
Repair shop and building trade One (1) space per employee on the largest shift and one (1) space for each company vehicle kept on the premises.
Medical center and laboratory Three (3) spaces per staff doctor, dentist or other professional [e.g. nurse practitioner, dental hygienist, phlebotomist] plus one (1) space per other employee on the largest shift.
Auto service station and auto body shop Three (3) spaces per lubrication or repair bay excluding such bays, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus one (1) space per company vehicle kept on the premises.
Vehicular dealerships and boat sales and rentals
One (1) space per fifteen hundred (1500) square feet of gross floor area of indoor and outdoor display area.
Veterinary and kennel Three (3) spaces per doctor plus one (1) space per other employee on the largest shift.
62
CONCORD ZONING
Principal Use
Business Uses Cont.:
Required Spaces
Financial and business office:
bank, loan agency, travel or other consumer services offices
general offices, administrative offices and executive offices
One (1) space per two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area, plus two spaces per Automated Teller Machine (ATM).
One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
Professional office One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of gross floor area.
Industrial Uses:
Warehouse and storage yard/open air
sales
One (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) space per company vehicle kept on the premises.
R&D and Light manufacturing One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet
of gross floor area used for office and one (1) space
per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area used for research, testing, training or light manufacturing.
Manufacturing, packaging, processing and testing
One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
Repair garage One (1) space per employee on the largest shift plus one (1) space per company vehicle kept on the premises.
7.7.2.2 Increased parking demand: When a building or use undergoes a change which involves any increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of measurement used as a means of determining off-street parking, and when such change would result in a requirement for a greater number of parking spaces than exists on the site, the off-street parking shall be increased to meet the requirements of subsection
7.7.2.1, Table IV, for the entire building or use as changed.
7.7.2.3 Use of required parking as commercial or public lot: No parking area designated as required parking in connection with a building or use shall be operated as a commercial or public parking lot providing spaces for the general public or for the tenants, customers, clients or residents of any other use or activity for a fee or other compensation except in accordance with subsection 7.7.2.4. In no event shall tenants of a building be charged an optional fee for use of required parking.
7.7.2.4 Joint parking facilities: Off-street parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any zoning district in which the separate uses would be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
63
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
(a) Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for educational, religious, lodge and club, indoor amusement, and restaurant uses may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments, and other uses not normally open, used, or operated during similar hours if specifically approved by the Planning Board. The approval may be rescinded and additional parking shall be provided by the owners in the event that the Planning Board, after notice and public hearing thereon, determines joint use is resulting in a public nuisance or other adverse effects on the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) A written agreement, assuring the continued joint use of the common parking area, executed by all parties concerned and approved as to form and length of time by the Planning Board, shall be filed with and made part of the application for a building or occupancy permit.
7.7.2.5 Fractional numbers: Where the computation of required parking spaces results in a fractional number only the fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one (1).
7.7.2.6 Mixed use facilities: Buildings or lots which contain more than one principal use are considered mixed use facilities. For the purpose of determining parking requirements for such a facility, each use component shall be treated as a separate principal use.
7.7.2.7 Location: All required parking or loading spaces shall be provided on the same parcel of land occupied by the use or building to which it is appurtenant; provided, however, that where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, there are practical difficulties in satisfying the requirement for parking spaces and/or if the public safety and convenience would be served better by another location, the Planning Board may authorize an alternative location for nonresidential parking subject to the following provisions:
(a) The property to be occupied as parking shall be in the same possession as the facility served either by deed, by easement, or by long-term lease. If the property is leased, the terms of the lease shall be subject to Planning Board approval as to form and length of time and a copy of the lease shall be filed with and made part of the application for a building or occupancy permit.
(b) The distance between the use or building and its parking area shall not be more than six hundred (600) feet.
(c) The separated parking area shall not create unreasonable traffic congestion or create a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
(d) The parking area shall be located on property zoned for the same or less restrictive use as the principal use being served by the parking.
7.7.2.8 Reserved parking spaces: The Planning Board may, based upon documentation of the special nature of the use, or building, authorize a phased development of required off- street parking with the following provisions:
(a) The total number of spaces required to be shown on the site plan shall be determined in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection 7.7.2.1, Table IV.
64
CONCORD ZONING
(b) The spaces that are not intended for construction immediately shall be labeled "Reserve Parking" on the site plan and shall be properly designed as an integral part of the overall parking layout, located on land suitable for parking development and in no case located within area counted as buffer, setback, or open space under other provisions of this Bylaw.
(c) No more than fifty (50) percent of the total number of required spaces may be reserved for later construction.
(d) If, at any time after the certificate of occupancy is issued for the building or use, the Building Inspector determines that additional spaces may be needed, he shall notify the Planning Board concerning his finding and that Board may require that all or any portion of the spaces shown on the approved site plan as "Reserved Parking" shall be constructed.
7.7.2.9 Use of parking area: No parking area shall be used for any use that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
7.7.2.10 Off-street loading: For every building or part thereof which is to be used by retail, industrial, hospital, hotel, extended-stay hotel or similar uses requiring the regular receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, off-street loading space(s) shall be provided according to the following schedule:
Sq. Ft. of Gross Floor Area in Use No. of Loading Spaces
0 to 10,000 None
10,000 to 50,000 1
50,000 to 100,000 2
Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1
However, an assisted living residence, as defined in Section 4.3.6, shall not be required to install more than one of-street loading space provided that the facility has no more than
100,000 square feet of gross floor area.
7.7.2.11 Exceptions: The parking and loading requirements set forth in subsection 7.7.2.1, Table IV, shall not apply to any building or use in existence on January 31, 1985, provided that existing off-street parking or loading areas are not reduced and provided further that the building is not substantially altered nor its use changed.
7.7.2.12 Relief from parking requirements: The Board may, upon advice of the Planning Board, grant relief from the parking and loading requirements in Section 7.7.2 provided the Board finds that a literal application of such requirements would be unreasonable and that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. The Board may require the applicant to submit a written report, prepared by a qualified parking consultant, defining and evaluating the nature and impact of the requested relief.
65
A
B*
C**
D
E
F
1-way
2-way
0
22'
9'
12'
24'
22'
NA
45
9'
17'
14'
24'
12.7'
18'
60
9'
18.5'
18'
24'
10.4'
18'
75
9'
19'
22'
24'
9.3'
18'
90
9'
18'
24'
24'
9'
18'
8' x 16'
A
B*
C**
1-way
D
2-way
E
F
0
20'
8'
12'
24'
20'
NA
45
8'
15.5'
14'
24'
11.3'
16'
60
8'
16.8'
18'
24'
9.2'
16'
75
8'
17'
22'
24'
8.3'
16'
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.7.3 Design Standards.
7.7.3.1 Parking dimensions: The minimum dimensions of parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be as follows:
A. Parking Angle
B. StallWidth
C. Distance of Stall to Curb
D. AisleWidth
E. Curb Length Per Car
F. Stall Depth
9' x 18'
FULL SIZE SPACES
(parallel)
SMALL CAR SIZE SPACES
(parallel)
90 8' 16' 24' 24' 8' 16'
* Non-parallel end spaces, restricted on one of the long sides by curbs, walls, fences or other similar obstructions, shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, and maneuvering space at the aisle end of at least five (5) feet in depth and nine (9) feet in width.
** Non-parallel spaces may include no more than two (2) feet of landscaped island or setback area at the front of the space, provided there are no obstructions to the vehicle's bumper overhang and provided, further, that the bumper overhang does not interfere with availability of the island or setback area for snow storage.
7.7.3.2 Loading space dimensions: Each loading space shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and shall be provided with a fourteen-foot-high clearance.
66
CONCORD ZONING
7.7.3.3 Circulation: Driveways and parking areas shall be designed with due regard to topography, integration with surrounding streets, general interior circulation, and separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic so as to reduce hazards to pedestrians and motorists.
7.7.3.4 Layout: Required parking and loading facilities shall be laid out so that each vehicle may proceed to and from its parking space without requiring the movement of any other vehicle. The Planning Board may waive this requirement for parking facilities under full-time attendant supervision.
In no case shall parking or loading spaces be so located as to require the backing or maneuvering of a vehicle onto the sidewalk or onto a public way in order to enter or leave the space.
7.7.3.5 Driveways: All driveways shall be located and designed so as to minimize conflict with traffic on public streets and to provide good visibility and sight distances for observation of approaching vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
7.7.3.6 Small car spaces: In parking lots with more than thirty (30) spaces, up to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total number of required spaces may be designed for small cars. In parking lots of thirty (30) or less spaces, up to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the total number of required spaces may be designed for small cars.
Small car spaces shall be located such that they are grouped in one or more areas which are neither more nor less convenient to the use or building served than the full size spaces. Small car spaces shall be suitably and conspicuously identified through appropriate signing or pavement markings.
7.7.3.7 Handicapped parking: Parking facilities shall provide specially designated parking spaces for the physically handicapped in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Architectural Barriers Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Safety.
Signs for the handicapped shall be clearly identified by a sign indicating that the spaces are reserved for physically handicapped persons. Such spaces shall be located nearest to the entrance to the use or building served.
7.7.3.8 Bicycle parking: Bicycle parking or storage shall be provided for use by residents, employees and other users of the site. Long-term bicycle parking for residents and employees shall be located in secure, weather-protected, restricted access facilities. Short- term bicycle parking for visitors and users of a site shall be located in convenient and accessible locations.
7.7.3.9 Surfacing, drainage and curbing: All parking facilities shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar nonerosive material, and drained in a manner deemed adequate by the Planning Board to prevent nuisance of erosion or excessive water flow across public ways or abutting properties.
Entrance and exit driveways shall be defined clearly with curbing, signs, and pavement markings. Parking and loading spaces shall be marked clearly in accordance with the dimensions specified in subsections 7.7.3.1 and 7.7.3.2, above.
67
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.7.3.10 Landscaping: In order to separate parking areas from abutting streets, to provide areas for disposal of snow, and to provide visual relief from expanse of pavement andvehicles, landscaping shall be provided in all parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces according to the Planning Board site plan rules and regulations in effect at the time.
7.7.3.11 Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be designed for safety and for personal security. Glare and light spillover, as defined below, shall be controlled to protect inhabitants from the consequences of stray light shining into inhabitant’s eyes or onto adjoining properties. Light pollution, as defined below, control shall be required to minimize the negative effect of misdirected upward light. All exterior lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and maintained so that it illuminates the task intended and does not shine directly onto neighboring properties, roadways or distribute excessive light skyward.
(a) Glare shall mean the sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted so as to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility. The magnitude of the sensation of glare depends upon factors such as the size, position, and luminance of the source, the number of sources, and the luminance to which the eyes are adapted.
(b) Light spillover shall mean illumination produced by a light fixture, which extends beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which the light fixture is located.
(c) Light pollution shall mean illumination which extends beyond an object, structure or area, which the light fixture is designed to serve, so as to produce glare, or otherwise interfere with viewing of natural vistas such as the night sky.
7.7.3.12 Maintenance: Parking and loading facilities and landscaping shall be continuously maintained in good condition and appearance. Whenever necessary, surfacing, lighting, curbing, markings and plantings shall be repaired or replaced with new materials, and drainage structures shall be cleaned or replaced in order to insure continued compliance with the provisions of Section 7.7. Failure to maintain parking facilities properly shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Bylaw.
7.7.3.13 Relief from design standards: The Board may, upon advice of the Planning Board, grant relief from the design standards contained in section 7.7.3 where the variation in the standards can be supported by a study prepared by a qualified consultant and where the Board finds that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
7.8 Personal Wireless Communications Facility
7.8.1 Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this Section is to establish a district within the Town in which personal wireless communication facilities may be provided, to regulate their impacts and to accommodate their location and use in a manner which:
(a) protects the visual, aesthetic, scenic, historic, environmental and natural or man-made resources of the Town;
(b) encourages the use of existing structures and towers;
68
CONCORD ZONING
(c) protects property values;
(d) minimizes the total number and height of towers located within the community by requiring tower sharing and clustering of personal wireless communication facilities where possible;
(e) minimizes any adverse impacts on the residents of the Town (such as, but not limited to, visual blight on viewsheds, attractive nuisance, noise and falling objects) with regard to the general safety, welfare and quality of life in the community;
(f) provides standards and requirements for regulation, placement, construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of personal wireless communication facilities; and
(g) provides a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of time for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate or modify personal wireless communication facilities;
The intent of this Section is to be in compliance with the federal Telecommunications Act of
1996.
7.8.2 Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
7.8.2.1 Act: The federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
7.8.2.2 Adequate coverage: Coverage is considered to be “adequate” within that area surrounding a base station where the predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted signal is greater than minus 95 (-95)dbm. It is acceptable for there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage where the signal is less than –95dbm, as long as the signal regains its strength to greater than –95dbm further away from the base station. For the limited purpose of determining whether the use of a repeater is necessary or desirable, there shall be deemed not to be adequate coverage within said holes. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, however, is that location past which the signal does not regain its strength to greater than –95dbm. In applications to the Board, predictions of field strength in proposed coverage areas shall be supported by submission of actual measurements or drive test data, using at least two methodologies, along the most heavily traveled roads in the proposed coverage area for review and analysis by the independent consultant referred to in subsection 7.8.4.3.
7.8.2.3 Adequate capacity: In an area where coverage exists, capacity is considered “adequate” if, during the busiest hour of the day on at least fifty percent (50%) of the days in any month preceding the date of application, 95% or more of the attempted calls are able to connect on their first attempt, as measured using direct measurement of the coverage area in question.
7.8.2.4 Antenna: A device that is attached to a tower, or other structure for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves.
7.8.2.5 Array: A set of antennas for one carrier or personal wireless communication service provider that are placed on a mount at a given height above ground level and spaced so as to avoid internal interference.
69
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
7.8.2.6 Available space: The space on a tower or other structure to which antennas of a personal wireless communication service provider are both structurally able and electromagnetically able to be attached.
7.8.2.7 Base station: A fixed-location sending and receiving site serving a coverage area within a wireless communication network. More than one base station and/or facilities as used or operated by more than one variety of personal wireless communication service provider can be located on a single tower or structure.
7.8.2.8 Channel: A segment of the radiation spectrum radiating from an antenna. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.
7.8.2.9 Communication equipment shelter: A structure located at the base of a tower or other structure designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with personal wireless communication transmissions.
7.8.2.10 Coverage or propagation studies: Computer generated estimates of the radiation emanating from antennas or repeaters sited on a specific tower or structure. The height above ground, power input and output, frequency output, type of antenna, antenna gain, topography of the site and its surroundings are all taken into account to create these simulations. They are a preliminary tool for determining whether a site will provide adequate coverage for a personal wireless communication service facility proposed for that site.
7.8.2.11 Facility site: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more personal wireless communication service providers and upon which one or more personal wireless communication facility(s) and required landscaping are located.
7.8.2.12 Filler site: a small, lower-powered site that uses a repeater or other similar technology to fill a gap in coverage that is otherwise not filled by a base station array.
7.8.2.13 Modification of an existing facility: Any material change or proposed change to a personal wireless communication facility including but not limited to power input or output, number of antennas, or change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing special permit.
7.8.2.14 Monitoring: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of the radiation from a facility site as a whole, or from individual personal wireless communication facilities, towers, antennas or repeaters.
7.8.2.15 Monitoring protocol: the testing protocol adopted by the Board, which is to be used to monitor the emissions from existing and new personal wireless communication facilities. A copy of the monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Building Inspector.
7.8.2.16 Monopole: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other painted metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations.
7.8.2.17 Personal wireless communication services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange services. These services include (but are not limited to): cellular services, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services and paging services.
70
CONCORD ZONING
7.8.2.18 Personal wireless communication facility: All equipment (including any repeaters, micro-cells or other similar technology) with which a personal wireless communication service provider broadcasts and receives the radio-frequency waves that carry their services and all locations of said equipment or any part thereof.
7.8.2.19 Personal wireless communication service provider: An entity licensed by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) to provide personal wireless communication services to individuals or institutions.
7.8.2.20 Repeater: A small receiver/relay transmitter designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage from a base station in a wireless communications network and has no significant visual impact on the surrounding area.
7.8.2.21 Structurally able: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of carrying the load imposed by the new antennas under all reasonably predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis.
7.8.2.22 Tower: A freestanding lattice structure or framework, or monopole, that is self- supporting, fixed to the ground and is designed to support personal wireless communication transmissions, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment. An existing lattice tower may be replaced in an existing location but no new lattice structures shall be permitted.
7.8.3 Exemptions: The following wireless communication facilities are exempt: police, fire, ambulance and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio; citizens band radio; any existing commercial radio tower; and radio dispatch for local businesses. No personal wireless communication facility shall be considered exempt from this Section for any reason whether or not said facility is proposed to share a tower or other structure with such exempt uses.
7.8.4 Procedure for review by the Board: Any person who desires to construct or install a personal wireless communication facility, including co-location on an existing facility, shall submit a written application for a special permit and site plan approval to the Board, with copies to the Planning Board. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements outlined in the Rules and Regulations for Personal Wireless Communication Facility(s) adopted by the Board. A special permit is required for: a) new tower construction (or modification of an existing tower); and b) personal wireless communication service facilities (or modification of an existing facility) to be mounted in or on an existing or newly permitted tower or structure, except where modification of an existing tower or facility does not substantially change the physical dimensions or appearance of such tower or facility or transmission equipment, or involves the removal of transmission equipment. The following additional information shall also be submitted:
7.8.4.1 Adequate coverage, adequate capacity and justification of need:
(a) The applicant shall provide written documentation of any facility sites in the Town and in abutting towns in which it has a legal or equitable interest, whether by ownership, leasehold or otherwise. Said documentation shall demonstrate the following: that these facility site(s) are not already providing, or do not have the
71
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
potential, by adjusting the personal wireless communication facility on the site(s), to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity; that there is a significant gap in coverage; and, that the proposal reduces or eliminates the significant gap in coverage in a manner that is least intrusive upon the interests of the Town as expressed in the purpose and intent of this Section. A “gap” in coverage exists when a remote user of personal wireless communication services is unable to either connect, directly or indirectly, with a base station or to maintain a connection capable of supporting a reasonably uninterrupted communication. A “significant gap” depends upon the physical size of the gap and upon the number of customers affected by that gap. Documentation shall include, for each facility site listed, the exact location, ground elevation, height of tower or structure, type of antennas, antenna gain, height of antennas on tower or structure, output frequency, number of channels, power input and maximum output per channel. Potential adjustments to these existing facility sites, including changes in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or power output shall be specified. Radial plots from each of these facility sites, as they exist and with adjustments as above, shall be provided as part of the application.
(b) The applicant shall provide written documentation that they have examined all personal wireless communication facility sites located in the town and in abutting towns in which the applicant has no legal or equitable interest to determine whether those existing facility sites can be used to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity. Documentation shall include all information outlined above. Radial plots from each of these facility sites as proposed shall also be provided.
(c) The applicant shall provide written documentation (including radial plots) that they have analyzed the provision of adequate coverage and adequate capacity through the use of filler sites in conjunction with all personal wireless communication facility sites listed above.
(d) The applicant shall provide a map of all proposed facilities to be applied for over the next twenty (20) months (or a complete build-out analysis) by the personal wireless communication service provider. Such map shall also include any and all existing personal wireless communication facility(s) of the provider and known proposed facilities of other personal wireless communication service providers.
(e) The applicant shall provide written documentation that the applicant has examined potentially viable personal wireless facility sites in the overlay districts in the town and relevant sites in abutting towns that could provide adequate coverage and capacity in the town, including the existing structures and open areas that comply with the relevant zoning bylaws of those towns and are consistent with Section 7.8.1
Purpose and Intent (a) through (e). The applicant shall list all such sites examined and state fully and completely the rationale for rejecting any such sites that are less intrusive upon the interests of the Town than the site(s) for which application is being made.
7.8.4.2 General requirements:
(a) New towers shall be set back a distance at least equal to the height of the tower from all lot lines of the site on which the tower is located, unless the tower has been
72
CONCORD ZONING
designed to break away at a certain point above the ground, in which case the new tower may be set at least the breakaway distance from all lot lines.
(b) If the facility site is in a wooded area, a vegetated buffer strip of undisturbed trees shall be retained around the entire perimeter of the personal wireless communication facility site for at least the lesser of (i) the distance to the lot line or (ii) fifty (50) feet. The landowner shall enter into a recordable easement, restriction, or similar instrument enforceable by the Town to ensure that the buffer strip is retained while the facility site is in place.
(c) Fencing and signs: the area around the tower and communication equipment shelters shall be completely fenced for security to a height of six feet and gated (unless the communication equipment shelter is otherwise secured). Use of razor wire is not permitted. A sign shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate indicating the facility owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number and any legally required radio-frequency warning sign shall be posted in an appropriate location. Commercial advertising on any antenna, tower, fencing, accessory building or communication equipment shelter is prohibited.
(d) Communication equipment shelters and accessory buildings shall be designed to be architecturally similar and compatible with each other and the surrounding area. The building shall be used only for the housing of equipment related to the site. Whenever practical, the buildings shall be located underground. Additional supplemental landscape screening may be required by the Board to lessen adverse visual impacts.
(e) New towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage for the personal wireless service facilities proposed for use on the tower, unless the Board determines that co-location with another service provider is desirable, suitable and consistent with this Section. In areas where there is no significant tree canopy, the maximum height of a tower shall not exceed one- hundred-twenty (120) feet above finished grade of the ground elevation. Such finished grade shall not be distorted above the pre-existent natural grade as a way to achieve additional height.
In areas where there is significant tree canopy, the maximum height of a tower shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above the average height of the natural pre-existent tree canopywithin a one-hundred fifty (150) foot radius of the tower.
The Board may permit an increase in the height of a tower, or attachment thereto, to facilitate co-location, provided the Board determines that no material increase in visual impacts will result from the increased height, but in no case shall the height exceed one-hundred fifty (150) feet.
The design of the tower and supporting base structure shall accommodate an ultimate height of whatever is approved by the Board.
(f) If primary coverage from the proposed personal wireless communication facility (greater than 50%) is outside the Town of Concord, the permit may be denied unless the Applicant can show that they are unable to locate within the Town which is primarily receiving service from the proposed facility.
73
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
(g) A personal wireless communication facility proposed to be located on an existing, suitable, non-residential structure or tower for which an occupancy permit was issued as of January 1, 2001 and located within this district, shall not exceed the height of such structure by more than twenty (20) feet.
(h) Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or Emerson Hospital medi- flight program, no exterior night lighting of towers or the personal wireless communication facility is permitted except for manually operated emergency lights for use when operating personnel are on site.
(i) A personal wireless communication facility subject to jurisdiction by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) shall be designed to minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual effects upon existing single-family detached dwellings and historic or scenic viewsheds. No new tower that requires striping or lighting per FAA requirements shall be located within one-thousand (1000) feet of an existing school, day care center, single-family detached dwelling or historic resource.
(j) No new tower for a personal wireless communication facility, shall be located within:
i. One-thousand (1000) feet, on a horizontal plane, to any existing structure which is, or is able to be, occupied or habitable on the property of any existing child care facility or school;
ii. One thousand (1000) feet, on a horizontal plane, to the structure of an existing single-family detached dwelling;
iii. One thousand (1000) feet, on a horizontal plane, to any structure in an Historic District, or listed, or eligible to be listed, on the state or federal Register of Historic Places;
iv. Town, Massachusetts, or federally regulated bordering vegetated wetland;
v. aMassachusetts certified vernal pool;
vi. the habitat of any Massachusetts listed rare or endangered wildlife or rare plant species;
(k) New personal wireless communication facilities in or on an existing, suitable, non- residential structure or tower for which an occupancy permit was issued as of January 1, 2000 shall be located at least:
i. five hundred (500) feet, on a horizontal plane, from any existing structure which is, or is able to be, occupied or habitable on the property of a child care facility or school;
ii. three hundred (300) feet, on a horizontal plane, from the structure of an existing single-family detached dwelling; or
iii. three hundred (300) feet, on a horizontal plane, from any structure in a Historic District or listed (or eligible to be listed) on the State or Federal Register of Historic Places.
(l) The following locations are ranked in order of preference and are encouraged:
74
CONCORD ZONING
i. personal wireless communication facility sites that are most distant from single-family detached dwellings and schools.
ii. municipal lands which complywith other requirements of this section.
iii. where the visual impact of towers can be minimized by the use of camouflage, stealth design or other innovative measures to reduce, eliminate or disguise the negative visual impact.
iv. filler sites to provide adequate coverage without requiring new towers. v. existing personal wireless communication facility(s).
(m) Personal wireless communication facilities shall be located so as to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity with the fewest number of base stations, towers and antenna arrays that are technically feasible. The Board may limit the number of base stations, towers and antenna arrays upon any single parcel. The Board may limit the number of base stations, towers and antenna arrays in any given overlay district.
(n) Subsequent applicants are required to co-locate and shall submit an application to add to existing towers, installed under the provisions of this Bylaw.
(o) The Board shall request input from the Fire, Police and other town emergency services regarding the adequacy for emergency access to the site.
(p) Balloon test: Within 35 days of submitting an application, the applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a three foot diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height and at the location of the proposed tower. The date(s) (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date), times and location of the balloon test shall be advertised, by the applicant at seven (7) and fourteen (14) days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the Town. The applicant shall inform the Board and the Planning Board in writing of the dates and times of the test at least fourteen days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least five consecutive hours between 7:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on the date(s) chosen. The applicant shall bear any and all expenses associated with such balloon test.
7.8.4.3 Evaluation by independent consultants: Upon submission of a complete application for a special permit under this Section, the Board shall engage the services of a qualified independent consultant and shall provide the independent consultant with the completed application and existing documentation for analysis and review. The independent consultant shall gather additional documentation and conduct additional research as necessary to support the analysis and review. Access to the site to conduct any necessary site visits shall be provided to the qualified independent consultant. The qualified independent consultant shall submit to the Board a written recommendation and an opinion as to the conformance of the application with the requirements of this Section.
7.8.4.4 Fees and insurance: Personal wireless service facilities shall be continuously insured by the owner(s) against damage to persons or property. The owner(s) shall provide a Certificate of Insurance to the Building Inspector on an annual basis in which the Town shall be specifically listed as an additional insured. A schedule of fees for
75
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
personal wireless service facilities permitting and renewal, any monitoring of emissions and inspection of structures, and any other fees shall be established by the Board as part of the Rules and Regulations for Personal Wireless Communication Facility(s).
7.8.4.5 Relief from general requirements: The Board may, upon advice of the Planning Board and a qualified independent consultant, grant relief from the general requirements contained in subsection 7.8.4.2 (rather than require an applicant to seek a variance from this Bylaw) where the Board finds that the relief is supported by the submittal of a study prepared by a qualified technical consultant showing a significant gap in coverage, where the Board finds that the extent of the granted relief is mitigated by a showing that the project provides a minimally intrusive viable means of reducing or eliminating such significant gap in coverage, and where the Board finds that the desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. However, the Board shall not grant relief from the maximum height limitation in subsection 7.8.4.2(e). The Board shall be empowered to grant relief from any setback requirement in subsection 7.8.4.2(i), (j) or (k) provided that the site proposed is demonstrated to be necessary to achieve adequate coverage or capacity and to be minimally intrusive upon the interests of the Town, consistent with Section 7.8.1 Purpose and Intent (a) through (e). The applicant shall provide the Board with a written statement describing why the requested relief is in the best interest of the Town with references to Section 7.8.1 Purpose and Intent (a) through (e)."
7.8.4.6 Approval criteria: A special permit shall be issued under this section only if the Board shall find that the project is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section. In addition, the Board, in consultation with the independent consultant referred to in subsection 7.8.4.3 shall make all the applicable findings before granting the special permit, as follows:
(a) that the applicant is not already providing adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity and that a significant gap in coverage exists;
(b) that the applicant is not able to use existing personal wireless communication facility site(s) either with or without the use of filler sites to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity;
(c) that the proposed personal wireless communication facility site selected by the applicant minimizes adverse impacts on historic resources, scenic views (viewsheds) and residential property values by being located most distant from historic resources, scenic views (viewsheds) and single-family detached dwellings.
(d) that the proposed personal wireless communication facility site minimizes adverse impacts on historic resources, scenic views, residential property values and natural or man-made resources through the use of camouflage, stealth or other innovative technology;
(e) that the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the facilities;
76
CONCORD ZONING
(f) that the proposal shall comply with the appropriate FCC Regulations regarding emissions of electromagnetic radiation and that the required monitoring program is in place and shall be paid for by the applicant; and
(g) that the applicant has agreed to rent or lease available space on the tower, under the terms of a fair-market lease, without discrimination to other Personal wireless service providers;
If a special permit is granted the Board shall impose any such additional conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require, either as recommended by the independent consultant, the Planning Board or upon its own initiative.
Any decision by the Board to deny a special permit under this Section shall be in conformance with the Act, in that it shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
7.8.5 Monitoring and evaluation of compliance: Pre-testing and post-testing (including monitoring) shall be required and in accordance with the Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 “Evaluating Compliance the FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields” and as defined in “A Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance”.
(a) Structural Inspection: The tower owner(s) shall pay for an independent licensed professional structural engineer to conduct inspection of the tower’s structural integrity and safety. Pre-existing guyed towers shall be inspected every three years. Monopoles and non-guyed lattice towers shall be inspected every five years. A report of the inspection results shall be prepared by the structural engineer and submitted to the Building Inspector, the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. Any modification of an existing facility that increases tower dimensions or antenna numbers or type shall require a new structural inspection.
(b) Unsafe Structure: Should the inspection of any tower reveal any structural defect(s) that, in the opinion of the independent structural engineer, render(s) the tower unsafe, the following actions shall be taken. Within ten business days of written notification of unsafe structure, the owner(s) of the tower shall submit a plan to remediate the structural defect(s). This plan shall be initiated within ten business days of the submission of the remediation plan and completed as soon as reasonably possible.
7.8.6. Removal requirements: Any personal wireless communication facility that ceases to operate for a period of one year shall be removed. Cease to operate is defined as not performing the normal functions associated with the personal wireless communication facility and its equipment on a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one year. At the time of removal, the facility site shall be remediated such that all personal wireless communication facility improvements that have ceased to operate are removed. If all facilities on a tower have ceased to operate, the tower (including the foundation to depth of three feet below grade) shall also be removed and the site shall be revegetated by the owner of the tower. Existing trees shall only be removed if necessary to complete the required removal. The applicant shall, as a condition of the special permit, provide a financial surety
77
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
or other form of financial guarantee acceptable to the Board, to cover the cost of removal of the facility and the remediation of the landscape, should the facility cease to operate.
7.9 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation
7.9.1 Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the creation of new large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety, and minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic community resources.
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations in any zoning district.
This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment.
Solar installations with a rated nameplate capacity of less than two hundred-fifty kilowatts (250 kW) direct current (DC) are not subject to this Bylaw and shall instead be considered either an above-ground utility under Section 4.4.3 or an accessory use.
7.9.2 Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
7.9.2.1 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof- mounted, and has a rated nameplate capacity of at least two hundred-fifty kilowatts (250 kW) direct current (DC).
7.9.2.2 Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
7.9.2.3 Solar Photovoltaic Array: an arrangement of solar photovoltaic panels.
7.9.3 General Requirements for all Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations: The following requirements apply to all large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installations.
7.9.3.1 Site Plan Review: Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are subject to site plan review by the Planning Board. Proponents shall submit site plans showing:
(a) existing conditions, including property lines, physical features and roads,
(b) proposed changes to the landscaping of the site, including grading, vegetation to be cleared, new plantings, exterior lighting, and screening vegetation,
78
CONCORD ZONING
(c) the proposed layout of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, including all appurtenant structures,
(d) driveways and other means of access to the site of the large-scale ground- mounted solar photovoltaic installation, and
(e) other reasonable documentation requested by the Planning Board.
7.9.3.2 Site Control: The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations.
7.9.3.3 Security: Adequate security measures and fencing shall be provided to control access to the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation in order to prevent unauthorized access. The use of barbed wire or razor wire fencing is prohibited.
7.9.3.4 Operation &Maintenance Plan: The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater controls and general procedures for operations and maintenance of the installation.
7.9.3.5 Utility Notification: No large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the Concord Municipal Light Plant (CMLP) has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid solar photovoltaic arrays shall be exempt from this requirement. The Building Commissioner may issue a permit only if the large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic device complies with this section.
7.9.3.6 Waivers: If the installation does not comply with one or more of the Dimensional Requirements or Design Requirements, the applicant shall be required to apply for a special permit from the Planning Board seeking waivers from any such requirement(s). The Planning Board may grant requested waivers upon a finding that such waiver(s) will not derogate from the intent of this bylaw or be detrimental or injurious to the public.
7.9.4 Dimensional Requirements:
7.9.4.1 Lot Area: For large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, the minimum lot area shall be 5 acres.
7.9.4.2 Setbacks: For large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard: The front yard setback shall be at least 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: Each side yard shall have a setback of at least 50 feet.
(c) Rear yard: The rear yard setback shall be at least 50 feet.
79
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Where a proposed large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation does not abut a residential zoning district or use, the Planning Board may waive the above dimensional requirements for front, side and rear yard setbacks by special permit as provided in subsection 7.9.3.6. In no case, however, shall the front, side or rear yard setback be less than 10 feet.
7.9.4.3 Appurtenant Structures: All appurtenant structures to large-scale ground- mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be screened from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
7.9.5 Design Requirements
7.9.5.1 Lighting: Lighting of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations and appurtenant structures shall be limited to that required for safety, security, and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of the solar photovoltaic array and appurtenant structures shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
7.9.5.2 Signage: Signs appurtenant to the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall comply with the Town’s Sign Bylaw. A sign consistent with the Town’s Sign Bylaw shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24- hour emergency contact phone number.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer, owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation.
7.9.5.3 Screening / Landscape Buffer: At a minimum, half of the provided side and rear yard setback areas shall be designed to reduce the visual impact of the solar photovoltaic array upon adjacent property by use of trees, shrubs, walls, fences, or other landscape elements. Where the area to be developed abuts land developed for residential use, suitable landscaping shall consist of a substantially sight-impervious screen of evergreen foliage at least eight (8) feet in height or planting of shrubs and trees complemented by a sight-impervious fence of at least five (5) feet, but not more than eight (8) feet, in height, or such other type of landscaping as may be required under site plan review.
7.9.5.4 Utility Connections: Reasonable efforts shall be made to place all utility connections from the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site, any requirements of the CMLP and other site permitting requirements. Where an aboveground connection solution already exists, it may be used if it meets the
80
CONCORD ZONING
requirements of the CMLP, and electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be located aboveground if required by the CMLP.
7.9.5.5 Stormwater Management: Best management practices shall be used for controlling and managing stormwater run-off and drainage for the large-scale ground- mounted solar photovoltaic installation in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local regulations.
7.9.6 Safety and Environmental Standards:
7.9.6.1 Emergency Services: The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief and CMLP. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries for as long as the installation is in active use.
7.9.6.2 Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts: Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws. Clearing to minimize shading is acceptable.
7.9.7 Maintenance and Modifications:
7.9.7.1 Physical Conditions: The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the installation in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief, CMLP and emergency medical services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access driveway.
7.9.7.2 Modifications: All substantial material modifications or changes to a large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation require site plan review by the Planning Board and acceptance by the CMLP.
7.9.8 Abandonment or Decommissioning:
7.9.8.1 Removal Requirements: Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life, is no longer operational or has been abandoned consistent with Section 7.9.8.2 of this bylaw shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days
after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board, Building Commissioner and CMLP by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
81
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
(a) Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(b) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste brought to the site or generated by the owner or operator or otherwise related to the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal law and regulations.
(c) Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
7.9.8.2 Abandonment: The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when it does not operate for more than one year. If the owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of discontinued operations, the Town may enter the property and physically remove the installation.
7.9.8.3 Financial Assurance: Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be required to enter a covenant with the Planning Board to ensure adequate funds are available to provide for decommissioning and removal of the installation.
7.10 Public Service Corporation Overlay District (PSCOD)
7.10.1 Purpose. The purpose of the Public Service Corporation Overlay District (PSCOD) is to provide a mechanism for the approval of uses by public service corporations including but not limited to wastewater treatment, municipal public works operations, large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installations, and peaking power plants.
7.10.2 Definitions. Within this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a) Public Service Corporation (PSC): Facilities, equipment, and structures necessary for conducting a service by a public or private utility facility. Such facilities shall include public or private wastewater treatment facilities, large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installations, and peaking power plants.
(b) Public Service Project (PSP): A project sponsored by a PSC, including facilities, equipment, and structures necessary for conducting a service by a public, private or quasi-private utility facility.
(c) Peaking Power Plant: A power plant that generally runs only when there is a high demand for energy.
82
CONCORD ZONING
7.10.3 Applicability. The PSCOD shall be construed as an overlay district. Within the PSCOD, the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force and effect until site plan approval pursuant to Section 11.8 has been granted by the Planning Board, and the decision is filed with the Town Clerk, and the appeal period set forth herein has expired, except where the requirements herein are more restrictive or provide for uses or structures not otherwise available in the underlying district; in such cases, the requirements herein shall supersede the underlying zoning regulations.
7.10.4 Use Regulations. A PSP may be constructed, subject to the requirements set forth herein, upon the issuance of site plan approval pursuant to Section 11.8 by the Planning Board. In the case of a large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installation, the provisions of Section 7.9 of this By-Law shall apply unless superseded by Section 7.10.8 herein. No other use or structures shall be permitted, except as specifically provided herein.
7.10.5 Administration. The Planning Board shall serve as the site plan approval authority pursuant to this Section. The Planning Board may waive the submittal of technical information or documents otherwise required hereunder where the Applicant demonstrates that, due to the simplicity of the proposal, such information is not necessary for or applicable to the Planning Board's decision pursuant to this Section. An application for site plan approval shall be governed by the requirements set forth in Sections 7.10.6 through 7.10.9.
7.10.6 Application. An application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning Board on forms furnished by the Planning Board. Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in the Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations and a technical review fee pursuant to G.L. c. 44, s. 53G and applicable regulations of the Planning Board. The application shall be accompanied by all of the applicable information required for the Board’s considerations of site plan review, as set forth in subsection 11.8.5 of the Zoning By-Law.
7.10.7 Dimensional and Design Requirements. A proposed PSP shall meet all of the following requirements:
(a) Parcel Size and Frontage. Minimum parcel size for a PSP shall be one acre of upland, excluding any resource area protected by G.L. c. 131, s. 40. There shall be no minimum frontage requirement for a PSP and access shall not be required to the PSP via the frontage, if any, serving the parcel.
(b) More than One Principal Use or Building. More than one principal use or building may be located on the same parcel or lot. In such cases, the Planning Board shall ensure that adequate access exists to all such principal uses for fire, police and emergency vehicles, and for expected vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Ownership and
maintenance responsibilities shall be clearly outlined for each facility and its associated infrastructure, including but not limited to utilities, stormwater management, and access drives.
(c) Buffer. A buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided at the perimeter of the PSCOD where it abuts residentially occupied properties existing at the time this overlay district was adopted, except for driveways necessary for access and egress to and from the site, or
83
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
for storm water retention facilities. No vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or removed, except for normal maintenance or for required stormwater management systems. The Planning Board may waive the buffer requirement (i) where the land abutting the site is the subject of a permanent restriction for conservation or recreation; or (ii) where the land abutting the site is held for conservation or recreation purposes; or (iii) the Planning Board determines that a smaller buffer will suffice to buffer adjacent residentially occupied properties.
(d) Site Access Drives. The principal driveway(s) serving the PSP shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic and shall be maintained by the operator of the PSP.
(e) Parking. Parking shall be adequate to serve all anticipated uses on the property, with information provided detailing the method used to calculate the number of parking spaces.
(f) Loading. Screening and landscaping shall be provided to block all views of loading areas (except those specifically designated for emergency vehicles) from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
(g) Stormwater Management. The stormwater management system shall be designed in accordance with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Regulations and the Concord Public Works Storm Water Regulations and Design and Construction Standards and Details.
(h) Utilities. Reasonable efforts shall be made to place all electric, gas, telephone, and cable lines underground.
(i) Emergency Systems. The PSP shall have an integrated emergency call, telephone and other communications system to provide monitoring by operators. There shall be sufficient site access for public safety vehicles. A plan shall be approved by the Fire Department for emergency conditions.
(j) Lighting. All exterior lighting shall not produce lighting so as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property within the Town. Lighting practices and systems shall reduce light pollution, light trespass and glare in order to preserve and enhance the natural, scenic, and aesthetic qualities of the Town; conserve energy and decrease lighting cost without decreasing night time safety, security, and productivity; and preserve the night sky as a natural resource to enhance nighttime enjoyment of property within the Town.
7.10.8 Large-scale Ground Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations: A large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be permitted as a PSP, subject to the provisions of Section 7.9 of this Bylaw, with the following exceptions.
(a) There shall be no minimum lot or parcel area requirement.
(b) A large-scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installation may be located on the same lot or parcel as another PSP.
(c) The setback requirements of Section 7.9.4.2 shall not apply.
84
CONCORD ZONING
7.10.9 Action by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may grant site plan approval for a PSP where it makes the findings required by Section ll.8 of this Bylaw. The proposed PSP shall comply with the requirements of this Section; provided, however, the Planning Board may waive a substantive requirement when the Board determines that the waiver will not result in substantial detriment to the District or the Town.
85
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND
SECTION 8. RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND
8.1 Purpose
To provide limited residential development within large tracts of land in a manner, which minimizes Town maintenance responsibility and cost, while simultaneously preserving the rural character of the Town.
8.2 Standards
A group of not more than five (5) single-family dwellings sharing common frontage and a private access road may be permitted by the Planning Board in all residential districts subject to the following provisions:
8.2.1 Tract frontage. A Residential Compound may be permitted on a single tract of land in one ownership, having a minimum frontage of two hundred (200) feet on a public way.
8.2.2 Minimum tract size. The Residential Compound tract shall contain at least five (5) acres per dwelling unit. Land which, at the time of submission of an application under this section, is subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L.c. 184 sec. 31 or any restriction similar thereto, shall not be included in the minimum tract size.
8.2.3 Dimensional requirements. There shall be no minimum lot width or frontage requirements in a Residential Compound. However, no structure other than a fence may be erected within forty (40) feet of any lot line in the Residence AA and A districts, or within twenty-five (25) feet of any lot line in the Residence B and C districts. No building lot within the Residential Compound shall be reduced in size below the minimum lot area required for the district in which it is located.
8.2.4 Access. Each building lot in the Residential Compound shall have adequate and legally enforceable rights of access to a public street via a private street or driveway.
8.2.5 Open space. Any land within the Residential Compound not designated as a building lot shall be designated as permanent open space. Such land may be used only for conservation, outdoor recreational facilities of a noncommercial nature, agriculture, preservation of scenic or historic structures, and structures accessory to any of the above uses (including swimming pools, tennis courts, stables, greenhouses). In all cases, a perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L.c. 184 sec. 31 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of future laws) running to or enforceable by the Town or a land trust satisfactory to the Planning Board shall be recorded in respect of such land. Such restrictions shall be in such form and substance as the Planning Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use, as the Planning Board may deem appropriate.
86
CONCORD ZONING
8.3 Limitation on Subdivision
No Residential Compound for which a permit has been issued under this section may be further subdivided and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan.
8.4 Other Restrictions
The approved subdivision plan of the Residential Compound shall contain statements indicating the following: that the land lies within an approved Residential Compound; that development of the land is permitted only in accordance with the land uses indicated thereon; that the Town will not be requested to accept or maintain the private access, drainage, open space or any other improvements within the compound. Further, all deed restrictions with respect to ownership, use, and maintenance of permanent open space shall be referenced on, and recorded with, the plan.
8.5 Dedication of Land to the Town
The fee interest of the open space (or a defined portion of the open space) within the Residential Compound may be given to the Town for conservation purposes, acting through its Natural Resources Commission.
8.6 Procedure for Approval
Any person who desires a special permit for a Residential Compound shall submit an application in writing in such form as the Planning Board may require which shall include the following:
8.5.1 Plans meeting to the extent applicable the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and including proposed locations of all structures;
8.5.2 Site perspective;
8.5.3 Detailed plans of all entrances from the public street;
8.5.4 Proposed deed restrictions; and
8.5.5 Such additional information as the Planning Board may require.
8.7 Special Permit
A special permit shall be issued under this section only if the Planning Board shall find that the Residential Compound is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that it is designed in such a manner to make it sufficiently advantageous to the Town to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable to the residential district(s) in which the Residential Compound is located. If a special permit is granted, the Planning Board shall impose as a condition of approval that copies of all recorded instruments be filed with the Planning Board prior to the issuance of any building permit.
87
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 9. RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
9.1 Purpose
In order to encourage the conservation of significant open space and the efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features, Residential Cluster Development allows, by special permit from the Planning Board, a pattern of land development alternate to the standard subdivision permitted in the residential districts. In order to encourage the grant of land for affordable housing purposes, the Residential Cluster Development includes Optional Special Provisions for Affordable Housing by special permit from the Board.
9.2 Standards
9.2.1 Minimum Tract Size. Residential Cluster Development shall be permitted upon a single tract, in one ownership with definite boundaries ascertainable from a recorded deed or recorded plan, which has an area of not less than five (5) times the minimum lot area of the zoning district within which it is situated (Residence C: Fifty thousand (50,000) square feet; Residence B: One hundred thousand (100,000) square feet; Residence A: Two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet; Residence AA: Four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet). Existing public and private ways need not constitute boundaries of the tract but the area within such ways shall not be counted in determining tract size.
9.2.2 Number of Lots. The number of lots permitted within any Residential Cluster Development shall be determined by the Planning Board to assure compliance with the purposes of this Section, and shall not exceed the basic density. The basic density of a Residential Cluster Development shall be the number of lots upon which a single family dwelling could be constructed in the residential district in which the Residential Cluster Development is located without regard to the Residential Cluster Development, and without waivers of the design standards set forth in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board.
9.2.3 Dimensional Regulations. Except as provided in this Subsection, all dimensions shall comply with the provisions of Section 6, Table III, Dimensional Regulations. However, to protect the surrounding neighborhood, the Planning Board may require that buildings within the development be set back from some or all of the boundaries of the original development tract. The required setback from such boundaries shall be no more than fifty (50) feet.
9.2.3.1 Minimum lot area:
Residence AA 30,000 Sq. Ft. Residence A 15,000 Sq. Ft. Residence B 10,000 Sq. Ft. Residence C 7,500 Sq. Ft.
88
CONCORD ZONING
9.2.3.2 Minimum lot frontage: Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet.
9.2.3.3 Minimum lot width: Each lot shall have a lot width of not less than fifty (50) feet and the nearest point on the front wall of the dwelling shall be set back on its lot at least to a point where the lot width is a minimum of one hundred (100) feet in the Residence AA and A districts, eighty (80) feet in the Residence B district, and sixty-four (64) feet in the Residence C district.
9.2.3.4
This diagramis Cluster LotWidth: provided for illustrative Res. AA 100’ purposes only A 100’
B 80’ C 64’
Lot Width
50’ MinimumLot Frontage = 50’
Street
Cluster Subdivision
9.2.4 Open Space. The area of the open space shall equal at least fifty (50) percent of the total area of the Residential Cluster Development tract. At least 50% of the area of required open space shall be upland (land that is not within the Flood Plain Conservancy District or freshwater wetlands as defined under the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw and the Wetlands Protection Act).
9.2.4.1 The open space shall have a shape, dimension, character, and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes by at least all the residents of the Residential Cluster Development. In determining whether the intent of this section has been satisfied, the Planning Board shall consider the extent to which land having one or more of the following characteristics is included in the proposed open space:
(a) Land abutting the Concord, Assabet or Sudbury Rivers, their tributaries, Elm Brook, or ponds of significant public interest, which enhance or protect wetlands or flood plain, or which provide public access to the water body, or which enhance or provide significant scenic vistas or views, or which provide water-related recreational opportunities;
(b) Land which currently is in agricultural use or land which is suitable in size, location and soil characteristics for agricultural use;
(c) Land which provides a significant wildlife habitat or which is a unique natural area;
(d) Land which provides recharge to Concord's current or future municipal wells and highly favored aquifer areas;
(e) Land which is to be developed for active recreational use including playing fields, boat launching areas, playgrounds, and neighborhood parks;
89
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
(f) Land which preserves existing trail networks or land on which new trails will be developed as part of the cluster for integration into an existing trail network;
(g) Land which enhances scenic roadside views;
(h) Land providing desirable public access to existing Town or State recreational or conservation land.
9.2.4.2 Provision shall be made so that the open space shall be readily accessible to the owners and occupants of the lots in the Residential Cluster Development, and owned by:
(a) a membership corporation, trust or association whose members are all the owners and occupants of the lots;
(b) by the Town; or
(c) otherwise as the Planning Board may direct.
9.2.4.3 In all cases, a perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L. c. 184, sec. 31 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of future laws) running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such land. Such restriction shall provide that the open space shall be retained in perpetuity for one or more of the following uses: conservation, agriculture, recreation, or park. Such restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Planning Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the open space, as the Planning Board may deem appropriate.
9.2.5 Limitation of Subdivision. No lot shown on a plan for which a permit is granted under this Section may be further subdivided, and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan.
9.3 Procedure for Approval
9.3.1 Application. Any person who desires a special permit for a Residential Cluster Development shall submit an application in writing in such form as the Planning Board may require which shall include the following:
9.3.1.1 Plans meeting to the extent applicable the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
9.3.1.2 Proposed deed restrictions; and
9.3.1.3 Such additional information as the Planning Board may require.
9.3.2 Natural Resources Commission Report and Recommendations. The Natural Resources Commission shall review the proposed Residential Cluster Development plans and shall submit in writing to the Planning Board its report and recommendations upon the degree to
90
CONCORD ZONING
which the Residential Cluster Development and proposed open space enhances the protection of environmental qualities including at least:
9.3.2.1 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which the development itself impinges upon critical environmental areas.
9.3.2.2 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which the common open space protects critical environmental areas and provides a valuable outdoor recreation resource.
9.3.2.3 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which any land intended to be conveyed to, or restricted for the benefit of, the Town:
(a) Enhances the protection of critical environmental areas, unique natural features, scenic vistas or potential or existing farmland; or
(b) Provides a valuable addition to the open space resources of the Town.
9.3.3 Special Permit. A special permit shall be granted under this Section only if the
Planning Board finds:
9.3.3.1 The plan submitted is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Section;
9.3.3.2 The proposed Residential Cluster Development is designed in such a manner to ensure a suitable development for the neighborhood, adequate buffers for adjoining tracts, and suitable open space;
9.3.3.3 The plan submitted conforms with the standards for minimum tract size, number of lots, lot dimensions, frontage, and open space area and characteristics as set forth herein; and
9.3.3.4 The Residential Cluster Development is designed in such a manner to make it sufficiently advantageous to the Town to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable to the residential district(s) in which it is located.
9.3.4 Conditions. If a special permit is granted, the Planning Board shall impose as a condition that the open space shall be conveyed, free of any mortgage interest or security interest and subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described above, prior to the Planning Board's release of any lots from the subdivision restrictive covenant or, if there is no covenant, prior to the Building Inspector's issuance of a building permit for any lot. The petitioner shall provide satisfactory assurance of said conveyance and recording in the form of copies of the recorded instruments bearing the recording stamp, or otherwise as the Planning Board may direct.
9.4 Optional Special Provisions for Affordable Housing by the Board
9.4.1 Approval by the Board. Where the proposed Residential Cluster Development provides for the granting of land for affordable housing purposes, the Residential Cluster
91
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
Development special permit shall be granted by the Board and the Board may authorize limited exceptions to the number of lots permitted and the open space requirements.
9.4.2 Exceptions for Granting of Land for Affordable Housing Purposes. The Board may increase the basic density permitted within a Residential Cluster Development and may reduce the required open space area provided that a lot or lots within the development be donated to the Town for affordable housing purposes. For each lot so donated, the Board may increase the basic density by two (2) lots and may reduce the required open space area. In no case shall the total number of lots be increased by more than forty (40) percent, and in no case shall the open space area be reduced to less than forty (40) percent of the area of the development tract.
9.4.3 Procedure for Approval of Optional Special Provisions by the Board.
9.4.3.1 Application. Any person who desires a special permit for a Residential Cluster Development with Optional Special Provisions for Affordable Housing shall submit an application in writing in such form as the Board may require.
9.4.3.2 Planning Board Report and Recommendations. The Planning Board shall review the proposed Residential Cluster Development plans and shall submit in writing to the Board its report and recommendations upon the technical quality of the proposed development, and at least the following:
(a) General descriptions of the natural terrain of the cluster tract and surrounding areas, and of the neighborhood in which the tract is situated.
(b) A review of the proposed development, including the design and use of the open space and of pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
(c) An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which any land intended to be conveyed to, or restricted as open space for the benefit of the Town: provides or will in the future provide an addition to areas of open space between developed sections of the Town; makes available land desirable for other public use; and conforms to the Town's long-range land use plan.
(d) An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which any land intended to be conveyed to the Town for affordable housing conforms to the Town's housing objectives and policy.
(e) Its opinion as to whether the proposed tract size, site design, development layout, number and location of lots constitute a suitable development for the neighborhood within which it is located.
(f) A statement that the developer's plans comply with the design standards of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board, or wherever such plans do not comply, a statement of the respects in which they do not so comply.
(g) Recommendations for the granting or denial of the special permit, including recommendations for modifications, restrictions, or requirements to be imposed as a condition of granting the special permit.
92
CONCORD ZONING
9.4.3.3 Natural Resources Commission Report and Recommendations. The Natural Resources Commission shall review the Residential Cluster Development plans and shall submit in writing to the Board its report and recommendations as provided in Section 9.3.2 above.
9.4.3.4 Special Permit by Board for Optional Provisions for Affordable Housing. A special permit shall be issued under this Section for a Residential Cluster Development with Optional Provisions for Affordable Housing only if the Board shall find the development conforms with Section 9.3.3 and also finds the proposed Residential Cluster Development provides significant public benefits through the granting of land for affordable housing purposes.
9.4.3.5 Conditions. If a special permit is granted, the Board shall impose as conditions thereof the following:
(a) The open space shall be conveyed, free of any mortgage interest or security interest and subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described above, prior to the Planning Board's release of any lots from the subdivision restrictive covenant or, if there is no covenant, prior to the Building Inspector's issuance of the building permit for any lot. A petitioner shall provide satisfactory assurance of said conveyance and recording in the forms of copies of the recorded instruments bearing the recording stamp, or otherwise as the Board may direct;
(b) All lots to be conveyed to the Town for affordable housing purposes shall be conveyed, free of any mortgage interest or security interest prior to the Planning Board's release of any lots from the subdivision restrictive covenant, or if there is no covenant, prior to the Building Inspector's issuance of a building permit for any lot. The petitioner shall provide satisfactory assurance of said conveyance and recording in the form of copies of the recorded instruments bearing the recording stamp, or otherwise as the Board may direct.
9.5 Amendments Without Public Hearing
Following the granting of a special permit under this Section, by either the Planning Board or the Board, the Planning Board may, upon application and for good cause shown, without public hearing, amend the plan solely to make changes in lot lines shown on the plan provided, however, that no such amendment shall:
9.5.1 Grant any reduction in the size or change in location of the open space as provided in the permit;
9.5.2 Grant any change in the layout of the ways as provided in the permit;
9.5.3 Increase the number of lots as provided in the permit; or
9.5.4 Decrease the dimensional requirements of any lot below the minima permitted by this Bylaw.
93
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 10. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD)
10.1 Purpose
Planned Residential Development allows by special permit from the Board an alternative pattern of residential land development. It is intended to encourage the conservation of open space, while at the same time providing for a mixture and diversity of housing types in the Town at somewhat greater dwelling unit densities than is otherwise permitted without a significant increase in Town-wide population density. In a PRD, dwelling units should be constructed in appropriate clusters that are harmonious with neighborhood development and will not detract from the ecological and visual qualities of the area. The overall site design and amenities should enhance the quality of living for the residents of the development, the immediate neighborhood and the Town generally. Attention, however, shall be given by the Board as to whether the proposed site design, development layout, number, type and design of housing constitute a suitable development for the neighborhood within which it is to be located.
10.2 Standards
10.2.1 Minimum Tract Size: Planned Residential Developments shall be permitted upon a single tract, in one ownership with definite boundaries ascertainable from a recorded deed or recorded plan, which has an area of not less than four (4) times the minimum lot area of the zoning district within which it is situated (Residence C: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet; Residence B: Eighty thousand (80,000) square feet; Residence A: One hundred sixty thousand (160,000) square feet; Residence AA: Three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) square feet; Business: Forty thousand (40,000 square feet), or which has an area of not less than the minimum lot area in a Limited Industrial Park #1 zoning district: 5 acres. Existing public or private ways need not constitute boundaries of the tract but the area within any such ways shall not be counted in determining minimum tract size.
10.2.2 Maximum Permissible Density: Maximum permissible density within a PRD tract shall not exceed two times the total number of dwelling units obtained through application of subsection 10.2.2.1 (basic density) in all residential districts and in the Business district. In the Limited Industrial Park #1 district the maximum permissible density shall not exceed three times the total amount allowed by application of Section 10.2.2.1. In no case shall that portion of a PRD which lies outside the Flood Plain and Wetlands Conservancy districts contain less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of upland area for each dwelling unit.
10.2.2.1 Basic density: The basic density of the PRD shall not exceed the number of units obtained by applying the following calculation:
The number of dwelling units obtained by dividing the sum of (1) the area of the tract exclusive of land situated within the Flood Plain or Wetlands Conservancy districts, and (2) twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of land situated within the Flood Plain or Wetlands Conservancy districts by the minimum lot size permitted in the zoning district(s) within
94
CONCORD ZONING
which the tract is located. In the Limited Industrial Park #1 district the maximum permissible density shall be obtained by dividing the aforesaid sum by 40,000 square feet.
10.2.2.2 Fractional Numbers: Where the computation of the basic density results in a fractional number, only a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one (1).
10.2.3 Diversity of Dwelling Units: A mix of diverse housing opportunities shall be provided in all Planned Residential Developments. Such diversity shall consist of the following mix:
(a) the number of bedrooms available;
(b) the price or rental rates of the units; and
(c) two of the three styles of units: single-family, two-family or multi-family.
If all the units proposed in the Planned Residential Development are market-rate units, then only the basic density shall be permitted. Increases beyond the basic density within the Planned Residential Development may be authorized by the Board only if at least ten percent (10%) of the units are made available as described in subsection 10.2.3.1 and 10.2.3.2. If only one unit is required, it shall be made available as described in subsection 10.2.3.1, and if two or more units are required, then at least 50% of the affordable units shall be made available as described in subsection 10.2.3.1. Any increases in density permitted by the Board shall not exceed the limits contained in subsection 10.2.2 and shall be based upon the degree to which the proposed PRD provides a range of low income and affordable dwelling units, in addition to the mix of diverse housing opportunities.
10.2.3.1 Low income dwelling units are those units made available to the Concord Housing Authority, or other entity as the Board may direct, either for purchase within the cost limits allowed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), or for lease under federal or state rental-assistance programs, or through a long-term contractual agreement; which can be counted toward the DHCD’s Subsidized Housing Inventory.
10.2.3.2 Affordable dwelling units are those units made available for sale, lease or rent at below market rates based on the following:
(a) Starter-priced housing: Dwelling units set aside for sale, lease or rental to households with incomes of less than one-hundred ten (110) percent of the median family income for the Boston Metropolitan Area as determined by the most recent calculation of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(b) Moderate-priced housing: Dwelling units set aside for sale, lease or rental to households with incomes of less than one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the median family income for the Boston Metropolitan Area as determined by the most recent calculation of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
10.2.3.3 Unit size: A variety of units shall be provided within the PRD, which may include dwelling units of one, two, three or more bedrooms; with a minimum gross floor area of not less than four-hundred (400) square feet.
95
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
10.2.3.4 Exterior design: The exterior of low income and affordable dwelling units shall be designed to be indistinguishable from the market-rate units; however it is recognized that these units may be smaller and have fewer features than market-rate units. Any low income units and affordable units proposed shall be integrated into the PRD development.
10.2.3.5 Long-term availability: The Board, as a condition of a special permit, shall impose appropriate limitations and safeguards to insure the continued availability of the below market-rate units for a minimum of forty (40) years. Such limitations and safeguards may be in the form of deed restrictions, resale monitoring, requirements for income verification of purchasers and/or tenants, rent level controls or other method as the Board may direct.
10.2.4 Permitted uses: There shall be permitted in any PRD:
10.2.4.1 Single family detached and semi-detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multi-unit dwellings of all types without regard to dwelling unit configuration or form of ownership; however, no multi-unit dwelling shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units. No more than eighty percent (80%) of the dwelling units within the PRD shall be in buildings of the same type.
10.2.4.2 Accessory uses incidental to the principal uses indicated above.
10.2.5 Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot area, frontage or yard requirements within a PRD. However, no building shall be erected within twenty (20) feet of a public way or boundary line of the PRD in the Residence C and B districts, and within thirty (30) feet in the Residence A and AA districts. In the Limited Industrial Park
#1 district, the minimum distances of a building from a public way or street and from property lines shall conform to those specified for Limited Industrial Park in Table III, Dimensional Regulations, of Section 6.
10.2.6 Access to the Tract: Access to the tract shall be provided from an existing public or private way and shall be through the existing frontage on such public or private way.
10.2.7 Height: The maximum permitted height of any structure within a PRD shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
10.2.8 Area of Residential Development: The area developed for residential use, including buildings, parking and other areas paved for vehicular use, shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total area of the PRD tract. Foot and bicycle paths and recreational facilities, including buildings wholly devoted to recreation, shall not be counted in calculating the fifty-percent limitation.
10.2.9 Common Open Space: All land within the PRD tract which is not covered by buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas or service areas, or which is not set aside as yards, patios, gardens, or similar areas for exclusive or shared use by the residents, shall be common open space. The area of the common open space shall equal at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the PRD tract. At least 50% of the area of common open space shall be upland (land that is not within the Flood Plain Conservancy District or freshwater wetlands as defined under theWetlands Protection Act and the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw).
96
CONCORD ZONING
10.2.9.1 The common open space shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes by at least all the residents of the Planned Residential Development. In determining whether the intent of this section has been satisfied, the Board shall consider the extent to which land having one or more of the following characteristics is included in the proposed open space:
(a) Land abutting the Concord, Assabet or Sudbury Rivers, their tributaries, Elm Brook, or ponds of significant public interest, which enhance or protect wetlands or flood plain, or which provide public access to the water body, or which enhance or provide significant scenic vistas or views, or which provide water- related recreational opportunities;
(b) Land which currently is in agricultural use or land which is suitable in size, location and soil characteristics for agricultural use;
(c) Land which provides a significant wildlife habitat or which is a unique natural area;
(d) Land which provides recharge to Concord's current or future municipal wells and highly favored aquifer areas;
(e) Land which is to be developed for active recreational use including playing fields, boat launching areas, playgrounds, and neighborhood parks;
(f) Land which preserves existing trail networks or land on which new trails will be developed as part of the PRD for integration into an existing trail network;
(g) Land which enhances scenic views;
(h) Land providing desirable public access to existing Town or State recreational or conservation land.
10.2.9.2 Provision shall be made so that the common open space shall be readily accessible to at least all of the owners and occupants of the units in the Planned Residential Development, and owned by:
(a) a membership corporation, trust or association whose members are all the owners and occupants of the units;
(b) by the Town; or
(c) otherwise as the Board may direct.
10.2.9.3 In all cases, a perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L. c. 184, sec. 31 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of future laws) running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such land. Such restriction shall provide that the common open space shall be retained in perpetuity for one or more of the following uses: conservation, agriculture, recreation, or park. Such restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the common open space as the Board may deem appropriate.
97
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
10.2.10 Limitation of Subdivision: No lot shown on a plan for which a permit is granted under this section may be further subdivided, and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan.
10.3 Special Provisions
10.3.1 Special Provisions for the Concord Housing Authority and Town of Concord Projects: Except as provided for in subsection 10.2.6 and 10.2.7 above, the limitations contained in subsection 10.2 shall not apply to a PRD application submitted by the Concord Housing Authority or to a PRD application submitted by the Concord Board of Selectmen in which seventy-five percent (75%) of the units will be of the type described in subsection
10.2.3.1 and 10.2.3.2 provided that the Board shall find that the proposed design is generally in keeping with the purposes of this Bylaw and with Town of Concord Housing Partnership Guidelines and Procedures as in effect from time to time.
10.3.2 Special Provisions for Non-profit entity: Except as provided for in subsection 10.2.6 and 10.2.7 above, the limitations contained in subsection 10.2 shall not apply to a PRD application submitted by a Non-profit entity in which seventy-five percent (75%) of the units will be of the type described in subsection 10.2.3.1 and 10.2.3.2 provided that the Board shall find that the proposed design is generally in keeping with the purposes of this Bylaw.
10.3.3 Special Provisions for Converted School Building and Municipal Building: The limitations contained in subsection 10.2 above shall not apply to applications for conversion of private or public school buildings and municipal buildings to residential use, provided that any such PRD conversion which varies from the aforesaid limitations shall be issued a special permit only in accordance with the following procedures:
10.3.3.1 An application for the proposed PRD conversion, in such form and containing such information as the Planning Board may require in order to evaluate the overall suitability of the proposed use in light of the purposes of Section 10 of this Bylaw, shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider such Application and, if its evaluation thereof is favorable, shall submit to the Town Meeting such evaluation and its recommendations regarding the Application.
10.3.3.2 At such Town Meeting, approval of the Application for the PRD Conversion shall be by a two-thirds vote.
10.3.3.3 Not later than twenty-four (24) months from the date of Town Meeting approval, an application for a special permit shall be submitted to the Board for the PRD Conversion in accordance with the procedures for approval set forth in Subsection 10.4 below. A special permit shall be issued only if the Board shall find that the plans submitted to it for the PRD Conversion conform substantially to the terms of the approval granted by the Town Meeting and provided further that such permit shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of Subsection 10.4.4. The Board may, in its discretion, permit minor deviations
98
CONCORD ZONING
from the Application as approved by the Town Meeting, so long as it finds that such deviations are not substantially inconsistent with the Town Meeting approval.
10.3.4 Special Provisions for an Alternative PRD to be submitted to and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of Town Meeting – In the Limited Industrial Park (LIP) District, the limitations contained in Subsection 10.2 above shall not apply to any PRD submitted to and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of Town Meeting prior to application for a special permit from the Board all in accordance with the following procedures (herein an “Alternative PRD”):
10.3.4.1 Purpose: The provisions applicable to an Alternative PRD are intended to:
(a) Permit an applicant to propose and for the Town to vote on a Preliminary Site
Development and Use Proposal unique to a particular location;
(b) Permit flexibility in the development of specific site by requiring few predetermined standards;
(c) Encourage proposals responsive to the Town’s housing goals including housing types which increase diversity and affordability; and
(d) Enable the Board to require adherence to the Primary Site Development and Use
Proposal approved by Town Meeting in the granting of a special permit.
10.3.4.2 Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal: Any person who desires to submit an Alternative PRD proposal to Town Meeting shall prepare a development statement and plans consisting of the following:
(a) A development statement consisting of a preliminary written proposal meeting the requirements of Section 10.4.1.1;
(b) Preliminary Site Development and Use Plans consisting of:
i. Overview Plan showing all of the land proposed to be used as part of the Alternative PRD and showing other land and buildings located within 300 feet of the boundary of the Alternative PRD;
ii. Site plan(s);
iii. Typical Floor Plan(s); and
iv. Architectural Rendering(s) or Elevation(s) of the principal building(s).
(c) A summary statement consisting of an overview of the proposed Alternative PRD with specific details of the provisions which will be made to enhance housing diversity and affordability.
10.3.4.3 Alternative PRD Submission, Public Hearing, Evaluation, Changes and Town
Meeting Vote.
(a) Before filing a Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal, the applicant is encouraged to meet informally with the Planning Board to discuss the proposed
99
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Alternative PRD and the level of detail to be included in the Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal.
(b) On or before the close of the Town Meeting warrant the applicant shall submit a proposed warrant article and file one (1) full copy of the Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal with the Town Clerk and five (5) copies of the Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal with the Planning Board.
(c) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Alternative PRD.
The Planning Board shall give notice of such hearing in accordance with Section 5 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws and shall also send copies of such notice to all Parties of Interest as determined by Section 11 of Chapter 40A.
(d) The Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal may be amended after the Public Hearing if (i) the Planning Board approves such amendment and finds that there is good cause for such amendment and (ii) a copy of the amendment is filed with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board at least five (5) days before the day on which the Town Meeting votes on the proposed Alternative PRD. The Preliminary Site Development and Use Proposal may also be amended on the floor of Town Meeting.
(e) The Planning Board shall evaluate the Preliminary Site Development and Use
Proposal and present its recommendation to the Town Meeting.
(f) Approval of the Preliminary Site Development and Use proposal shall require a two- thirds (2/3) vote of Town Meeting
10.3.4.4 Alternative PRD Application for Special Permit; Reports and Recommendations; and Issuance of a Special Permit by the Board: Generally, the application of a special permit, the Planning Board’s and Natural Resources Commission’s report and recommendations and issuance of a special permit by the Board shall follow the requirements of Section 10.3 provided however that in addition to the provisions contained in Section 10.3.4 the Board shall find:
(a) The proposed Alternative PRD is substantially consistent with the Preliminary Site
Development and Use Proposal approved by Town Meeting;
(b) The minimum frontage, front yard, side yard and rear yard shall not be less than the minimum permitted in the Zoning District in which the Alternative PRD is located;
(c) The maximum permitted height of any structure shall not exceed the height permitted in the Zoning District in which the Alternative PRD is located.
(d) The maximum gross floor area permitted shall not exceed the gross floor area permitted in the Zoning District in which the Alternative PRD is located provided however that the gross floor area of any (i) low income or affordable dwelling units (ii) enclosed parking (iii) enclosed trash/recycling area and (iv) any basement area and unfinished attic area shall not be included in determining the maximum gross floor area as defined and permitted in accordance with this Bylaw
(e) The minimum Common Open Space shall be equal to at least fifty (50) percent of the total area of the PRD Tract; the Common Open Space shall be subject to a
100
CONCORD ZONING
perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L.C. 184 Section 31 and the Common Open Space shall be owned by a membership corporation, trust or association whose members are all the owners of the units or owned by the Town or otherwise owned as the Board may direct;
(f) The special permit shall be granted within two (2) years of the date of the Town Meeting vote which approved the Preliminary Site Development Use Proposal. Said two (2) years shall not include any time required to pursue or await determination of any appeal applicable to the Alternative PRD.
10.4 Application for Special Permit; Reports and Recommendations; Issuance of Special
Permit
10.4.1 Application: Any person who desires a special permit for a PRD shall submit an application in writing in such form as the Board may require which shall include the following:
10.4.1.1 A development statement consisting of a petition, a list of the parties in interest with respect to the PRD tract, a list of the development team and a written statement meeting the requirements of a site evaluation statement under the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board, and setting forth the development concept including in tabular form the number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, floor area), ground coverage, and summary showing the area of residential development and common open space as percentages of the total area of the PRD tract.
10.4.1.2 Development plans consisting of:
(a) Site plans meeting, to the extent applicable, the requirements set forth for a
Definitive Plan in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board;
(b) Building elevations;
(c) Floor plans;
(d) Detailed plans for disposal of sanitary sewage; and
(e) Landscape plan and details;
10.4.1.3 Low income and affordable dwelling unit marketing program including anticipated:
(a) Income range (using ranges established by the appropriate state or federal agencies as acceptable to the Board) of family households or single individual residing in each low income or affordable dwelling unit;
(b) Methods for attracting residents of diverse income and ethnic backgrounds.
(c) Pre- and post-construction management methods concerning the maintenance of the low income and affordable dwelling units including supporting documents and contracts; and
101
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(d) Proposed methods of ensuring long-term availability for the low-income and affordable dwelling units, including supporting documents and restrictions.
10.4.1.4 Such additional information as the Board may determine.
10.4.2 Planning Board Report and Recommendations: The Planning Board shall review the development statement and plans and shall submit in writing to the Board its report and recommendations upon the technical quality of the proposed development, and at least the following:
10.4.2.1 General descriptions of the natural terrain of the PRD tract and surrounding areas, and of the neighborhood in which the tract is situated.
10.4.2.2 A review of the proposed development, including the design and use of buildings and of the open spaces between and around them, of pedestrian and vehicular circulation, of the location and capacity of parking, and of the provisions for grading, landscaping and screening.
10.4.2.3 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which the proposed PRD provides a range of diversity and the size of the units as it relates to increased density that may be permitted by the Board.
10.4.2.4 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which any land intended to be conveyed to, or restricted for the benefit of, the Town:
(a) Provides or will in the future provide an addition to areas of open space between developed sections of the Town;
(b) Makes available land desirable for future public use; or
(c) Conforms to the Town's long-range land use plan.
10.4.2.5 Its opinion as to whether the proposed site design, development layout, number, type and design of housing constitute a suitable development for the neighborhood within which it is located.
10.4.2.6 Recommendations for the granting or denial of the special permit, including recommendations for modifications, restrictions or requirements to be imposed as a condition of granting the special permit.
10.4.3 Natural Resources Commission's Report and Recommendations: The Natural Resources Commission shall review the development statement and plans and shall submit in writing to the Board its report and recommendations upon the degree to which the proposed development enhances the protection of environmental qualities including at least:
10.4.3.1 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which the development itself impinges upon environmental areas.
102
CONCORD ZONING
10.4.3.2 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which the common open space protects environmental areas and provides a valuable outdoor recreation resource.
10.4.3.3 An evaluation and opinion upon the degree to which any land intended to be conveyed to, or restricted for the benefit of, the Town:
(a) enhances the protection of environmental areas, unique natural features, scenic vistas or potential or existing farmland; or
(b) provides a valuable addition to the open space resources of the Town.
10.4.4 Board Issuance of Special Permit: A special permit shall be issued under this section only if the Board shall find that the PRD is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that the PRD contains a mix of residential, open space, or other uses in a variety of buildings to be sufficiently advantageous to the Town to render it appropriate to depart from the requirements of this Bylaw otherwise applicable to the district(s) in which the PRD tract is located. If a special permit is granted the Board shall impose as a condition thereof that the installation of municipal services and construction of interior drives within the PRD shall comply with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board to the extent applicable, shall require sufficient security to insure such compliance and the completion of planned recreational facilities and site amenities, and may impose such additional conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require, either as recommended by the Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission or upon its own initiative. The Board shall give due consideration to the reports of the Planning Board and Natural Resources Commission and where the decision of the Board differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board or Natural Resources Commission, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing.
103
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 11. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11.1 Enforcement
The Building Inspector of the Town of Concord is hereby designated as the officer charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw.
11.1.1 The Building Inspector, upon a written complaint of any citizen of, or owner of property within, the Town or upon such officer's own initiative, shall institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the name of the Town of Concord to prevent, restrain or abate violation of this Bylaw.
11.1.2 Violation of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
11.2 Building Permit
No structure or part thereof shall be constructed, altered, or moved without a permit from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall not grant such permit if such construction, alteration or movement would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Bylaw, nor shall any officer of the Town of Concord grant any permit or license for the use of any land or structure if such use would be in violation of this Bylaw.
11.3 Certificate of Occupancy
No use or occupation of land for any purpose for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall be made, in whole or in part, until such a certificate has been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the use of the land and structure, if any, complies with this Bylaw and other applicable codes in effect at the time of issuance.
11.4 Board of Appeals
The Town of Concord Board of Appeals, heretofore established by the Town of Concord pursuant to the provisions of Section 30 of Chapter 40, Section 14 of Chapter 40A (as in effect prior to January 1977) and Section 81Z of Chapter 41 of the General Laws, is hereby designated as the Zoning Board of Appeals required by Section 12 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws as in effect on the date of adoption of this Bylaw.
11.4.1 The Board shall act on all matters over which it has jurisdiction and in the manner prescribed by the following provisions, as the same may from time to time be amended:
104
CONCORD ZONING
11.4.1.1 The provisions of this Bylaw;
11.4.1.2 Chapter 40A of the General Laws;
11.4.1.3 Section 81Y through 81BB of Chapter 41 of the General Laws; and
11.4.1.4 Any other applicable provisions of the General Laws or this Bylaw.
11.4.2 Without limiting the generality of subsection 11.4.1, an appeal may be taken to the Board by any person including an officer or board of the Town of Concord aggrieved by reason of inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer of the Town of Concord under Chapter 40A of the General Laws or this Bylaw, or by reason of an order or decision of the Building Inspector or other administrative officer of the Town of Concord in violation of any provision of Chapter 40A or any bylaw of the Town of Concord adopted thereunder.
11.5 Rules and Regulations
The Board and the Planning Board shall adopt rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Bylaw and Chapter 40A of the General Laws or other applicable provision of the General Laws, and shall file a copy of said rules with the Town Clerk.
11.6 Special Permit
Certain uses are designated in this Bylaw as requiring a special permit. The Board and the Planning Board may, in accordance with Chapter 40A of the General Laws, grant such special permits for such designated uses without any finding of hardship. A special permit is a permit to use property for the purpose specified and shall not reverse, alter or vary any provision of this Bylaw applicable thereto. Application for a special permit must be made by the owner of the property noted in the permit or with the owner's written permission. Special permits may be issued only following public hearings held within sixty-five (65) days after filing an application.
Special permits shall be granted by the Board or the Planning Board, unless other criteria are otherwise specified herein, only upon the written determination of either board, as applicable, that the adverse effects of the proposed use will not outweigh its beneficial impacts to the public interest, the town and the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. In addition to any other specific factors that may be set forth in this Bylaw, the determination shall include consideration of each of the following:
11.6.1 Impacts on economic or community needs;
11.6.2 Traffic flow and safety concerns, including parking and loading;
11.6.3 Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
11.6.4 Impacts on neighborhood character;
11.6.5 Impacts on the natural environment; and
105
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11.6.6 Fiscal impacts, including impacts on town services, the tax base and employment.
Either such Board shall also make such further findings as may be otherwise required by this Bylaw and may impose such additional conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate to protect the surrounding neighborhood including, but not limited to, imposition of requirements greater than the minimum set forth in this Bylaw. A special permit shall lapse if a substantial use thereof has not commenced, or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has not commenced (except for good cause) within two (2) years from the date of grant thereof.
11.7 Variance
A variance from the specific requirements of this Bylaw, including a variance authorizing a use or activity not otherwise permitted in a particular zoning district, may be authorized by the Board only where, after notice and a public hearing, the Board specifically finds that, owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of land or structures, and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Bylaw would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this Bylaw. The Board may impose such conditions, safeguards and limitations, both of time and of use, as it deems appropriate upon the grant of any variance. Any rights authorized by a variance which are not exercised within one (1) year from the date of grant of such variance shall lapse and may be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing pursuant to this subsection.
11.8 Site Plan Review
11.8.1 Applicability: In all instances specified in Section 4, Table I, Use Regulations, indicating site plan approval, no building permit to establish a new building or to alter substantially an existing building shall be issued by the Building Inspector; no change in use of an existing building or lot shall be permitted; no area for parking, loading, or vehicular access shall be established or substantially altered; and, no exterior light fixtures shall be installed or substantially altered unless a site plan has been submitted and approved in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.
11.8.2 Site plan compliance: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector until the site has been developed in compliance with the approved site plan, unless completion is delayed by seasonal considerations. In such instances, the Building Inspector may issue a temporary occupancy permit and shall require sufficient security to insure full compliance within six (6) months.
11.8.3 Interpretation: Substantial alteration to a building means an alteration of a single building or a group of buildings under one ownership on the same lot or contiguous lots which results in an increase in gross floor area of either five hundred (500) square feet or
106
CONCORD ZONING
ten (10) percent of the existing gross floor area, whichever is less. The calculation of substantial alteration shall be determined based upon the aggregate of all expansions undertaken within a consecutive five-year period.
Change in use means a change in part or all of an existing building or lot from one use category to another. However, in a mixed or multi-use building, change or rearrangement of uses that does not result in an increase of required parking or loading spaces shall not be construed as a change in use.
Substantial alteration to areas for parking, loading or vehicular access shall mean a change in the layout or location of parking spaces, an increase in pavement area of more than three hundred (300) square feet, or any relocation, addition or change in driveways. Resurfacing shall not be construed as a substantial alteration unless it involves a change of surface material.
Substantial alteration to exterior lighting shall mean an increase in more than ten (10) percent of the number of exterior light fixtures, an increase in height of any free standing light fixture, or a change in the coloration or an increase in the brightness/luminance produced by a fixture. Change in coloration from non-white light to white light; installation of full cut-off fixtures, positioned to prevent glare and light spillover, and with a height equal to or less than existing free standing light fixtures; and the use of temporary holiday lighting shall not be construed as a substantial alteration. Furthermore, when Site Plan Review is required based solely on the installation or alteration of exterior light fixtures, review by the Board or the Planning Board shall be limited to the proposed exterior lighting and to issues directly related to the proposed exterior lighting.
11.8.4 Procedure: Anyone seeking Site Plan Review shall obtain an application and checklist from the office of the Town Planner. A completed application form, the plan and supporting materials shall be submitted to the Planning Board in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Planning Board in effect at the time.
11.8.5 Site Plan Review: In reviewing the site plan submittal, the following matters shall be considered:
(a) Protection of adjoining premises against seriously detrimental uses by provision for surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, and preservation of views, light and air;
(b) Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site, the location of driveway openings in relation to traffic or to adjacent streets and, when necessary, compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, minors and the elderly;
(c) Adequacy of the methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site;
(d) Adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the premises;
(e) Adequacy of the method of exterior lighting for convenience, safety and security within the site and for protection of neighboring properties, roadways and the night sky;
107
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(f) Relationship of structures and open spaces to the natural landscape, existing buildings and other community assets in the area and compliance with other requirements of
this Bylaw; and,
(g) Impact on the Town’s resources including the effect of the Town’s water supply and distribution system, sewage collection and treatment, fire protection, and streets.
(h) Incorporation of sustainability and resiliency principles into the site design that result in a plan that is responsive to the environment and actively contributes to the development of a more sustainable community.
11.8.6 Decision: Where a special permit from the Board is required or a variance from the Bylaw is requested in connection with any action subject to Site Plan Review, a site plan decision shall be made by the Board. In such case the Planning Board shall submit a report to the Board concerning the matters described in subsection 11.8.5 prior to any public hearing. In considering a site plan, the Board shall insure a reasonable use of the site consistent with the uses permitted in the district in which the site is located. The Board shall give due consideration to the report of the Planning Board and where the decision of the Board differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing.
Where a special permit or a variance is not required or requested, the Planning Board shall render a site plan decision and shall file its decision with the Town Clerk within ninety (90) days of receipt of an application, unless such time is extended in writing by agreement with the applicant and notice of such extension is filed with the Town Clerk. The Planning Board may impose such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards as will insure compliance with the terms of approval.
11.8.7 Site Plan Review for religious uses, educational uses and child care facilities: The purpose of this section is to ensure that all religious and education uses, and all child care facilities are reasonably regulated in regards to bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. The Board and the Planning Board have the authority to place reasonable conditions on the aforementioned issues, but are not permitted to withhold approval of Site Plan Review.
11.8.7.1 In reviewing the site plan submittal for religious uses, educational uses and child care facilities, the following issues shall be considered:
(a) Relationship of the bulk and height of structures and adequacy of open spaces to the natural landscape, existing buildings and other community assets in the area and compliance with other requirements of this Bylaw, which includes, but is not limited to, building coverage requirements, yard sizes, lot areas and setbacks;
(b) Physical layout of the plan as it relates to convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site, the location of driveway openings in relation to traffic or to adjacent streets and, when necessary, compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, minors and the elderly;
(c) Adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the premises;
108
CONCORD ZONING
(d) Physical lighting of the site, especially the adequacy of the method of exterior lighting for convenience, safety and security within the site and for protection of neighboring properties, roadways and the night sky;
(e) Protection of adjoining premises against seriously detrimental uses by provision for surface water drainage;
(f) Adequacy of the methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site;
(g) Adequacy of fire protection measures, and;
(h) Incorporation of sustainability and resiliency principles into the site design that result in a plan that is responsive to the environment and actively contributes to the development of a more sustainable community.
11.8.7.2 Where a special permit from the Board is required or a variance from the Bylaw is requested in connection with any action subject to site plan review for religious uses, educational uses and child care facilities, site plan approval shall be by the Board. In such case the Planning Board shall submit a report to the Board concerning the matters described in subsection 11.8.7 prior to any public hearing. In considering a site plan for religious uses, educational uses and child care facilities, the Board shall insure a reasonable use of the site consistent with the uses permitted in the district in which the
site is located. The Board shall give due consideration to the report of the Planning Board and where the decision of the Board differs from the recommendations of the Planning Board the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing.
11.8.7.3 Where a special permit or a variance is not required or requested, site plan approval for religious uses, educational uses and child care facilities shall be by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall file its decision with the Town Clerk within ninety (90) days of receipt of an application, unless such time is extended in writing by agreement with the applicant and notice of such extension is filed with the Town Clerk. The Planning Board may impose such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards as will insure compliance with the terms of approval.
11.8.8 Term of approval: Site plan approval shall lapse if construction has not commenced within two (2) years from the date of approval. For site plan approval by the Planning Board, an extension of time may be granted for up to six (6) months.
11.8.9 Appeal: Decisions of the Planning Board regarding site plan approval shall be appealed as set forth in G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 17 to a court of competent jurisdiction.
11.9 Bylaw Construction
This Bylaw shall not interfere with or annul any other Town Bylaw, rule or regulation, which is more restrictive, except where this Bylaw is more restrictive, it shall control.
11.10 Validity and Separability
The invalidity of one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or provisions of this Bylaw shall not invalidate or impair the Bylaw as a whole or any other part hereof.
A-1
APPENDIX A
GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE ZONING ACT
Chapter 40A of the General Laws as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975 sets forth certain requirements relating to zoning matters. For the convenience of those using the Concord Zoning Bylaw, a few of these requirements of interest are set forth below. However, nothing herein is intended to alter or vary the requirements of Chapter 40A, the provisions of which shall control in all instances.
1. A zoning change may be initiated by or submitted to the Board of Selectmen by a selectman, the Board of Appeals, individuals owning land to be affected, ten (10) registered voters, the Planning Board or a regional planning agency.
2. All zoning changes require approval of Town Meeting by a two-thirds vote.
3. No proposed zoning bylaw or change unfavorably voted upon shall be considered by the Town Meeting within two (2) years unless there is a favorable Planning Board recommendation.
4. No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Board of Appeals can be reconsidered within two (2) years without consent of the Planning Board.
5. A special permit shall lapse within two (2) years (or such shorter period as is deemed appropriate by the Board of Appeals or the special permit granting authority) if substantial use thereof has not commenced within such period except for good cause or if construction has not begun except for good cause.
6. Rights acquired under a variance shall lapse if they are not exercised within one (1)
year.
7. Decision on a special permit must be made within ninety (90) days of the public hearing thereon. Failure to make a decision within ninety (90) days shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit.
8. Decision on an appeal or variance must be made within one hundred (100) days of the date of filing. Failure to make a decision within one hundred (100) days shall be deemed to be a grant of the appeal or variance.
9. The Board of Appeals consists of three (3) members. By reason of Chapter 40A, all decisions must be unanimous.
10. The Planning Board consists of seven (7) members. By reason of Chapter 40A, all decisions as special permit granting authority shall require a two-thirds vote.
B-1
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
SUMMARY OF ZONING HISTORY IN CONCORD
1927 March 17 Authorize a Committee of Nine to present a Zoning Bylaw to the
Town.
1928 March 12 Adopt a ZBL establishing the following districts: Industrial,
Business, General Residence, and Single Residence.
1930 March
Special March
25 Establish Planning Board.
5 Amend Section 6B by deleting “provided the aggregate”.
6 Extend Milldam Business District.
1935 Special June 5 Establish By-Pass District
1937 March 25 Amend Section 4 and 5, sideyard, setback, accessory buildings.
1938 March 28
Amend Section 4, Sideyard.
29 Establish Limited Business District #1 for restaurant.
1939 March
24
Amend Section 6F(11) Tourist Home.
27
Add to Section 6I Board of Appeals conditions on permits.
28 Add to Section 6M Profession in Residential District.
1940 Special
1 Establish Limited Business District #2 for bank, theatre, or parking
September (64 Main St.)
1941 March 32
Establish Res. Dist. A (40,000 s.f., 150’ frontage) and Res. Dist. B (20,000 s.f., 100’ frontage) by adding to existing requirements.
35 Rezone corner of Thoreau/ Main Streets for 100’ to General Res.
1944 March 16 Add Section 6A(1) Gravel removal; 6H Permit from Board of
Appeals for professional use in Res. Dist. and/or use not permitted
in Business District.
1946 April
29 Establish Limited Business District #3 for bowling.
Special July 2 Change from Single to General Residence #5 Sudbury Road.
1947 March 37, 38
39
Allow garden apartments by Board of Appeals permit.
Amend Section 3 Bus. Dist.-Corner clearance, height, front yards.
40 Extend Milldam Business District.
B-2
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1948 March 48
49
50
51
52
Revise Section 2 Industrial District use; delete Section 3A, substitute
3A Business District use.
Add to Sections 4 and 5, Frontage minimum 80’.
Amend Sections 2 and 3, Yards, corner clearance, height, yards, combined buildings.
Amend Sections 7E and 7F “on public and private ways”. Add 7G Lot areas; 7H Lot definition.
Include in Single Residence B all land along Lexington Rd. now in
General Residence or Business District.
1949 March 26 Amend Section 7G Division of land into lots of less than required
area and frontage by Board of Appeals variance.
1950 March
Special April
23 Establish new boundary descriptions of zoning districts; establish
Residence C, frontage requirement 80’.
26 Rezone Rt. 2/Baker Ave. area to Ind. Dist. 600’ from Rt. 2.
1 Extend depth of Business District Monument Square.
Special October 1 Amend Limited Business District #2 (59 Walden Street)
1951 March 31
32
33
34
35
36
37
Amend Section 5A(8) “in Residence District C”.
Amend Section 8C by substituting new 8C re: Board of Appeals. Amend Section 6F re: fairs, carnival.
Revise and renumber Section 3 Business District.
Amend Section 1E(1) Limited Business District #1 to include recreational facilities.
Amend to include Limited Business District in Business District, Milldam area.
Amend Section 1E, redefine Residence District in
Wood/Nashoba/Main Streets area.
1952 March 36 Amend Section 1E, redefine Industrial District, Conant St. area.
1953 Special
May
1-9
11
Redefine zoning, delete General Residence District; add 10,000 s.f. area requirement to Residence District C.
Delete Section 2B, substitute new section on yards, corner, clearance,
height, and area.
1954 March 37 Amend frontage requirement in Res. Dist. B from 100’ to 125’.
B-3
1959 March
31
Amend Limited Bus. Dist. #3, Bedford St./Court Lane.
34
Amend Limited Bus. Dist. #1, Elm Street.
35
Amend Section 6M Parking.
36
Amend Section 4.1 Floodplain Districts.
37
Establish buildability of substandard lots.
38
Shopping Center District, Sudbury Rd. and Grant Street.
39
Amend setback requirements in Shopping Center and Ind. Dist.
4
, 41, 43, 44
Establish Industrial Park District, revise Industrial District.
4
, 46, 47, 49
Establish Residence District AA: 80,000 s.f. area, 200’ frontage, 40’
front yard.
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1955 March 21
Amend Section 4A from “recreational” to “municipal use”.
46 Redefine boundaries of Res. Dist. B in Rt. 2/ORNAC area.
1956 Special
8
Amend Section 1E re: Business District boundaries.
June
9
Add Section 9A re: use of trailers.
10 Delete 4A(3); add 5F(13) Club.
1957 Special
May
5 Establish 5:1 ratio parking in Business District; exempt part of
Milldam area.
7 Redefine boundaries of Res. Dist. A in Main St./ORNAC area.
1958 March
33
Exempt further Bus. Dist. (Milldam) areas from parking ratio.
Special October
12
Exempt further Bus. Dist. (Thoreau) area from parking ratio.
13
Exempt further Bus. Dist. (Commonwealth) area from parking ratio.
14
Establish parking requirements in Industrial District.
15
Amend to require approval of Planning Board for garden apartments
site plans.
16 Establish Shopping Center District.
0
5
Special June 5 Amend Industrial Park District near Virginia Road.
1960 March
44
Redefine Res. Dist. A boundaries, Second Division Brook area.
45
Amend Section 6H defining lot area and bounds.
46
Exempt further areas from parking ratio.
48 Amend Industrial Park District, Elm St. to Rt. 2.
1961 March
53
Amend Section 1E(1) Residence District AA boundaries.
54
Amend Section 1E(2) Residence District AA boundaries.
55 Amend Section 1E by adding south of Rt. 2 to Res. Dist. AA.
B-4
Date of
Town Meeti
Article
ng
CONCORD ZONING
Subject
1962 March
20
Add Section 10, Disaster shelters.
52
Amend Section 2D(4) stating min. lot size of 4 acres in Ind. Dist.
53
Amend Section 6I, Method of determining frontage.
56
Add Section 11, Cluster development/
57, 58, 59
Add Section 4.2, Flood Plain Conservancy District and amend
Section 1E, Flood Plain Districts.
1963 March
21
Amend Section 5F(7) to include a nonprofit community center.
48
Amend to enlarge Industrial Park (Virginia Road).
52
Amend to redefine Res. Dist. A near Hayward Pond and Main Street.
53
54, 55, 56
Substitute new Section 7C Board of Appeals.
Establish traffic safety controls and signs.
1964 March
34
38
Establish Medical-Professional District.
Amend Business District/Residence area off Monument St.
1965 March
33
Add Flood Plain Conservancy District.
34
Redefine Industrial District off Commonwealth Ave.
35
Amend Section 3A Frontage and area for dwellings in Bus. Dist.
37
Establish Limited Business District #4 Motor lodge and restaurant
1966 March 38, 39 Amend to require Res. C frontage and area for dwellings in Bus. Dist.
1967 March
18
Amend maximum height in Residence District to 35’
19
Amend maximum height in Medical-Profession District.
20
Amend Section 6B, Area, height measurement regulations.
21 Amend Section 6H, Lot ownership, area, boundaries.
1968 March 22
49
59
Establish garden apartment frontage.
Amend Limited Business District #1 to include office and professional use and limiting vehicular access.
Amend Section 4.2 to protect community against unsuitable
development in floodplain.
1969 March
45
Delete Section 1E(6) from Business District (Damon St.)
46
Amend Maximum Height Med.-Prof. Dist. south of Rt. 2.
48
Establish Limited Business District #5 Boathouse.
49 Amend Industrial District use, yards and prohibiting dwellings.
1970 March
37
Redefine boundaries of Damon Mill/Pond Lane/Main St. Bus. Dist.
43
Amend Section 4A to allow nonprofit dormitory use in Residence B
and C for public school students.
B-5
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1971 March 29 Amend Section 4A(7) Accessory uses and storage.
1972 March
36
Amend Section 1E Limited Business District.
37
Amend Section 1E Medical-Professional District.
38
Amend Section 3I Limited Business Dist. paragraph (6) added.
44
Amend Section 6M(6) Min. dimensions for off-street parking spaces.
45
Amend Section 6M(5) parking space requirements.
47
Amend Section 4A(8) 5,000 s.f. of lot area per dwelling unit.
48
Amend Section 1E Residence District C.
49
50
Amend Section 1E Flood Plain Districts, Section 4.1 Flood Plain
Districts and Section 1E Flood Plain Conservancy Dist. Amend Section 1E Business Districts.
51
Amend Section 7A Filing of plans.
52
Amend Section 11B(7) by adding (d) conservation restriction.
53
Amend Section 11 by adding F, Planning Board can amend.
54
Amend Section 11 by adding G, no further subdivision.
57
Delete Section 4A(9) Apartment/dormitory.
62
Amend Section 12 Sign Bylaw
Special October
20
Amend Section 3A(2) Dwelling, apartment, hotel.
21
22
Amend Section 3G combination business and dwelling uses in a Bus.
Dist.
Amend Section 1E(2) Res. Dist. B line 10 “Industrial Park”.
23
Amend Section 1E(5) Res. Dist. B to correct numbering error.
24
Amend Section 1E(3) Industrial District “a” to “the”.
25
Amend Section 6D, E, F changing word order to “Residence AA (or
A, B, C) District”.
26 Amend Section 6F(1) Add word “square”.
1973 March
58,59
Delete Section 6M(3)(a), (b) and (c) and substitute Section 6M(3)
Parking.
60
Amend Section 6M(1) Plan for off-street parking.
61
Amend Section 6M(4) Computing parking space requirements.
62
Delete Section 6M(5) Substitute new 6M(5) Parking.
64
Amend Section 6G Lot area and frontage.
67
Amend Section 4A(8) Apartment moratorium.
Special June
5
Add Section 13 Earth removal.
6 Delete from Section 5D “for a quarry or gravel or sandpit or”.
B-6
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1974 May 54
55
60
62
64
65
Amend Limited Business District boundaries near Monument
St./Monument Square/Bedford Street.
Extend Residence C District Lowell Rd./Monument Square. Amend 3F Height.
Revise Section 1E Business District and Industrial District boundaries near Baker Ave./Derby St./Main St.
Amend Section 2I(a) to eliminate retail sales in Industrial Dist. Amend Section 4A by Adding (9) Additional dwelling unit in single
66 family residence.
1975 May 44
45
46
47
48
Amend Section 1E Flood Plain Cons. Dist. by adding tributaries. Amend Section 4D by adding (1) lot width.
Delete Section 6C, D, E, F and substitute 6C Table of area, frontage and width regulations.
Amend Section 5J by adding (1) interrupted nonconforming use. Add Section 6N Site plan approval.
49 Extend apartment moratorium one year.
1976 May
39 Add Section 4.1 Wetland Conservancy District.
40 Add Section 11.1 Planned Residential Development.
41 Delete Sections 1E and 3J Shopping Center Dist.; amend Section 1E Business Dist. and Section 1E Residence B Dist. boundaries.
Special October 5 Amend Section 4.2.6 to include nonprofit boarding house for elderly.
1977 Special
April
1
2
3,4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Accept Chapter 808 “The Zoning Act”. Adopt recodification and revision of ZBL.
Delete duplicative provisions, renumber and reletter remaining provisions of Wetlands Cons. Dist. and Planned Res. Dev. (PRD) Amend Industrial Park, Res. A and B Dist. boundaries in area of Border, Hillcrest and Hayward Mill Rd.
Amend Res. AA, A and B Dist. boundaries in area of Boarder, Hillcrest and Hayward Mill Rd.
Amend Res. AA, A and B Dist. boundaries in the area of Ministerial
Dr. and Old Marlboro Rd.
Amend Bus., Res. B and C Dist. boundaries south of Main St. at the
Assabet River.
Amend Ind., Res. B and C Dist. boundaries off Pond Ln. and Old
Stow Rd.
Amend Ind., Res. B and C Dist. boundaries off Conant St., Wedgewood Common and Laws Brook Rd.
Amend Bus. And Res. C Dist. boundaries north of Laws Brook Rd.
and west of Commonwealth Ave.
B-7
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1977 Special
April cont.
13 Amend Bus. And Res. C Dist. boundaries in the area of Bradford, Maple, Main, Highland and Church Streets.
14 Amend from Res. A, B Ind. Park and Bus. Dist. to By-Pass District land along Rt. 2.
15 Amend Bus., Res. A and B Dist. boundaries in area of Concord
Reformatory.
16 Amend Res. B and C boundaries in area along Commonwealth Ave.
17 Amend Res. B and Ind. Park Dist. boundaries south of Rt. 2 at the
Assabet River.
18 Amend Limited Bus. #1, Res. A and B Dist. boundaries in the area between Elm St. and Barrett’s Mill Rd.
19 Amend from Res. C to Res. B Dist. land north of Main St. and east of
Rt. 2.
20 Amend form Res. AA, B and C Dist. to Med.-Prof. Dist., and from Res. C to Res. B Dist. boundaries in area of ORNAC, Main St. and Rt. 2.
21 Amend Res. C and B Dist. boundaries in area of Southfield, Riverdale and Sudbury Roads.
22 Amend Bus., Res. B and C Dist. boundaries in area of Thoreau and
Belknap Streets and Love Ln. and Sudbury Rd.
23 Amend Bus. and Res. C Dist. boundaries in area from Lowell Rd. to
Hubbard St.
24 Amend from Res. C to Bus. Dist. in area of Monument St. and
Lowell Rd.
25 Amend Res. B and C Dist. boundaries in areas of Monument/Bedford
Streets, and Walden/Heywood Streets.
26 Amend Res. A, B and C Dist. boundaries in area north of Fairhaven
Rd. and south of Walden St.
27 Amend Res. AA, A and Bus. Dist. boundaries at Nine Acre Corner.
28 Amend from Bus. To Res. A Dist. land near entrance to landfill north of Walden St.
29 Amend from Bus. To Res. A Dist. land north of former RR ROW
near Peter Spring R. containing Town filter beds.
30 Amend Res. B and A Dist. boundaries in area between Lexington Rd. and Dalton/Virginia Roads.
32 Amend Ind. Park, Ind. And Res. C Dist. boundaries in the area north
of Baker Ave./Main St.
1978 April
Special November
25 Amend from Ind. to Bus. Dist. land on Main St. west of Baker Ave.
1 Amend Section 9 to include PRD Conversion of school and
municipal buildings.
B-8
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1979 April 25
26, 27
38
39
40
Establish Limited Bus. Dist. #7 Professional office.
Amend Zoning Map to incorporate changes created by PRD
conversion of Rose Hawthorne School.
Amend Zoning Map to incorporate FIA flood boundaries into the
Flood Plain Conservancy District Map.
Revise subsection 2.3.5 to incorporate FIA standards into FPCD. Amend subsection 2.3.4 to permit 30 ft. extension into either district
where zoning boundary divides a lot.
1980 April 31
33
36
Amend Section 4.7 by adding subsection 4.7.2 Temporary restrictions in Industrial Park District.
Amend subsection 7.6.3.2 to increase small car parking to 30% in all parking lots.
Amend Tables I and II and subsections 5.1.8 to change use in
Limited Business District #4.
1981 April 32
34
37
40
44
Amend Table II Dimensional Requirements under the subheading
Industrial Park.
Establish a new category Limited Industrial Park (LIP); add LIP to Section 4, Table I Use Regulations and to Section 6, Table II Dimensional Regulations.
Amend subsection 4.7.2 to define further the extent of prohibited activities.
Amend subsection 7.7 Site plan approval.
Amend subsection 4.5.1, 4.5.4 and 4.7.1 in order to prohibit fast-food
restaurants.
1982 April
Special April
20 Clarify special permit requirements with respect to certain industrial uses.
21 Clarify interpretation of “maximum lot coverage” and “maximum floor area ration”.
23 Amend date for adding certain additional dwelling units under subsection 4.2.2.2.
24 Establish Groundwater Conservancy District.
26 Incorporate cluster development into PRD and add certain definitions.
27 Establish Residential Compound.
3 Amend subsection 4.7.2 to provide certain temporary restrictions in
West Concord area.
1983 April 30 Amend subsection 1.3.13 and add Section 5.2 to clarify definitions
and limitations of accessory uses.
B-9
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1984 April 34
35
36
37
39
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map to change date of Groundwater
Conservancy District Map from 1982 to 1984.
Add subsection 7.2.3.7 and 7.2.3.8 to allow repair of septic systems within Flood Plain Cons. Dist. and Wetlands Cons. Dist.
Amend subsections 4.2.2.1 and 7.1.2 to clarify permit requirements for two-family uses and alterations to nonconforming uses.
Amend subsection 4.1.2 to specify horticulture, floriculture and viticulutre as permitted uses in all districts.
Add subsection 5.1.17 to allow erection of private, noncommercial
radio and television towers by special permit.
1985 April
24
Add subsection 1.3.8, definition of gross floor area; renumber
subsections 1.3.8-1.3.20 as 1.3.9-1.3.21; amend Section 5.2 regarding
site plan approval; delete Section 7.6 Parking regulations and Section
7.7 Site plan approval and add in lieu thereof Section 7.6 Off-street
parking, loading and site plan requirements; and renumber Section
7.8 as Section 7.7.
1987 April 24
27
34
38
39
40
41
42
43
Accept application of Crosswhite Properties, Inc. for an eleven unit
PRD conversion of former school building.
Amend Section 9 to require subsidized and affordable housing units in PRDs
Amend the Zoning Map to change certain parcel of land from
Limited Industrial Park to Res. B.
Amend the following sections for editorial changes for clarity and consistency: 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.3.3, 1.3.10, 1.3.11, 1.3.12, 1.3.15, 2.2,
2.3.1, 2.3.3, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, 3.1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, 4.1 Table I, 4.2.1, 4.2.3, 4.5.11, 4.5.13, 4.5.14, 4.6.1, 4.6.2, 4.6.3, 5.1.7, Table II, 6.1, 6.2.3.2, 6.2.6, 6.2.11, 7.1.1, 7.1.3; renumber Section 7.7
Groundwater Cons. Dist. as 7.6; renumber new Section 7.6, adopted under Article 24, 1985 Town Meeting as Section 7.7.
Amend Section 4, Principal uses, to prohibit gasoline service stations in residential districts.
Delete subsection 5.1.3, Kennels and stables, and add in lieu thereof new subsections 5.1.3, 5.1.4; renumber subsections 5.1.4-5.1.17 as
5.1.5-5.1.18.
Amend subsections 4.2.5, 4.2.6 and add subsection 5.1.19 to clarify definitions of tourist home, boarding house, hotel and motel.
Add subsection 4.5.18 to allow provision of “for profit” child care facilities.
Amend subsection 4.7.1, prohibition of drive-in or fast-food
restaurants.
B-10
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1987 April cont.
Special July
44 Add subsection 7.2.1.4, 7.2.1.5, defining Lowest floor and Water surface elevation; amending subsection 7.2.4.1, permitted uses in the Flood Plain Conservancy District.
4 Delete subsection 9.2.2.3 re: density bonus program for PRD’s;
replaced by PRD bylaw adopted as Article 27, 1987 Town Meeting.
1988 April 30
31
32
33
Amend subsection 7.6.4.11 Groundwater Cons. Dist. to clarify. Amend subsection 8.2.2 defining minimum tract size and amend subsection 8.2.3 to allow fences within minimum setback areas. Delete Section5, Accessory Uses, and substitute a new Section 5 with Table of Accessory Uses (renumber exiting Tables II, III as III, IV.) Adopt new Flood Plain Cons. Dist. Map and amend Section 2.2 and subsection 2.3.5 to correspond to new federal flood insurance study.
34 Add subsection 4.5.19, Transportation services.
1989 April 39
40
41
Amend date for adding certain additional dwelling units under subsection 4.2.2.2.
Amend Section 7.4, By-Pass Dist. to limit vehicular access to lots in existence prior to January 1, 1989.
Amend Section 6, Table III Dimensional Regulations to revise
maximum lot coverage percent in Limited Bus. Dist. #6.
1990 March
Special October
22 Amend subsection 9.2.3, Mandatory Inclusionary Dwelling Units, to clarify the intent.
11 Delete subsection 9.2.10 in its entirety and substitute with new subsection 9.2.10, Special Provisions for Concord Housing Authority
12 and Town of Concord Projects.
Amend subsection 9.2.3.2, Affordable Housing.
1991 April 44
45
46
47
Amend subsection 6.2.2, Minimum lot area, to require fifty (50)
percent upland for lots created after September 1, 1991.
Amend the Zoning Map to change certain parcels south of White
Pond from Res. A to Res. AA.
Amend Section 6.3, Special Dimensional Exceptions to add a provision for hammerhead lots.
Establish Section 9, Residential Cluster Development (RCD);
renumber Section 9 and 10 as 10 and 11; add RCD to Section 4,
Table I, Use Regulations as 4.2.5; renumber other residential uses.
B-11
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1992 April 50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
Amend subsection 5.3.1, Home recreational facilities, to require that setbacks conform to the minimum yard requirements.
Amend subsection 1.3.7, Frontage, to clarify the definition of frontage.
Amend subsection 6.2.3, Frontage, by deleting the second means for measuring frontage in the case of a lot fronting all or partly on a cul- de-sac.
Amend subsection 7.7.2.1, Table IV, Minimum Parking to add parking requirements for child care centers.
Amend subsection 4.1.6, Private recreation by adding fitness clubs; delete health clubs from subsection 5.3.16, Personal service shops; add to subsection 7.7.2.1, Table IV Minimum Parking, parking requirements for fitness clubs.
Add subsection 7.3.2.4 to protect wildlife and its habitat, as a purpose of the Wetlands Cons. Dist.
Add subsection 1.3.7 Dwelling units, as a new definition; renumber subsections 1.3.7-1.3.21 as 1.3.8-1.3.22.
Amend Section 5.3 Table II Accessory Use Regulations, and subsection 5.3.6 Home Occupation, to provide for customary and special home occupations.
Amend subsection 3.2.3, 4.6.1, Section 4, Table I and Section 6,
Table III to redefine and clarify uses and dimensional requirements in the Limited Ind. Park; add new subsection 4.6.3, R&D and Light Manufacturing to Section 7, Table IV.
Add subsection 6.3.3, Dedication of Land to the Town.
Amend Section 4, Table I and subsections 4.3.4 and 4.5.12 to allow by special permit nursing home use and medical center and
laboratory use in Limited Bus. Dist. #6.
1994 April 42
43
44
Amend subsection 6.2.11 Height to revise the method for measuring the height of a building.
Amend Section 4.3 Institutional Uses, by adding 4.3.2 Child care facility; delete 4.5.18 Child care center; add to 7.7.2.1 Table IV Minimum Parking requirements for child care facility.
Amend Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses to delete subsection
4.6.5 Repair garage; revise subsection 4.6.2 Storage yard; add subsection 4.2.4 Combined industrial/business/residence use; amend Table III Dimensional Regulations under maximum lot coverage in
the Industrial Dist.
B-12
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1995 April 53
54
Delete subsection 4.2.3.2 in its entirety and replacing it with a new subsection 4.2.3.2; Delete text in its entirety from Table III Dimensional Regulations under Maximum Lot Coverage in Bus. Dist. B Combined Bus./Res. and replace with new text.
Amend the Zoning Map to change certain parcels located on
Virginia Rd. from Ind. Park Dist. to Res. A Dist. and from Res. A
Dist. to Ind. Park Dist.
1996 April 43
45
46
47
48
Amend date for adding certain additional dwelling units under subsection 4.2.2.2.
Delete Section 5.3.2 in its entirety and replacing it with a new
Section 5.3.2.
Add subsection 5.4.1.3 to allow the use of a trailer as a temporary office.
Amend subsection 7.7.2.12 by adding the phrase “upon advice of the
Planning Board,” after the words “The Board”.
Amend Table III Dimensional Regulations to increase the allowed height to 40 ft., but no more than three stories within the Ind. Park
and Limited Ind. Park Dist.
1997 April 56
57
59
Amend Section 4.2.2.2 to clarify and expand the requirements related to the creation of accessory apartments by adding items j) through m).
Amend Section 5.3.2 to add the phrase “and other communication”
after “television”.
Add subsection 5.3.17 Seasonal catering to the allowed uses in the Limited Bus. Dist. #5 and amend Table II Accessory Use Regulations to add 5.3.17 Seasonal Catering; and all district shall
indicate an “N” except LB, which shall have “Y5”.
1998 April 46 Amend Section 2.2 to add a Wireless Communications Facility(s) District and add a new Section 7.8, Personal Wireless
Communications Facility
1999 April 59
60
Add to Section 1.3 the definition of Family day care home, Home occupation, and Large family day care home; Revise subsection
4.3.2 Child care facility.
Revise Section 2.2 to reference the NFIP; Revise Section 2.3.5 to reference FEMA’s Flood Insurance Study; Replace subsection 7.2.2 and subsection 7.2.4 to conform to the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; Add paragraph (c) to subsection 7.2.5.2
requiring additional notification of state and federal agencies.
B-13
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
1999 April cont.
61
Amend the Zoning Map to show Parcel 2198 as Limited Business
District #8; Add LB Dist. #8 at 68 Commonwealth Ave. to Section
2.1; Renumber Section 4.3.6 and 4.3.7 to 4.3.7 and 4.3.8 and add a
new Section 4.3.6 Assisted living residence; Amend Table I to add
the new Section 4.3.6 and identify uses in LB Dist. #8; Amend
Section 6.2.12, Table III and Table IV to add LB Dist. #8; Revise
subsection 7.7.2.10 to require only one loading space for an assisted
living residence.
2000 April 25 Amend Section 7.7; Off-street Parking, Loading, and Site Plan
Requirements to add exterior lighting as a Site Plan evaluation
criteria.
2001 April 34
36
38
39
40
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map to expand the Personal Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay district and to amend Section
7.8, Personal Wireless Communications Facilities.
Amend date for adding certain additional dwelling units under subsection 4.2.2.2.
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map by adopting a new map of the
Groundwater Conservancy District and by deleting Section 7.6
Groundwater Conservancy District in its entirety and replacing it with a new Section 7.6 Groundwater Conservancy District
Delete Section 10 Planned Residential Development in its entirety and replace it with a new Section 10. Planned Residential Development
Add a new Subsection 10.2.12, (or, if Subsection 10.2 has been amended by separate vote of Town Meeting for Article 39, by
adding the following to Subsection 10.3 as a new Subsection 10.3.4)
to the Planned Residential Development Bylaw.
2002 April 28
29
Amend Section 4.2.2.2, Two-Family or Additional Dwelling Unit to eliminate a specific date for the creation of the dwelling.
Add a new subsection 5.3.18, Common Driveways by Special
Permit.
31 Add a new subsection 5.4.2, Storage Trailers.
2003 April 28A
28B
31
Amend Section 7.8.4.1 & 7.8.4.5, Personal Wireless
Communications Facility to clarify Purpose and Intent.
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map to expand the Personal Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay district.
Amend Section 4.3.5 and Table I to allow hospital parking as a permitted use in Ltd. Bus. Dist. #6.
B-14
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
2003 April cont. 64
65
66
67
Revise the dimensional regulation for Section 6.2.4, Frontage exception to require a minimum 45-degree angle.
Revise the dimensional regulation for Section 6.2.5, Lot Width. Revise the reference to the Flood Plain Conservancy District Map under Section 2.2 and 7.2.1.1 to acknowledge Letter of Map Revision for the Mill Brook.
Add new subsection 6.3.3, Reduced frontage, lot width and/or lot area lots to preserve existing historically significant structures and
renumber Dedication of Land as Section 6.3.4
2004 April 29A
29B
Revise some of the subsections of Section 7.8 Personal Wireless
Communications Facility.
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map to expand the Personal Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay district to add two parcels of
land located on Old Marlboro Rd.
2005 April 37 Amend subsection 6.3.3 to allow waiver of the rear and side yard setback dimensions when there is an existing historically significant
structure on the lot.
2006 April 34
35
36
38
Add sub section 1.3.2 definition of “Affordable Housing” and renumber all subsequent definitions in sequence beginning with
1.3.3 Board.
Amend Section 4.2.3 “Combined Business/Residence use to add a requirement for the provision of affordable housing.
Amend Section 4.2.4 “Combined Industrial/Business/Residence use to add a requirement for the provision of affordable housing.
Amend Section 2.2 entitled “Zoning Map” by changing the zoning district over portions of three abutting land parcels located between
Old Stow Road and Pond Lane from Ind. to Res. C.
2007 April 40 Amend Section 2.1 Classification of Districts under “Limited Industrial Park” to add “Limited Industrial Park #1 @ 2229 Main Street” and “Limited Industrial Park #2 @ Main Street and Forest Ridge Road”. Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map (Assessors Maps A12, A13, B11, B12, B13) to: “Zoning Districts, Town of Concord,
2007 (Scale 1’=100’ consisting of 122 sheets)”. Amend Section 4
Classification of Principal Uses: to amend Table I – Principal Use
Regulations subsections 10.2.1, 10.2.2,10.2.2.1 and 10.2.5
2007 November 7 Delete the last sentence of the first paragraph of Section 11.6 and add a new second paragraph, which defines the criteria for the grant of a special permit.
B-15
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
2008 April 38
39
41
Amend Section 5.3.6.1 and Section 5.3.6.2 to allow customary and special home occupations in dwellings located in all zoning districts. Amend Section 7.7.2.1, Table IV, Minimum Parking, to establish a parking requirement for ATM machines in a financial or business office.
Amend Section 6.2.11 to add a special permit requirement for wind
turbine facilities.
2009 April 36
38
39
40
44
Delete Zoning Bylaw Section 7.1 Nonconforming Uses and replace it with a new Section 7.1 Nonconforming Uses and Structures Amend the Zoning Bylaw by adopting a new temporary zoning district and listing the map for that district in Zoning Bylaw Section
2.2 Zoning Map, and adding a new Section 7.9 West Concord – Interim Planning Overlay District (WC-IPOD)
Amend Section 7.7 and add a new subsection 11.8 Site Plan Review to Section 11. Administration and Enforcement.
Amend Section 8 Residential Compound
Delete subsections 7.3.2; 7.3.3; 7.3.4; and 7.3.5 from Section 7.3
Wetlands Conservancy District, and add a new subsection 7.3.2, and delete references to the Wetlands Conservancy District in
subsections 7.2.3.5 and 7.5.2.3
2010 April 41
42
43
44
45
48
49
Amend Section 7.1 Nonconforming Uses and Structures, subsection
7.1.5.
Amend Section 10. Planned Residential Development, subsection
10.2.2 Maximum Permissible Density; amend subsection 10.2.3
Diversity of Dwelling Units; amend subsection 10.2.3.1 Low income dwelling units; amend subsection 10.2.9 Common Open Space. Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map, Groundwater Conservancy
District.
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map and amend Section 4. Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE I – Principal Use Regulations to establish the West Concord Business and West Concord Industrial Districts. Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map; amend Section 4. Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE I – Principal Use Regulations to establish
the Concord Center Business, Thoreau Depot Business, Nine Acre Corner Business, West Concord Business &West Concord Industrial Districts.
Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map; amend Section 2.3.5; amend
Section 7.2 Flood Plain Conservancy District, subsections 7.2.1.1
Flood plain, 7.2.13 Floodway data, 7.2.1.7 Water surface elevation, and 7.2.5.1(c).
Amend subsection 1.3.11, Gross floor area.
B-16
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Article Subject
Town Meeting
2010 April cont. 50
51
52
53
54
Amend TABLE I – Principal Use Regulations, Section 4.5.18, Transportation services.
Amend TABLE II – Accessory Use Regulations; amend subsection
5.3.17 Seasonal catering.
Amend subsection 5.3.1 Home recreational facilities. Amend subsection 6.2.2 Minimum lot area.
Amend Section 7.7 Off-street Parking, Loading and Design
Standards to correct spelling errors.
2011 April
Special April
43 Amend subsection 6.2.7 Side Yards in Residence C Zoning District; amend
Table III footnotes.
44 Amend subsection 6.2.11 Height in Residence C Zoning District; Amend Table III footnotes.
45 Amend Section 2.1 Classifications of Districts & Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE 1 – PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS for
corrections.
46 Amend TABLE III – Dimensional Regulations – eliminate Business
Use subcategories (A) Dwelling and (B) Combined Business/Res.
47 Amend subsection 4.5.14 Auto repair shop and subsection 5.3.5 Garaging or parking of commercial motor vehicles by increasing the commercial vehicle wheel base.
48 Amend Section 5.3.6.2 Special Home Occupation (b).
49 Amend subsection 10.3.4.3 for spelling correction.
50 Amend Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE 1 – PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS to modify the uses in the West
Concord Business District (WCB).
52 Amend subsection 4.5 Business Uses to add a definition of grocery store and size limitations to the definitions of retail store and restaurant uses in
the West Concord Business and the proposed West Concord Village Districts.
53 Amend Sections 6.2.6, 6.2.11 and TABLE III – Dimensional Regulations for front yard and minimum height references for the West Concord
Business and West Concord Village Districts.
54 Amend Section 1 to add a definition of formula business and Section 3
USE REGULATIONS to add a new subsection 3.3 Formula Business with a Cap.
3 Amend Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE 1- PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS to modify uses in the West Concord Industrial District (WCI).
4 Amend Section 4.2.4 Combined industrial/business/residence for West
Concord Industrial District & Industrial District.
6 Amend Section 2.1 Classification of Districts, Section 2.2 Zoning Map, and Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses, TABLE I – PRINCIPAL
USE REGULATIONS to establish the West Concord Village District.
B-17
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2012 April 34 Amend Section 7.9 to add Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar
Photovoltaic Installation
40 Amend Section 2.1 Classification of Districts, Section 2.2 Zoning Map, and Section 4 Classification of Principal Uses; TABLE I – PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS, TABLE II – ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS, TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS, and TABLE IV, MINIMUM PARKING for Extended Stay Hotel
41 Amend Section 1.3 Definitions and Section 5.4 Temporary
Accessory Uses for Mobile Medical Facility
42 Amend Section 6.3 Special Dimensional Exceptions subsections
6.3.3, 6.3.3.3 (b), 6.3.3.3 (c)
43 Amend Section 9 Residential Cluster Development, Subsection
9.2.3 Dimensional Regulations
Special April 8 Amend TABLE I – PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS column applicable to 4.2.3 Combined business/residence to add combined business/residence as a permitted use in the Limited Business District #7.
2013 April 31 Amend Section 6.2.3 to relate the measurement of frontage in this
Section to the definition of frontage in Section 1.3.11
32 Amend Section 6, TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS to incorporate new Zoning Districts that have been created and added to the Principal Use Table in the past years and codify the building side yard setbacks in the Business Districts in the West Concord Village District and the Limited Industrial Park 1 and 2 Districts.
33 Amend Section 6, TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS to allow educational uses, the greater floor area ratio as defined for R&D and light manufacturing in the Limited Industrial Park District #2
B-18
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2013 April 34 Amend TABLE II – ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS in Section 5 to incorporate the new Zoning Districts that have been created and added to the Principal Use Table in the past years (Concord Center Business, Thoreau Depot Business, Nine Acre Corner Business, West Concord Business, West Concord Village, West Concord Industrial, Industrial Park A, Industrial Park B, Limited Industrial Park #1 and Limited Industrial Park #2
Districts).
35 Amend subsection 5.3.6.2 Special Home Occupation by deleting the sole example provided to define Special Home Occupation, which is “the sale of antiques”.
36 Amend subsection 6.2.7 and Section 6, TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS by using the same language adopted for the Residence C Zoning District in 2011 by limiting the height of structures to no greater than fifteen feet within 12-15 feet of a side yard in the Residence B Zoning District.
37 Amend subsection 6.2.11 and Section 6, TABLE III – DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS by using the same language adopted for the Residence C Zoning District in 2011 for measurement of height of a structure in the Residence B Zoning District.
38 Amend Section 4.4 to add Public Service Corporations to the definition of uses and to provide a higher level of review for projects proposed by municipalities that are not the Town of Concord.
39 Amend Section 4.3 Institutional Uses and Section 4, Table I to add a new use and definition of Medical Marijuana Treatment Center.
40 Add a new Section 7.10 Public Service Corporation Overlay
District (PSCOD).
2014 May 47 Amend Sections 2.2 , 2.3.5 , 7,2,1.5, 7.2.1.7; insert a new Section
7.2.3, and renumber the following Sections and subsections 7.2.4
7.2.5, 7.2.6 to address changes to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and National Flood Insurance Program.
B-19
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2014 May cont.
48
Amend Table III Dimensional Regulations to change the minimum front yard in the Concord Center and Thoreau Depot business districts to zero and add the Business district and Nine Acre Corner business districts
49
Amend Section 4.3 Institutional Uses and Table I Principal Use Regulations in Section 4 to align the Town’s terminology with the State’s terminology for a registered marijuana dispensary.
50
Amend Section 4.5.4 to allow, by special permit, a restaurant in the
West Concord Village District to be 30% larger than 4,000 sq. ft. in area.
51
Amendment to revise and correct numbering and numbering sequences in the existing Bylaw and to allow non-substantive numbering changes to be made in the future without requiring a vote of Town Meeting.
52
Amend Section 7.8 to address changes to the interpretation of section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 regarding wireless facility modifications.
53
Amend Section 7.7.3 by adding a new subsection 7.7.3.8 and renumbering the sections that follow; and by deleting subsection
7.7.3.12 and inserting a new subsection 7.7.3.13 regarding bike parking requirements and waiver of design standards for site plan requirements.
Special May
5
Amend Table I – Principal Use Regulations by adding the numeral “1” to the first footnote thereof permitting Financial and Business Office in the Limited Business 1 District.
2015 April 12 Amend Section 6.2.5 – Lot Width by inserting the phase “in addition
to the required frontage” before the phrase “a width of not less”.
13 Amend Section 7.5 and Section 7.8 to reference the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw, which was adopted after each of these sections in the Zoning Bylaw.
14 Amend Section 7.3.1 and Section 7.3.2 – Wetlands Conservancy District – Definition and Purpose by bringing the definition into conformance with the definition established in the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw and to reference it in the Purpose section.
B-20
CONCORD ZONING
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2015 April 15 Amend Section 9.2.4 Residential Cluster Development – Open Space,
to require at least 50% of the open space to be upland.
16 Amend Section 10.2.9 Planned Residential Development – Common
Open Space to add reference to the Town’s Wetlands Bylaw; and to correct a clerical error in Section 10.3.4.2.
17 Amend Section 6.2.11 Height and Table III Dimensional Regulations to match the way height of a structure is measured in the Residence A and AA Zoning Districts with that of the Residence B and C Zoning Districts.
2016 April 34 Amend Section 4.2.3.2 Combined Business/Residence to retain the requirement for affordable units in a combined business/residence use when there are four or more residential units.
35 Amend Section 4.2.2.1 Residential Uses to substitute “dwelling units” for “families” and require additions to create an additional dwelling be integral to and part of the existing building and share a common wall or floor.
36 Amend Section 10.2.3 Planned Residential Development Diversity of Dwelling Units.
37 Amend Section 11.8.7.1 Site Plan Review for religious uses, educational uses, and child care facilities by adding three additional criteria for evaluating a Site Plan.
38 Amend Section 2.2 Zoning Map & Section 2.3.5 Zoning Map Interpretation to update the Flood Plain Conservancy District boundary as a result of a Letter of Map Revision accepted by FEMA.
39 Move Section 7.2.5.2 Flood Plain Conservancy District to a new Section 7.2.4.8 – Uses permitted without review by the Board.
40 Amend Sections 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 5.3.4, 5.3.7, 5.3.8, 5.4.4 Agricultural Uses, Table I Principal Use Regulations, and Table II Accessory Use Regulations to revise Sections dealing with agricultural uses based on changes to M.G.L. Ch. 40A, Sec. 3.
B-21
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2016 April 41 Amend Principal Use Regulations Table I Section 4.2.3 & Section 4.2.3.4 Combined Business/Residence & Table III Dimensional Regulations to allow combined business/residence as an allowed use in the Limited Business District #2 (59 Walden St.), increase the permitted building height from 25 ft. to 27.5 ft. and prohibit waivers to allow a building height of 40 ft.
42 Amend Section 6.2.13 Maximum Floor Area Ratio, Section 7.1.5 Nonconforming single and two-family residential structures & Table III Dimensional Regulations to establish a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for all residential zoning districts and allow a Special Permit to exceed the maximum FAR under certain conditions.
2017 April 35 Amend Section 11.8.7.1 Site Plan Review for religious uses, educational uses and childcare facilities to delete the words “, sound and sight buffers, and preservation of light and air” from subsection (e).
36 Amend Section 4.5.11 Professional Office to add the words “real estate broker”.
37 Amend Section 7.1.5 Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures to make the method of measuring the gross floor area of a residence under Section 7.1.5 Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures consistent with Section 6.2.13 Maximum Floor Area Ratio.
38 Amend Section 4.2.2.1 Two-family or additional dwelling unit to correct and change the measurement from volume to gross floor area.
39 Add a new Section 4.8 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for “marijuana establishments” through July 1, 2018.
2018 April 32 Amend Section 4.8 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium through December 31, 2018.
33 Amend Section 1.3.8 Dwelling unit to add the phrase “and private” to clarify the meaning and intent of the definition
B-22
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS
Date of
Town Meeting Article Subject
2018 April cont. 34 Amend Section 6.2.11 Height to limit the height of accessory structures within the required side and rear yard in all residential districts to 24 feet for a pitched room and 18 feet for a flat roof
35 Amend Section 4.2.3.3 Combined Business/Residence to allow less than the required amount of open space by special permit
36 Amend Section 7.1.5 Nonconforming Single and Two Family Structures to add the phrase “ reconstruction, alteration or structural change” to various paragraphs in order to eliminate any ambiguity in the meaning and intent of the section
37 Amend Section Table IV Minimum Parking to delete the phrase
“& real estate agency” from the definition of “Financial and business office” for uniformity purposes
38 Amend Section 11.8.5 Site Plan Review to add a sustainability review criterion
39 Amend Section 11.8.7.1 Site Plan Review to add a sustainability review criterion
B-23
CONCORD ZONING
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
C-1
APPENDIX C
Subject
See Also
Section
AccessoryUses Table II
5.3
Additional dwelling
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.2.2
Administration and Enforcement
11.0
Auto repair shop
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.5.14
Aviation facilities
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.9
Bed & breakfast or tourist home
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.15
Board of Appeals
11.4
Boarding House
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.2.8
Boat sales and rental
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.5.16
Building Permit
11.2
By-Pass District
7.4
Certificate of Occupancy
11.3
Change, extend non-conforming use
and/or structure
7.1.2, 7.1.3
Childcare facility
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.3.2
Christmas tree sales
5.4.4
Common driveways
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.18
Corner Clearance
see also Table III
6.2.10
Craft shop
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.5.3
Dedication of Land to Town
6.3.4
Definitions
1.3
Definition - Building
1.3.4
Definition - Day care, family
1.3.9
Definition - Day care, large family
1.3.14
Definition – Dwelling unit
1.3.8
Definition – Formula business
1.3.10
Definition – Frontage
1.3.11
Definition – Gross floor area
1.3.12
Definition -Multi-unit dwelling
1.3.16
Definition – Street
1.3.23
Dimensional Regulations
Table III
6
Earth Removal
7.5
Educational use
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.3.1
Fairs, bazaars, antique shows,
suppers & dances
5.4.5
Farm product sales
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.7
Fast food
4.7.1
Five foot setback for accessory...
6.2.7 – 6.2.8
Flood Plain ConservancyDistrict
7.2
Floor Area Ratio
see also Table III
6.2.13
Frontage - dimension
see also Table III
6.2.3
Formula Business
Applicable to West Concord Business
&West Concord Village Districts
3.3
Frontage exception
see also Table III
6.2.4
C-2
APPENDIX C
Subject
See Also
Section
Garaging or parking commercial
vehicles
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.5
Gift shops, candy counters
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.13
Government Utility and Other Public
Service Corporation Uses
4.4
Groundwater Conservancy District
7.6
Hammerhead lots
6.3.2
Height - dimension
see also Table III 5.3
6.2.11
Home Occupation, customary or
special
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.6
Home recreational facilities
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.1
Hotel and motel, extended stay
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.2.9
Junk yard
4.7.1
Kennels
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.3
Landscape buffer
6.2.9
Lighting
7.7.4.10
Lodging for farm employees
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.8
Lot area - dimension
6.2.1
Lot width - dimension
see also Table III
6.2.5
Lunchrooms and cafeterias
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.12
Maximum floor area ratio
see also Table III
6.2.13
Maximum lot coverage
see also Table III
6.2.12
Marijuana – Registered Marijuana
Dispensary
4.3.9
Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium
4.8
Minimum lot area - dimension
see also Table III
6.2.2
Nonconforming uses
7.1
Nonconforming structures
7.1.3
Parking, Loading & Design
Standards
7.7
Parking and landscaping
7.7.3.9
Parking Dimensions
7.7.3.1
Parking, minimum
Table IV
7.7.2.1
Parking, relief from requirements
7.7.2.12
Personal service shop
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.16
Personal Wireless Communications
Facility
7.8
Planned Residential Development
10
Principal Use Regulations
Table I
4
Public Service Corporation Overlay
District (PSCOD)
7.10
R & D and light manufacturing
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.6.3
Radio and television towers
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.2
Rear yards – dimension
see also Table III
6.2.8
Reduced frontage, lot width etc. for historically significant structures
6.3.3
C-3
APPENDIX C
Subject
See Also
Section
Repair shop and building trade
see also Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.5.8
Residence C side yards & height
see also Table III
6.2.7, 6.2.11
Residential Cluster Development
9
Residential Compound
8
Restaurant
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.5.4
Reconstruction of nonconforming
structures after catastrophe
7.1.7
Scientific research & development
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.14
Seasonal catering
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.17
Side yards - dimension
see also Table III
6.2.7
Single lot exemption
6.3.1
Site Plan Approval
11.8
Solar – Large Scale Installations
7.9
Special Home Occupation
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.6.2
Special Permit
11.6
Stable
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.4
Storage trailer
5.4.2
Storage yard, open-air sales
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.6.2
Temporary storage
5.4.3
Temporary Accessory Uses
5.4
Tourist home or bed and breakfast
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.15
Two-family or additional dwelling
unit
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.2.2
Variance
7.1.4, 11.7
Warehouse
see also parking Table IV 7.7.2.1
4.6.1
Watchman’s apartment
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.10
Wireless Communications Facility
7.8
Workshops and classes
see also Table II 5.3
5.3.11
C-4
APPENDIXC
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]

Amended through
June 2007
SUBDIVISION RULES & REGULATIONS
TOWN OF
CONCORD, MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN OF CONCORD
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
i
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS .......................................... 1
1.1 Authority .............................................................................................................. 1
1.2 Purpose ............................................................................................................... 1
1.3 Definitions ........................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 2. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION ................................................................. 5
2.1 Unapproved Subdivision Prohibited .................................................................... 5
2.2 Limitation of One Dwelling on Any Lot ................................................................. 5
2.3 Effect of Prior Recording ..................................................................................... 5
2.4 Waivers ............................................................................................................... 5
2.5 Interpretation, Conflict and Separability ............................................................... 5
2.6 Reservations and Appeal .................................................................................... 6
2.7 Amendments ....................................................................................................... 6
2.8 Invalidation by State Law .................................................................................... 6
2.9 Enforcement ........................................................................................................ 6
2.10 Forms, Applications and Fee Schedule ............................................................... 7
SECTION 3. APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT
REQUIRED ................................................................................................ 9
3.1 Submission .......................................................................................................... 9
3.2 Contents of the Plan ............................................................................................ 9
3.3 Determination of Frontage ................................................................................. 10
3.4 Board Action ...................................................................................................... 11
SECTION 4. PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF A
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN ..................................................... 13
4.1 When Required ................................................................................................. 13
4.2 Application Procedure ....................................................................................... 13
4.3 Form and Contents ............................................................................................ 13
4.4 Action by the Board ........................................................................................... 14
4.5 Relationship of Preliminary Plan to Definitive Plan ............................................. 14
SECTION 5. DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN .......................................................... 17
5.1 Application Procedure ....................................................................................... 17
5.2 Form and Contents of Plan ............................................................................... 17
5.3 Street Plans and Profiles ................................................................................... 19
5.4 Site Evaluation .................................................................................................. 20
5.5 Review Procedures ........................................................................................... 21
5.6 Release of Performance Guarantee .................................................................. 24
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
ii
5.7 Rescission ......................................................................................................... 26
5.8 Ownership and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements .............................. 26
5.9 Completion within Three Years ......................................................................... 26
SECTION 6. REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN ...................... 27
6.1 General Requirements ...................................................................................... 27
6.2 Character of the Land ........................................................................................ 27
6.3 Lots ................................................................................................................... 28
6.4 Construction Specifications ............................................................................... 29
6.5 General Construction Procedures ..................................................................... 29
6.6 Construction Methods and Materials ................................................................. 29
6.7 Streets – Basic Requirements ........................................................................... 30
6.8 Streets – Design Standards............................................................................... 31
6.9 Curbing .............................................................................................................. 34
6.10 Sidewalks .......................................................................................................... 34
6.11 Monuments........................................................................................................ 35
6.12 Utilities – Basic Requirements ........................................................................... 36
6.13 Storm Drainage ................................................................................................. 37
6.14 Water Facilities .................................................................................................. 38
6.15 Sewer ................................................................................................................ 38
6.16 Electric and Communication Lines .................................................................... 39
6.17 Trees and Other Plantings ................................................................................ 39
6.18 Street Signs ....................................................................................................... 40
6.19 Street Lighting ................................................................................................... 40
6.20 Reservation of Land for Public Purpose ............................................................ 40
6.21 Reservation of Land for Housing Purposes ....................................................... 41
TOWN OF CONCORD
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
1
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
1.1 Authority
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Concord by
Section 81Q of Chapter 41 of the General Laws, the Board hereby adopts these rules and
regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Concord.
1.2 Purpose
The Concord Planning Board is authorized under the General Laws of
Massachusetts to regulate the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions to
insure the safety, convenience and welfare of present and future inhabitants of Concord.
The Board shall exercise its authority with due regard for the provision of adequate
access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for
travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent pubic ways; for reducing
danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case
of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies; for insuring compliance with applicable
provisions of the Concord Zoning Bylaw and the Wetlands Protection Act; for securing
adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility service, police and
fire protection and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; for coordinating
the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in neighboring
subdivisions; and for preserving the special historical and rural character of Concord.
In considering a proposed subdivision, the Planning Board solicits the opinions of
other Town Boards, Committees, and Officials as they pertain to the activity of
subdivision.
1.3 Definitions
In constructing these Regulations, the definitions in Section 81-L of Chapter 41 of
the General Laws shall apply. In addition, the following other terms and words are
defined:
1.3.1 Applicant: A person applying for approval of a plan under these regulations,
including owner, agent or assigns of owner.
1.3.2 Base Flood Elevation: The level of flooding having a one per cent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as designated on the Flood Plain
Conservancy District Map of the Zoning Bylaw, Town of Concord, June 1988 (Scale
1” = 1000’ consisting of a single sheet); the Town of Concord Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) dated June 3, 1988 and issued by the Federal Emergency
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
2
Management Agency for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program
showing all special flood hazard areas as Zone A, AH, A1-30; and the FEMA Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map dated June 3, 1988, or, in the absence of such
designation, as may be determined based upon the best available information
regarding flood hazards, including any available U.S. Geologic Survey, Soil
Conservation Service, and Corps of Engineer studies.
1.3.3 Bench Mark: A mark made in a durable object of known position and
elevation, as a reference point.
1.3.4 Board: The Town of Concord Planning Board. A quorum for a meeting or
hearing is four members.
1.3.5 Cul-de-sac: A local, dead-end street with a turnaround at the end.
1.3.6 Easement: A right in land acquired by public authority or other person to
use or control property for a utility or other limited purpose.
1.3.7 Engineer or Surveyor: A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts to perform professional civil engineering or land surveying services.
1.3.8 Lot: An area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries used, or
available for use, as the site of one or more buildings. Areas endorsed by the Board
upon a plan as “Not available for building purposes” shall not be considered lots.
1.3.9 Owner: The owner of record as shown by the records of the South
Middlesex Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
1.3.10 Recorded: Recording in the Registry of Deeds for South Middlesex and ,
where registered land is affected, filing with the recorder of the Land Court.
1.3.11 Streets:
Local: A street that provides direct access to abutting properties only; this
category includes cul-de-sacs and loop streets.
Collector: A street used primarily to connect local streets to arterial streets.
It carries moderate volumes of traffic. Less than 25% of the average daily
traffic of a collector is normally attributed to through traffic.
Minor arterial: A street used to provide movement between major arterials,
collectors and other minor arterials. It carries relatively high volumes of
traffic. At least 25% of the average daily traffic volume is normally attributed
to through traffic.
Major arterial: A street of regional significance, with high volumes of traffic
used primarily to carry traffic through the Town. It is not intended as a
residential street.
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
3
1.3.12 Subdivision: The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, including
re-subdivision, provided that such division shall not be deemed to constitute a
subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law (G.L.c. 41) if at the time it is made:
every lot within the tract has frontage on a public way, a way which the Town Clerk
certifies as maintained and used as a public way, a way shown on a plan theretofore
approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in
existence as of February 28, 1938 meeting the standards of the Board as set forth in
Section 3.3.
1.3.13 Way, Public: Any street which has been accepted as a public way pursuant
to G.L.c. 82 and any way known as a public way before 1846 or any way established
by court decree to be a public way by dedication, prescription or otherwise.
1.3.14 Utilities: Private or municipal services to be furnished within the subdivision
including, without limitation, telephone, cable TV, electric light and power, gas lines,
sanitary sewers, water drains, water pipes and appurtenances.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
4
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
5
SECTION 2. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
2.1 Unapproved Subdivision Prohibited
No subdivision of any land, improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or
construction of streets or installation of municipal utilities therein shall be permitted unless
and until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the
Board under the provisions of these regulations.
2.2 Limitation of One Dwelling on Any Lot
No more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling purposes
shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in a subdivision, or
elsewhere in the Town, without the consent of the Planning Board. Such consent may be
conditioned upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for each
such building, in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
2.3 Effect of Prior Recording
The recording of a plan of subdivision within the Town in the Registry of Deeds
prior to the effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in the Town of Concord
(February 28, 1938) shall not exempt the land within such subdivision from the application
and operation of these Rules and Regulations except as specifically exempted by G.L.c.
41, Section 81.
2.4 Waivers
The Board may waive strict compliance with any of these Regulations if it deems
such waiver to be in the public interest and if written record is kept of each such waiver
and the reasons for it. In approving waivers, the Planning Board may require such
conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standard(s)
or requirement(s) waived.
2.5 Interpretation, Conflict and Separability
2.5.1 The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
2.5.2 These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any
other bylaw, regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
6
these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other regulations, bylaw, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall apply.
2.5.3 If any part or provision of these regulations, or if application of any part or
provision of these regulations to any particular circumstances, is adjudged to be
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgement shall not affect or impair
the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application of these regulations
as a whole to other circumstances.
2.6 Reservations and Appeal
Upon adoption of these regulations, the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of
Concord adopted on November 11, 1974, as amended, are hereby repealed, except to
such section(s) expressly retained herein.
2.7 Amendments
The Planning Board may from time to time amend the provisions imposed by these
regulations. Public Hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Board in
the manner described in G.L.c. 41, Section 81.
2.8 Invalidation by State Law
Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated by a new State law or
modification of an existing State law shall automatically be brought into conformity with
the new or amended law, and shall be deemed effective immediately, without recourse to
public hearing and the customary procedures for amendment and repeal of such
regulations.
2.9 Enforcement
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure
located on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the erection of a building until
first satisfied that the lot on which the building is to be erected is not within a subdivision,
or that a way furnishing access to a lot within a subdivision is shown on a recorded plan
and that any conditions endorsed on the plan limiting the right to erect or maintain
buildings on such lot have been satisfied, or that the Board’s endorsement, if required
under Section 3, has been obtained.
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
7
2.10 Forms, Applications and Fee Schedule
The forms, applications and a fee schedule for the administration of these
regulations are available in the Concord Planning Division office. These documents are
not part of the regulations and the content may be revised from time to time by
administrative action of the Board, without a public hearing.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
8
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED
9
SECTION 3. APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT
REQUIRED
3.1 Submission
Any person who wishes to record a plan of land and who believes that the plan
does not require approval under the Subdivision Control Law shall:
3.1.1 File with the Board, at its regular meeting, an application (Form A)
accompanied by the necessary information to show that the plan does not require
approval, and obtain an acknowledgement of said application.
3.1.2 Submit with the application an original drawing of the plan, in the form
described in Section 3.2 with four (4) contact prints.
3.1.3 Submit with the application the appropriate filing fee as shown in the
Planning Board fee schedule.
3.1.4 File written notice with the Town Clerk of the filing with the Board, using a
copy of Form A.
3.2 Contents of the Plan
The original drawing of the plan and the four prints shall contain the following
information:
3.2.1 Title, boundaries, north point, date and scale.
3.2.2 Name and address of owner and of the surveyor.
3.2.3 Seal and signature of the surveyor.
3.2.4 Names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax list.
3.2.5 The location of all structures, streets, ways, easements, and lots.
3.2.6 Location of all permanent bounds, identified as to whether existing or
proposed.
3.2.7 The entire area of land of which the division takes place, including all
parcels affected by an increase or decrease in size.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
10
3.2.8 Sufficient data to determine location, width, direction and length of every
street line, lot line and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the ground, with
areas of lots and lot numbers.
3.2.9 Zoning classification and location of any zoning district boundaries,
(including overlay districts) which may lie within the locus of the plan.
3.2.10 Frontage and area of any remaining adjoining land owned by the applicant.
3.2.11 The statement “Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required”
and sufficient space for the date and endorsement of the Board.
3.2.12 Notation of any special permit/variance issued as to the land or any
buildings thereon.
3.2.13 Evidence that each lot shown on the plan, or altered by the plan, meets at
least one of the four following criteria: (1) has all the frontage required under zoning;
(2) has been clearly marked on the plan to be either joined to or made part of an
adjacent lot; (3) contains a building which existed prior to 1938; or (4) constitutes an
existing parcel with no new lot division.
3.2.14 The statement “Planning Board Endorsement is not a determination as to
the conformance with Zoning Requirements.”
3.3 Determination of Frontage
In determining whether each and every lot shown on the plan has adequate
frontage, the Board will determine first, whether the lot directly abuts a public or private
way and second, whether the lot has direct, practical access from the abutting way.
3.3.1 In determining whether an existing private way is adequate to qualify a plan
as not constituting a subdivision, the Board shall consider the following:
(a) Is the right-of-way at least forty (40) feet wide and of reasonable horizontal
alignment?
(b) Does the existing horizontal and vertical alignment of the traveled way provide
safe visibility?
(c) Is the traveled way constructed at least eighteen (18) feet wide, with at least
eight (8) inches depth of gravel, and with adequate provisions for drainage?
(d) If the road could ever service more than five (5) dwellings, is it bituminous
surfaced or have provisions been made for such surfacing without cost to the
Town?
(e) Have provisions been made for public utilities without cost to the Town?
APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED
11
3.3.2 In determining whether a way has been used and maintained as a public
way, the Board shall require that written evidence be submitted by the Town Clerk of
public maintenance under vote of the Town and of continued substantial use by the
general public without permission of the landowners for at least twenty (20) years.
Sporadic use, use by a few persons, or use by agreement of the abutter(s) shall not
suffice.
3.3.3 Where direct access to a lot from the abutting street is not possible due to
steep grades, wetlands, watercourses or other physical constraints, the Planning
Board shall not consider the lot as having sufficient frontage to allow a division of land
without approval under the Subdivision Control Law.
3.4 Board Action
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall endorse the plan under the phrase “Approval Under the
Subdivision Control Law Not Required” within twenty-one (21) days of the date of
submission and shall notify the Town Clerk of its action. Said plan shall be returned to
the applicant.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, it shall give written notice to the Town Clerk and to the applicant of its
determination within twenty-one (21) days of submission of said plan. The plan shall be
returned to the applicant.
If the Board fails to act upon the plan or fails to notify the Town Clerk and the
applicant within twenty-one (21) days of submission, the plan shall be deemed not to
require approval under the Subdivision Control Law and the Board shall make such
endorsement on the plan. If the Board fails to endorse the plan, the Town Clerk shall
issue a certificate to that effect.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
12
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION PLAN
13
SECTION 4. PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF A
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN
4.1 When Required
A Preliminary Plan of a non-residential subdivision shall be submitted to the
Planning Board prior to the submission of a Definitive Plan.
For residential subdivisions, a Preliminary Plan is not required. However,
submission of a Preliminary Plan is strongly recommended in order to provide the
applicant, the Board, and other municipal agencies an opportunity to discuss and clarify
development issues before the applicant incurs the expense of preparing the Definitive
Plan.
4.2 Application Procedure
Any person who desires approval of a Preliminary Plan for the subdivision of land
shall:
4.2.1 File with the Board at its regular meeting, and with the Board of Health, an
application (Form B) and obtain acknowledgement of receipt of said application;
4.2.2 Submit with the application an original Preliminary Plan, in the form
described under Section 4.3, and the filing requirements as determined by the
Concord Planning Division;
4.2.3 Submit with the application, the appropriate application fee as shown in the
Planning Board fee schedule;
4.2.4 File a written notice with the Town Clerk by hand delivery or by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, accompanied by a copy of the completed application.
If notice is given by hand delivery, the Town Clerk will, if requested, provide a written
receipt.
4.3 Form and Contents
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn on a reproducible transparency at a suitable
scale and shall show sufficient information about the subdivision to form a clear basis for
discussion. Such information shall include the following:
4.3.1 Subdivision name or identifying title, boundaries, locus plan, north point,
date, scale, legend, and the title “Preliminary Plan”;
CONCORD SUBDIVSION RULES AND REGULATIONS
14
4.3.2 The names of the record owner and the applicant, if not the owner, and the
stamp and signature of the registered Land Surveyor or Registered Professional
Engineer;
4.3.3 Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax list, including
names of owners of land separated from the subdivision only by a street;
4.3.4 The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and any
public areas within the subdivision in a general manner;
4.3.5 Names, status (public or private), approximate locations and widths of
adjacent streets;
4.3.6 The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas
and dimensions;
4.3.7 Topography of the land in a general manner at a two-foot contour interval
based upon U.S.G.S. datum (NGVD29 or NAVD88) and S.C.S. soils maps, including
major features such as wooded areas, ditches, wetlands, and water bodies;
4.3.8 The volume of earth to be removed, if applicable, or a statement that no
earth is to be removed;
4.3.9 The zoning classification of all land shown on the plan including overlay
districts, i.e., the Flood Plain, Wetlands, and Groundwater Conservancy Districts; and
4.3.10 Proposed system of drainage (in a general manner), including the location
of all swamp, marsh, water bodies, streams, natural or manmade ditches, and public
and private flowage rights adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision.
4.4 Action by the Board
As soon as practicable after receipt of the application and plan, the Board will
study the Preliminary Plan and discuss it with the applicant. Within forty-five (45) days of
submission, the Board shall approve the Preliminary Plan with or without modifications
suggested by it or agreed upon by the applicant, or disapprove the Preliminary Plan
giving the reasons for such disapproval. The Board shall send notice of its actions to the
Town Clerk and the applicant.
4.5 Relationship of Preliminary Plan to Definitive Plan
Approval of a Preliminary Plan does not constitute approval of a subdivision, and a
Preliminary Plan cannot be recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION PLAN
15
If a Definitive Plan is submitted within seven months from the date of submission of
the Preliminary Plan, and if the Definitive Plan is approved by the Board, the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations in effect at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan shall
govern the Definitive Plan. If the Definitive Plan is approved, the zoning provisions in
effect at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan shall govern the land shown on
the plan for five years from the date of the Board’s endorsement of the Definitive
Subdivision Plan.
CONCORD SUBDIVSION RULES AND REGULATIONS
16
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
17
SECTION 5. DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
5.1 Application Procedure
Any person who desires approval of a Definitive Plan for a subdivision of land shall
file with the Board, at its regular meeting, and with the Board of Health, an application
form (Form C) with a Designer’s Certificate (Form D) and obtain acknowledgement of
receipt of said application. The application shall be accompanied by:
5.1.1 Copies of the Definitive Plan to the Planning Board and to the Board of
Health as specified in the filing requirements as determined by the Concord Planning
Division (the original drawing will only be needed if and when endorsement of the plan
takes place);
5.1.2 Copies of the street plans and profiles as specified in the filing requirements
as determined by the Concord Planning Division;
5.1.3 A site evaluation statement, if required (see Section 5.4);
5.1.4 A copy of the Abutters List Request Form documenting that a request has
been filed with the Assessor’s Office for a certified list of abutters;
5.1.5 A non-refundable filing fee as shown in the Planning Board fee schedule;
5.1.6 An application fee in the amount as shown in the Planning Board fee
schedule.
5.1.7 If applicable, a list of any waivers of the regulations being requested and
reasons for requesting such waivers.
The applicant shall submit to the Town Clerk by registered or certified mail, a
notice stating the date of Definitive Plan application submission to the Planning Board
and a copy of the completed application Form C.
5.2 Form and Contents of Plan
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or
Registered Professional Engineer in a form acceptable to the Middlesex South Registry of
Deeds. The drawing shall be to a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40’), or such
other scale as the Board may approve, on sheets 24 x 36 inches in size. Where a plan is
drawn on multiple sheets it must be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
18
The Definitive Plan shall contain the following information:
5.2.1 Subdivision name, north point, legend, date, scale and a locus plan at a
scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1”= 1,000’);
5.2.2 Name and address of record owner and of the applicant and the stamp and
signature of the Registered Land Surveyor and/or Registered Professional Engineer
and any other professionals engaged in the design, in each case certifying that those
elements of the plan for which they are responsible have been prepared in
accordance with these regulations;
5.2.3 Location and names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax
list, including owners of property on the opposite side of any streets abutting the
subdivision;
5.2.4 Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction, and length of
every existing and proposed street, way, easement, lot and boundary line, and to
establish those lines on the ground;
5.2.5 The area and dimensions of each proposed lot;
5.2.6 Lot numbers enclosed in a circle;
5.2.7 Location of all permanent monuments, identified as to whether existing or
proposed;
5.2.8 Location, names and present widths of streets bounding, approaching or
within reasonable proximity of the subdivision;
5.2.9 Existing and proposed water courses and water bodies;
5.2.10 Precise boundaries of any zoning district, including any overlay district
insofar as the boundaries touch on the subdivision;
5.2.11 Location of base flood elevation if encountered within one hundred (100)
feet of the subdivision;
5.2.12 Existing and proposed topography with two (2) foot contour intervals and an
indication of annual high water mark;
5.2.13 The volume of “earth” to be removed as defined in the Concord Zoning
Bylaw if applicable, or a statement indicating that no earth is to be removed;
5.2.14 Size and location of existing and proposed water supply mains and their
appurtenances; hydrants; sewer pipes and their appurtenances and/or sewage
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
19
disposal systems; storm drains and their appurtenances; all easements pertinent
thereto; and data on borings and soil test pits;
5.2.15 Indications of all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the land,
including zoning setbacks. In addition, the plan shall show the proposed location of all
buildings within the subdivision;
5.2.16 Suitable space for endorsement by the Board and certification by the Town
Clerk, with spaces for annotating dates of approval and endorsement;
5.2.17 On a Separate Sheet: Existing and proposed drainage, including drainage
areas inside the subdivision, areas outside the subdivision which drain into it, and the
route for all existing and proposed drainage discharging from the subdivision to the
primary receiving course or other body of water. Cross sections for each drainage
ditch or pond shall be included.
If surface water drains will discharge into adjacent existing streets or onto adjacent
properties not owned by the applicant, the applicant shall clearly indicate what course
the discharge shall take and shall present evidence from the Town Engineer and the
owner of the adjacent property that such discharge is satisfactory and permitted.
5.3 Street Plans and Profiles
For each street there shall be a separate plan at one inch equals forty feet (1” =
40’) and a profile at a horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet (1” = 40’) and a
vertical scale of one inch equals four feet (1” = 4’), showing the following data:
5.3.1 Existing grades along the center line and both side lines of the street;
5.3.2 Proposed finished center line grades with elevations at every 50-foot station,
location of vertical curves and gradient of even grades, with the rate of grade indicated;
5.3.3 Bearings and distances, radii and arcs, central angle and tangent distances
on all curves with stationing on the center line;
5.3.4 The grade of all streets intersecting the proposed street(s) shall be shown
for at least two hundred (200) feet on each side of the intersection of the proposed
street center line;
5.3.5 Proposed drainage, catch basins, manholes, pipes and any other drainage
facilities;
5.3.6 Existing and proposed sidewalks;
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
20
5.3.7 Typical sections of streets showing widths and grades of street lines,
pavement, sidewalks, grass strips, location and size of all utility lines, and the depth of
sidewalk and roadway pavements and base courses;
5.3.8 The location and elevation of the starting bench mark and at least two other
permanent bench mark. All elevations shall refer to U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey
Bench Marks.
5.4 Site Evaluation
A Site Evaluation shall be submitted for all subdivisions which create frontage for
six or more lots.
The Board may require that certain elements of the site evaluation be prepared by
qualified experts. The Board may require that certain of the following information is
necessary to evaluate a plan for less than six (6) lots as well, because of special
circumstances relating to the location, natural features, or the proposal itself.
The Site Evaluation shall consist of the following:
5.4.1 A set of plans at a uniform scale, encompassing the entire subdivision on a
single sheet not larger than 24” x 36” showing:
(a) Boundaries of the subdivision, existing and proposed streets, and proposed lot
lines;
(b) Topography at two (2) foot contour intervals, with graphic drainage analysis;
location of all existing structures, including fences and stone walls; and location
of all surface water bodies, wetlands, and aquifer or recharge areas for existing
public water supplies;
(c) Vegetative cover analysis, including identification of general cover type
(wooded, cropland, brush, etc.); location of all major tree groupings and
outstanding trees, important wildlife habitats, and identification of areas not to
be disturbed by construction;
(d) Soil types (based on the U.S. Department of Agriculture soils study),
approximate groundwater level, and location and results of soil percolation and
other subsurface tests;
(e) Visual analysis, including analysis of scenic vistas and the visual impact of the
subdivision on other properties.
5.4.2 A narrative statement, with references to the above plan as necessary,
documenting:
(a) Impact of the subdivision upon surface and groundwater quality and level;
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
21
(b) Effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding botanical features, scenic or
historic sites or buildings;
(c) Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion control measures to
support proposed development without erosion, silting or other instability;
(d) Estimated increase of peak run-off caused by altered surface conditions, and
methods to be used to return water to the ground;
(e) Description of proposed alterations of wetlands or flood plain areas;
(f) A report estimating the traffic flow at peak periods in relation to existing traffic on
the streets in and adjacent to the subdivision, and the effect of the project on
public services such as water, sewer, schools, police, fire, waste disposal, and
recreational facilities;
(g) A summary tabulation of the total area being subdivided, the total area of all
lots, the total area dedicated for streets and drainage or utilities, and the total
area reserved for recreation, parks or other open land;
(h) A projection of the direct, current Town costs and revenues associated with this
development;
(i) An analysis of the sight distances at the intersections of the proposed street(s)
with any other street(s);
(j) Impact of the subdivision on any historical or cultural resources located within
one hundred (100) feet of the proposed development as identified in the Survey
of Historical and Architectural Resources and Historic Resources Masterplan;
(k) Impact of the subdivision on any open space or natural resources located within
one hundred (100) feet of the proposed development as identified in the Town
of Concord Open Space Plan.
5.5 Review Procedures
5.5.1 Application Review: Within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the
Definitive Plan Application with the Planning Board, the Town Planner shall notify the
Planning Board and the applicant in writing of any missing or incomplete information in
the application. At that time, the applicant may withdraw an incomplete application by
notifying the Planning Board and the Town Clerk, in writing, of his decision to do so. If
the applicant withdraws his application, he shall forfeit the nonrefundable filing fee.
If the applicant does not withdraw an incomplete application within seven (7) days
of notification of incompleteness, the Board shall proceed to advertise and hold a
Public Hearing on the application as submitted. No additional information or materials
shall be accepted for review after the receipt of the application is acknowledged by the
Planning Board.
5.5.2 Public Hearing: Upon determination by the Board that the application for
approval of the Definitive Plan is complete, or that it is incomplete and the applicant
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
22
has failed to withdraw the application, the Board shall set a date for the public hearing
and so notify the applicant.
Notice of the hearing shall be arranged by the Board, at the applicant’s expense,
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in Concord in each of two (2)
successive weeks, the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days before
the day of such hearing; and by mailing, return receipt requested, not less than ten
(10) days before the date of the hearing, a copy of the advertisement to all owners of
land abutting upon the land included in the plan as appearing on the most recent tax
list.
5.5.3 Report of the Board of Health: The Board of Health shall report, within fortyfive
(45) days after the plan is filed, to the Planning Board in writing its approval or
disapproval of said plan and, in report, and where possible, shall make
recommendations for adjustment. Failure to report within forty-five (45) days after
filing shall be deemed approval by the Board of Health. If the proposed subdivision is
to be serviced by the Concord sewage system, failure to so report within forty-five (45)
days after filing shall also be deemed approval by the Board of Health.
Extreme care shall be practiced in the layout of a subdivision in an unsewered
area. The extent of soil evaluation shall be determined by the Concord Board of
Health Agent based on the Town of Concord Soils Map and whatever other soil
information is available. The tests which may be required include deep test holes,
percolation tests and test borings, and the number of tests required shall be
determined by the Board of Health.
A permit to construct an individual subsurface absorption area must be obtained
from the Board of Health for each individual lot not served by the Concord sewage
system, and a condition shall be inscribed on the plan as follows: “No building or
structure shall be built or placed on any lot without a permit from the Board of Health.”
5.5.4 Plan Review by Other Town Officials: Prior to approval of any Definitive
Plan, the Planning Board shall give due regard to the reports of the Concord Public
Works, the Department of Planning and Land Management, the Fire Chief, the Police
Chief, and the Superintendent of the Concord Municipal Light Plant.
Where any deviations from the design requirements specified by these Rules and
Regulations or the Town of Concord’s design standards and construction
specifications are indicated on the plan, the Town Engineer shall so notify the
Planning Board and shall provide a written statement approving or disapproving of
said deviation.
The Town Engineer shall also provide written estimates of the cost of performing
the various items of work described in the plans so that the Board may determine the
proper amount of security as required in Section 6.
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
23
5.5.5 Action by the Board: After the Public Hearing, the Board will approve,
modify and approve, or disapprove the plan as submitted. Criteria for action by the
Board shall be the following:
(a) Completeness and technical adequacy of the plans and supporting materials;
(b) Determination that development at the proposed location does not entail
unwarranted hazard to safety, health and convenience of future residents of the
development or of others because of possible traffic hazards, or environmental
degradation which could be avoided or ameliorated through an alternative plan;
(c) Conformity with the design and construction standards described in these
Rules and Regulations and practices, specifications and standards required
and approved by Concord Public Works;
(d) Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements;
(e) Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law as described in
G.L.c. 41, section 81-M.
5.5.6 Filing of Decision: Where a Preliminary Plan has been duly submitted
and acted upon or where forty-five (45) days elapsed without action on said
Preliminary Plan, the Board shall file with the Town Clerk a certificate of its action on
the Definitive Plan within ninety (90) days of receipt of the Definitive Plan application,
and shall send notice of its action by certified mail to the applicant.
In the case of a residential subdivision, where no Preliminary Plan has been
submitted or where forty-five (45) days did not elapse between submission of a
Preliminary Plan and submission of the Definitive Plan, the Board shall file with the
Town Clerk a certificate of its action on the Definitive Plan within one-hundred and
thirty-five (135) days of receipt of the Definitive Plan application, and shall send notice
of its action by certified mail to the applicant.
5.5.7 Performance Guarantee: Before endorsement of approval, the Board shall
require that timely construction of ways and installation of municipal services be
secured by one, or in part by one and in part by another, of the methods described in
Sections 5.5.7 a, b, and c, which method(s) may be selected and from time to time be
varied by the applicant. The sufficiency of the amount of security shall be determined
by the Board. The alternative methods are:
(a) By a proper performance bond or a deposit of money or negotiable securities,
in an amount determined by the Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of the
construction of ways and installation of municipal services. Each bond or
deposit shall be contingent upon such construction and installation being
completed within such period as the Board shall determine. Each bond filed
shall be approved as to form, manner of execution and sureties by the Town
Manager and all deposit agreements and securities shall be approved as to
form and manner of execution by the Finance Director. (See Form G for
suggested form.)
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
24
(b) By a covenant running with the land, which shall be executed and recorded by
the owner of record, whereby such ways and services shall be provided to
serve any lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed by other than
mortgage deed, subject, however to the rights and limitations specified in
G.L.c. 41, Section 81-U. (See Form E for suggested form.)
(c) By delivery to the Board of an agreement executed by the applicant and the
lender after recording of a first mortgage covering the premises shown on the
plan or a portion thereof given as security for advances to be made to the
applicant by the lender. This agreement shall provide for retention by the
lender of funds sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure the construction
of ways and the installation of municipal services.
The agreement shall provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made
to the applicant upon completion of various stages of the work and shall also provide
that in the event the work is not completed within the time agreed to by the applicant
that any funds remaining shall be available to the Town for completion of the
outstanding work.
5.5.8 Endorsement and Filing of Documents: The Board’s approval of a Definitive
Subdivision Plan, if granted, will be endorsed on the plan only after the expiration of
the twenty (20) day appeal period, certification by the Town Clerk that no appeals
have been taken and submission to the Planning Board an electronic version of the
plan in a format acceptable to the Town Engineer.
Following recording of the endorsed plan in the South Middlesex Registry of
Deeds by the applicant, the applicant shall provide the Board with three (3) complete
sets of prints of the recorded plan and one copy of the recorded covenants and
restrictions. The Planning Board will transmit one set of the plans to the Building
Inspector and one set to the Town Engineer.
5.6 Release of Performance Guarantee
5.6.1 Written Request: Upon completion of improvements required by these
Regulations, the applicant may request either partial or full release of the bond,
deposit or covenant by sending a statement of completion and a request for release
by registered mail to the Planning Board and to the Town Clerk. The statement will
include:
(a) Written evidence from the Town Engineer that the streets and drainage
conform to the Board’s requirements in accordance with the approved
Definitive Plan.
(b) Written evidence from the Town Engineer that the underground wiring, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, hydrants and fire alarm conform to
specifications and the Board’s requirements in accordance with the approved
Definitive Plan.
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
25
(c) Written evidence from the Town Engineer that as-built drawings have been
submitted and accepted.
(d) Written evidence from the Town Engineer that the improvements have been
exposed to one complete winter environment (Dec.1 – April 30) without
damage, or that damage, if incurred, has been repaired to the satisfaction of
the Town Engineer.
(e) Written evidence from the Tree Warden that installation of street trees and
other plantings as described in Section 6 have been completed satisfactorily
and that the warranty has been assigned to the Town.
5.6.2 Partial Release: Prior to final release of security, the Board may, at its
discretion, grant up to three (3) partial releases from the required security for partial
completion of improvements provided that:
(a) No reduction shall reduce the bond, deposit or covenant to a value below the
estimated cost of completing the unfinished portions of the improvements.
(b) No lots shall be released from a covenant unless construction of ways and
installation of services for those lots have been completed or another form of
security has been substituted, sufficient to complete said way and service.
Form F shall be submitted when applying for a release of lots from a covenant.
(c) No partial release of security shall be granted until the Board has received
written verification from the Town Engineer that substantially more than fifty
(50) per cent of the required improvements have been completed satisfactorily.
(d) No partial release shall reduce the security by more than fifty (50) per cent of
the amount being held at the time the release is requested.
5.6.3 Final Release of Security: If the Board determines that the required
improvements have been completed in accordance with these Rules and Regulations,
it will release the interest of the Town in any bond or deposit and return the bond or
deposit to the applicant, or release the covenant by appropriate instrument, duly
acknowledged. (Form F is suggested.)
However, even though all improvements covered by a bond, deposit or covenant
have been competed, the Board may, upon recommendation of the Town Engineer,
refuse to release the security if completion of construction on any remaining
undeveloped or partially developed lots poses a substantial risk or injury to the
covered improvements.
5.6.4 Refusal of Release: If the Board determines that required construction or
installation has not been completed, it will specify the details wherein the construction
or installation fails to comply with its Rules and Regulations in a notice sent by
registered mail to the applicant and delivered to the Town Clerk. If the Board fails to
so notify the Town Clerk and the applicant within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a
request for release of security, as described in Section 5.6.1, the deposit or bond shall
be returned and any covenant shall become void. In the event that the forty-five (45)
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
26
days period expires without such specification or without release of the security, the
Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged.
5.7 Rescission
Failure of an applicant to record the Definitive Plan within six (6) months of its
endorsement by the Board; or to comply with the construction schedule incorporated
into the performance agreement or to initiate construction of improvements or sell lots in
a subdivision within seven years of the approval of the Definitive Plan; or to comply with
all applicable Zoning Bylaw requirements and requirements of the Natural Resources
Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act; or to comply with the approved plans
and any conditions of approval, shall constitute reason for the Board to consider
rescission of its approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth
in G.L.c. 41, Section 81-W.
5.8 Ownership and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
5.8.1 Acceptance: Approval by the Board of a Definitive Subdivision Plan, shall
not constitute acceptance by the Town of any streets, sidewalks, or other
improvements within a subdivision.
5.8.2 Ownership: Applicant shall retain title of the fee of each street, path or
easement in, or appurtenant to, the subdivision until conveyed to the Town and shall
maintain and repair the streets and drainage facilities in a manner satisfactory to
Concord Public Works during that period.
Prior to final release of security, the applicant shall submit to Concord Public Works
all necessary documentation for street acceptance, including plans in a form
acceptable to the Registry of Deeds, legal description, easements, a list of owners and
mortgagees of lots having rights in the street, and grants of right necessary.
5.9 Completion within Three Years
The Board may impose as a condition of approval on a Definitive Plan that
construction of all ways and all installation of municipal services shown on the plan be
completed within three (3) years of the date of approval. If the construction and
installation is not completed within the three (3) year period, the approval shall
automatically lapse and no way shall be laid out, constructed or opened for public use
unless and until a new Definitive Plan application has been filed in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations then in effect and the new plan has been approved by the
Board.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
27
SECTION 6. REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
6.1 General Requirements
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width and construction to
accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access for police, emergency, fire
fighting, snow removal, sanitation and road maintenance equipment; to coordinate streets
so as to compose a convenient system; to avoid undue financial burdens for present and
future taxpayers; and to avoid potential natural or technological hazards or nuisances,
including the problems associated with uncontrolled storm water run-off, the Planning
Board has established the design of subdivisions set forth in this Section.
In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivisions
shall conform to the provisions of the Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw, the Regulations of
the Concord Board of Health, and the practices, specifications and standards required
and approved by Concord Public Works.
6.2 Character of the Land
6.2.1 Protection of Natural Features: In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider
shall give due regard for all natural features such as large trees, watercourses, scenic
or historic spots, aquifers, flood plains, habitats of rare or endangered species, and
similar community assets which, if preserved, would add attractiveness and value to
the subdivision. These features shall be left undisturbed wherever practical and the
Board may waive design requirements in order to protect important natural features.
6.2.2 Unsuitable Land: Land which the Planning Board finds to be unsuitable for
development due to flooding, improper drainage or adverse drainage, adverse
topography, poor soils, bedrock, location of utility easements, or other features which
the Board has reason to believe would be harmful to the safety, health and general
welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding
area, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate measures are formulated
by the subdivider and approved by the Board to eliminate any short-term or long-term
impacts created by development of the unsuitable land.
6.2.3 Subdivision Straddling Municipal Boundaries: The Board will not approve
a subdivision of land where access to the subdivision tract in Concord is through land
in another Town, unless the access is an accepted public way at the time the
subdivision application is submitted. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to
cross municipal boundaries.
6.2.4 Self-Imposed Restrictions: If, as part of a subdivision application, the
subdivider or owner places voluntary restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision which are greater than the requirements of these Regulations or of the
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
28
Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw, such restrictions or references thereto shall be
indicated on the Definitive Plan and recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of
Deeds.
6.3 Lots
6.3.1 Lot Arrangement: Lots shall be arranged so that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography, soils, bedrock, improper drainage, or
other conditions in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the
Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw, or in providing practical, feasible driveway access to
the building on such lots.
6.3.2 Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
of the Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw. Dimensions of corner lots should be large
enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback
from both streets. Depth and width of properties laid out for business or industrial use
shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required by
the Zoning Bylaw.
6.3.3 Soil Preservation and Final Grading: The Board may condition approval of a
Definitive Plan by requiring that no certificate of occupancy be issued for a building in
the subdivision until final grading of the lot has been completed in accordance with the
Definitive Plan, and the entire lot recovered with topsoil for an average depth of at least
six (6) inches, except for that portion of the lot where the grade has not been changed
or the vegetation seriously damaged. The topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding and/or
sodding.
6.3.4 Lot Drainage: Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all proposed buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be designed so as to avoid
concentration of stormwater drainage from each lot to adjacent lots or to the street.
6.3.5 Debris and Waste: No debris, junk, rubbish, or other non-biodegradable
waste materials shall be buried on any land in the subdivision or left on any lot or on
the street right of way, and removal of same shall be required prior to final release of
any covenant or security. Burial of biodegradable materials on the site shall be subject
to approval of the Board of Health and the Town Engineer. The burial locations(s) and
description of buried materials shall be noted on the as-built drawings. The Planning
Board may require that the description and location of buried materials be recorded in
the Registry of Deeds prior to release of affected lots for sale or building.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
29
6.4 Construction Specifications
The practices, specifications and standards required and approved by Concord
Public Works will be used as a guide to required construction specifications unless
otherwise directed. The Town Engineer will determine if the standards have been met.
6.5 General Construction Procedures
6.5.1 Notification: No step in construction of required improvements shall
commence until the Town Engineer and the Police Department have been notified at
least two (2) business days in advance of the beginning steps.
6.5.2 Inspection: Each phase or step in the construction of required
improvements shall be inspected and approved in writing by the Town Engineer or his
representative. As a minimum, the subdivider shall request an inspection at the
following stages of development:
(a) Following installation of all underground drainage and utilities, prior to
backfilling;
(b) Following preparations of the street subgrade and shoulders;
(c) Following spreading and compaction of the gravel base, prior to application of
the binder course on the street;
(d) Immediately prior to and during the application and compaction of the surface
course on the street and, if required, on the sidewalk, and;
(e) Following completion of all improvements and installation of bounds.
The subdivider shall not proceed with construction of any of the above stages of
development until the Town Engineer has signed off on the previous stage.
The Town Engineer may require inspection at such other intervals as he may deem
necessary to assure proper construction of improvements. In addition, the Town
Engineer may require periodic inspection reports from the subdivider’s engineer.
6.6 Construction Methods and Materials
6.6.1 Clearing and Grubbing: The area between property lines within the right of
way shall be cleared and grubbed except for those trees which are intended to be
preserved as street trees.
6.6.2 Earth Excavation: All excavation shall conform to the lines and grades
shown on the approved Definitive Plan. Where mucky soils, ledge, or clay is
encountered within the right-of-way, it shall be removed entirely and, where necessary,
replaced with sand and gravel. Where water is encountered, or is expected to be
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
30
encountered, within four (4) feet of the finished grade of the street, subsurface
drainage, of a design acceptable to the Town Engineer, shall be constructed.
6.6.3 Ledge Excavation: Boulders or ledge shall be removed to a depth of at
least twenty-four (24) inches below final grade when within the pavement area.
6.6.4 Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall not exceed four (4) feet unless the
Planning Board votes to waive this provision. Where street and shoulder grades
require more than two (2) feet cut or fill, the Planning Board may require retaining walls
along abutting property lines unless a suitable alternative is shown.
6.6.5 Materials: Specifications and standards may be obtained through the
Concord Public Works.
6.7 Streets – Basic Requirements
6.7.1 Frontage: No subdivision shall be approved unless the land to be
subdivided shall have frontage on an existing public street or on an existing private way
in the Town of Concord, which way shall be improved by the subdivider to meet the
minimum design and construction requirements set forth in this section.
6.7.2 Improving Existing Streets: Where a subdivision borders an existing, but
inadequately constructed public street, the subdivider may be required to improve the
street bordering the subdivision tract or provide the land necessary for future
improvements for that portion bordering the subdivision. Land used for or reserved for
future street improvements may not be counted in satisfying the yard and area
requirements of the Town of Concord Zoning Bylaw.
6.7.3 Topography and Arrangement: Streets shall be designed to conform as
closely as possible to the original topography of the site, but at the same time, a
combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
6.7.4 Street Names: Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in
spelling from other street names in the Town so as not to cause confusion. A street
which is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name. The
Planning Board, after consultation with the Fire Chief and the Historical Commission,
shall have final authority over the names of streets in a subdivision.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
31
6.8 Streets – Design Standards
6.8.1 Table IA Minimum Design Standards for Local Streets
(Design Speed 25 MPH)
ZONING DISTRICT
Res. AA Res. A&B Res. C Non-Res.
Min. R.O.W. Width 50’ 50’ 50’ 50’
Min. Pavement Width 22’ 22’ 26’ 26’
Max. Grade 8% 8% 7% 7%
Min. Grade 1% 1% 1% 1%
Min. Sight Distance 150’ 150’ 250’ 250’
Min. Radius of Curve 225’ 225’ 225’ 225’
Min. Length of Vertical Curve 100’, but not less than 20’ for each algebraic
difference in grade
Min. Curb Radius at Intersection 30’ 30’ 30’ 30’
Cul-de-Sacs
R.O. W. Diameter 150’ 150’ 150’ 170’
Pavement Width 22’ 22’ 22’ 30’
Center Island Diameter 76’ 76’ 76’ 90’
Outside Paving Diameter 120’ 120’ 120’ 150’
Max. Length of Cul-de-Sac 600’ 600’ 600’ 600’
Min. Length of Cul-de-Sac 200’ 150’ 125’ 80’
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
32
6.8.2 Table IB Minimum Design Standards for Collector Streets
(Design Speed 35 MPH)
ZONING DISTRICT
Res. AA Res. A&B Res. C Non-Res.
Min. R.O.W. Width 50’ 50’ 50’ 50’
Min. Pavement Width 26’ 26’ 28’ 28’
Max. Grade 7% 7% 7% 7%
Min. Grade 1% 1% 1% 1%
Min. Sight Distance 250’ 250’ 250’ 250’
Min. Radius of Curve 450’ 450’ 450’ 450’
Min. Length of Vertical Curve 200’, but not less than 40’ for each algebraic
difference in grade
Min. Curb Radius at Intersection 30’ 30’ 30’ 30’
Temporary Cul-de-Sacs
R.O. W. Diameter 150’ 150’ NA NA
Pavement Width 22’ 22’ NA NA
Center Island Diameter 76’ 76’ NA NA
Outside Paving Diameter 120’ 120’ NA NA
Max. Length of Temporary
Cul-de-Sac
1000’ 1000’ NA NA
Min. Length of Cul-de-Sac 200’ 150’ 125’ 80’
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
33
6.8.3 Table IC Minimum Design Standards for Arterial Streets
(Design Speed 45 MPH)
ZONING DISTRICT
Res. and Non Res.
Min. R.O.W. Width 60’
Min. Pavement Width 36’
Max. Grade 6%
Min. Grade 1%
Min. Sight Distance 400’
Min. Radius of Curve 800’
Min. Length of Vertical Curve 350’, but not less than 70’ for
each algebraic difference in
grade
Min. Curb Radius at Intersection 30’
Cul-de-Sacs NA
6.8.4 Excess Right-of-ways: Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designated in Tables IA, IB, and IC may be required, whenever, due to topography
additional width is necessary to provide adequate side slopes. Such slopes shall not
be steeper than 3:1.
6.8.5 Cul-de-sacs - Temporary: Subdivision design shall provide for continuation
of streets between adjacent properties when such continuation promotes the
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection and emergency vehicle access,
efficient snow removal service, and efficient provision of utilities, and/or where such
continuation is in conformance with the Town’s Long Range Plan.
6.8.6 Cul-de-sacs – Permanent: Where a street will not extend beyond the
subdivision boundaries and its continuation is not required for access to adjoining
property, the terminus shall not be nearer the subdivision boundary than fifty (50) feet.
A permanent dead-end street shall be provided with a cul-de-sac turnaround in
accordance with Section 6.8.1 Table IA.
6.8.7 Cul-de-sacs – Minimum Length: The minimum length of dead-end streets
shall not be less than the minimum lot frontage in the zoning district in which
proposed. The required length shall be measured from the nearest right-of-way line of
the intersecting street to the nearest point of the first curve of the outside radius of the
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
34
turnaround as measured along the shortest right-of-way line of the proposed dead-end
street exclusive of intersection radii.
6.8.8 Reserve Strips: Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining
property shall not be permitted except where, in the opinion of the Board, such strips
shall be in the public interest.
6.8.9 Intersections: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles, and in no case at less than a seventy-five (75) degree angle.
New intersections at one side of an existing street shall align directly with any existing
intersection at the opposite side of the street whenever feasible. Street intersection
jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be
permitted.
Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade (not greater than two (2) per cent)
for a distance of at least sixty (60) feet from the intersecting street.
6.9 Curbing
As a minimum, a continuous, low-profile, modified Cape Cod berm shall be
provided as an integral part of all new streets. On cul-de-sac turnarounds and at
intersections with collector or local streets, sloped granite curbing shall be required.
Vertical granite curb shall be required at the back of catch basins, on grades over five (5)
per cent, and at intersections with arterial streets.
Reference is made to detail #IA, “Vertical Granite Curb”; detail #2B, “Modified Cape
Cod Berm”; and detail #3C, “Sloped Granite Edging” appended to these Regulations in
Appendix A.
6.10 Sidewalks
6.10.1 Requirement: Sidewalks will be required on both sides of the street along
all arterials. Sidewalks will be required on one side of the street along all local and
collector streets unless the Planning Board determines that pedestrian movement is
otherwise provided for.
6.10.2 Design Standards: All sidewalks and ramps shall meet the most current
ADA/MAAB standards. The design and construction of sidewalks shall be based upon
the nature and density of development as shown in the following Table:
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
35
Table II
Minimum Design Standards for Sidewalks
Street
Classification Zoning District
Residential Non-Residential
Res. AA Res. A&B Res. C Business
District
Non-Res.
Other
Local bituminous
meandering1
or standard2
5’ wide
bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
concrete
standard
6’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
Collector bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
concrete
standard
6’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
Minor Arterial bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
bituminous
meandering
or standard
5’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
concrete
standard
6’ wide
concrete
standard
5’ wide
Major Arterial bituminous
standard
5’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
bituminous
standard
5’ wide
concrete
standard
6’ wide
concrete
standard
5’ wide
1Meandering – follows existing terrain and major features such as stone walls, large trees, rock
outcroppings, etc. Requires approval of the Planning Board.
2Standard – uniform width parallel to the street.
6.10.3 Exceptions: Where new sidewalks are to be constructed in short sections
to connect existing sidewalks, the new sections shall be constructed to the same
specifications as the existing sidewalks.
6.11 Monuments
6.11.1 Requirements: Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all
points of change in direction or curvature of streets, at two (2) property corners of all
new lots, and at any other point where, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
permanent monuments are necessary.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
36
6.11.2 Spacing: Monuments located in the street right-of-way shall be spaced so
as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being contained wholly within the
street right-of-way limits. On curves, the maximum interval shall be one thousand
(1000) feet.
6.11.3 Materials: Monuments shall be standard granite markers of not less than
four (4) feet in length and not less than six (6) inches in width and breadth, and shall
have a drillhole in the center. Monuments shall be set flush with the final grade.
6.11.4 Certification: No permanent monuments shall be installed until all
construction which would destroy or disturb the monuments is completed. Placement
and location of bounds are to be certified by a registered land surveyor after installation
of the street, and shall be shown on the as-built drawings.
6.11.5 Datum: All monuments shall be assigned (X,Y) coordinates based
upon the Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate System. These coordinates shall be
listed on the plan either by labeling individual bounds or in tabular form.
6.12 Utilities – Basic Requirements
6.12.1 Installation: All utility lines, water stops, and/or other subsurface facilities
within street right-of-ways shall be installed prior to the preparation of the street subbase.
6.12.2 Identification: The subdivider shall provide and install utility identification
tape at all underground utility installations. The tape shall be placed in the trench a
minimum of twelve (12) inches above the pipe, conduit, or cable and not closer than
twelve (12) inches to the final grade.
Identification tape for utilities shall be a durable, non-biodegradable plastic,
approximately six (6) inches wide by four-thousandths (.004) inches in thickness. The
following colors shall be used:
Orange – Communication cables or conduit, alarm or signal lines
Yellow – Gas, oil, petroleum, steam or other gaseous material
Green – Sewer and drain lines
Blue – Water and irrigation
Red – Electric power lines, cables, conduit or light cables
6.12.3 Easements: Where necessary, the Planning Board shall require perpetual,
unobstructed easements for sewers, storm drains, power lines, and water mains. Such
easements shall be a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and shall be indicated on the
Definitive Plan.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
37
6.13 Storm Drainage
Storm water run-off shall be disposed of through a combination of storage and
controlled release. Drainage systems shall be designed according to the following
principles and criteria.
6.13.1 Peak Flows: Property shall be developed in such a manner as to maximize
storm water recharge on the site and to minimize direct overland run-off into adjoining
streets and watercourses. Peak flows and run-off at the boundaries of the subdivision
shall be no higher following development than before development.
6.13.2 Capacity: Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to handle all
storm water run-off presently flowing through the subdivision, as well as to dispose of
any additional run-off generated by the proposed development up to and including the
run-off from a one hundred (100) year storm using the following methods:
(a) The flow from storms of up to a twenty-five (25) year frequency and the twentyfour
(24) hour duration shall be conveyed through the subdivision site, following
natural drainage patterns wherever possible, in a manner which will maintain
the ratio of run-off to infiltration at the same percentage as under natural
conditions;
(b) Detention facilities shall be provided to handle all run-off which exceeds the
percolation capacity of the site, up to and including the run-off generated by the
one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm.
6.13.3 Release Rate: The combination of storage and design release rate shall not
result in a storage duration of greater than seventy-two (72) hours. Maximum depth of
storm water retention areas shall be four (4) feet. Detention area side slopes shall be
kept as close as possible to natural land contours, ten (10) per cent or less wherever
possible.
6.13.4 Outlet Structures: Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as
possible and shall require little or no attention for proper operation.
6.13.5 Emergency Overflow: Each storm water detention area shall be provided
with a method of emergency overflow in the event of a storm in excess of the one
hundred (100) year frequency type.
6.13.6 Natural Patterns: Natural drainage patterns shall be used wherever
possible. All existing watercourses shall be left open unless approval to close them is
obtained through the Natural Resources Commission. All new open watercourses
shall be appropriately seeded, sodded, paved or riprapped.
6.13.7 Alteration: Any alteration of land on the site shall be such that changes in
existing patterns of drainage shall not adversely affect properties outside the
subdivision by increasing the amount or rate of peak flow.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
38
6.13.8 Structured Systems: Where soil conditions or topography make natural
drainage systems impractical and where existing drains in adjacent streets or
easements are adequate in capacity to accommodate the drainage flow from the
subdivision, a structured system shall be used and appropriate connection to the
existing Town drainage system shall be made.
6.13.9 Calculations: Hydraulic calculations, prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer, shall be submitted to substantiate all design features of any
proposed drainage system. Computations for run-off shall be made in accordance with
standard engineering practice, acceptable to the Town Engineer, and the method of
calculation shall be noted.
6.13.10 Drainage Easements: Where it is necessary to carry drainage across lots
within the subdivision, storm water easements shall be provided, of such width and
construction as will be adequate to accommodate the volume and velocity of the runoff.
However, in no case shall the easements be less than twenty (20) feet in width.
When a proposed drainage system will carry water across land outside the
subdivision boundaries to an approved outfall, appropriate drainage rights shall be
secured by the subdivider and shall be referenced on the Definitive Plan.
6.14 Water Facilities
6.14.1 Installation: The subdivider shall be responsible for installing water
facilities in accordance with the current Rules and Regulations, specifications, and
standards of the Water and Sewer Division. Connections from the main to the exterior
line of the street right-of-way shall be constructed for each lot unless the Board of
Health has approved individual wells.
6.14.2 Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire
hydrants shall be located not more than four hundred (400) feet apart, and shall be
approved for location by the Fire Chief.
6.14.3 Extensions: Reasonable provisions shall be made for extension of the
water main to adjoining property, including installation of water gates and manholes if
necessary. Appropriate easements may be required.
6.15 Sewer
Within the existing or proposed sewer service area of Town, the subdivider shall be
responsible for installing sewer system facilities in accordance with the current Rules and
Regulations, specifications, and standards of the Water and Sewer Division.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
39
6.16 Electric and Communication Lines
6.16.1 Installation: All electric and communication lines shall be installed
underground. Communication lines shall include, but not be limited to telephone, fire
alarm, and cable TV.
6.16.2 Electric Lines: The electrical power distribution shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications of the Concord Municipal Light Plant (CMLP) in
effect at the time.
6.16.3 Fire Alarm: A fire alarm system shall be installed in conformity with the
National Fire Protection Association Standards. Such system shall include one fire
alarm box for each one thousand (1000) feet of street, or any fraction thereof, within
the subdivision. The location of all fire alarm boxes shall be approved by the Fire Chief
and shown on the Definitive Plan.
6.17 Trees and Other Plantings
6.17.1 Location: Street trees shall be required to be planted, at the subdivider’s
expense, on all streets within the tract being subdivided. Trees shall be planted within
the street right-of-way, between the area designated for sidewalks and the sideline of
the street pavement and shall be spaced at intervals of approximately fifty (50) feet on
center, but no closer than thirty-five (35) feet.
6.17.2 Species: The species of street trees selected shall be of Zone 6 hardiness
and shall be of licensed nursery stock with good root development and branching
characteristics, and with a one-year warranty. Existing trees may be preserved as
street trees if inspected and approved by the Tree Warden
6.17.3 Size: The minimum size of street trees shall be two and one-half (2 ½)
inches in caliper, measured four (4) feet from the ground level, and eight (8) to ten (10)
feet of height in place.
6.17.4 Planting: Street trees shall be planted in holes at least six (6) inches
deeper than the height of and one and one-half (1 ½) times as wide as the root ball.
Trees shall be planted at their previous depth in good quality topsoil and shall be
securely staked.
6.17.5 Cul-de-sac Plantings: The center island of a cul-de-sac shall be landscaped
using one of the following options:
(a) Planting of perennial grass by either sod or seed on a six (6) inch depth of loam;
(b) Planting of nursery-grown, well-rooted shrubs and ground cover;
(c) Planting of street trees, shrubs and perennial grass, or;
(d) Retaining existing vegetation, if approved by the Planning Board.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
40
6.17.6 Slopes: All cut and fill slopes within or contiguous to the street right-of-way
shall be planted with suitable, well-rooted, low growing plant materials as determined
by the Concord Public Works. A wood chip or comparable mulch shall be used with
ground cover plants to minimize erosion. Planting of sod may be required.
6.17.7 Cleared Areas: All cleared areas of the street right-of-way, not to be
planted with groundcover, and all disturbed area within public easements, shall be
loamed with not less than six (6) inches compacted depth of good quality loam and
seeded with turf grass seed or such mixture as may be approved by the Concord
Public Works. Seeding shall be done at appropriate times of the year and in a manner
to insure growth of grass.
6.18 Street Signs
Street signs shall be installed at all intersections in conformity with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and the specifications of the Public Works
Commission. Until such time as each street is accepted by the Town as a public way, the
sign posts at the intersection of such street with any other street shall have affixed thereto
a sign designating such street as a private way.
6.19 Street Lighting
Provisions shall be made for street lighting connections at locations determined by
the Superintendent of the Concord Municipal Light Plant (CMLP). Prior to endorsement of
the plan, the applicant shall deposit with the CMLP a sum of money estimated to cover the
cost of the required fixtures and their installation.
6.20 Reservation of Land for Public Purpose
The Planning Board may require the designation of a portion of the subdivision
tract for reservation for a period of three years for municipal purposes. Reservation of land
shall not be unreasonable in relation to the size of the tract being subdivided and to the
prospective uses of the reserved land.
If the Board reserves land, a notation shall be made on the plan concerning the
area being reserved and the requirements that no street, utilities, building, or other
improvements within the boundaries of the land being reserved may be made without the
Board’s approval for a period of three years from the date of endorsement of the plan.
During the three year reservation period, the Town may elect to acquire any or all of
the reserved land and shall justly compensate the owner for the land acquired. If the Town
does not elect to acquire the land within the three year reservation period, the subdivider
may proceed with improvements in accordance with the approved subdivision plan.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
41
6.21 Reservation of Land for Housing Purposes
In order to serve the public purposes of the Inclusionary Housing Bylaw adopted by
the 1992 Town Meeting as Article 61 of addressing the Town’s affordable housing needs
and of encouraging the availability of housing in the Town for persons of all income levels,
the Planning Board shall require, as a condition of approval of each new residential
subdivision, the reservation of land within the subdivision for purchase by the Town or its
designee, in accordance with the following specific requirements, procedures and
exceptions:
6.21.1 Minimum Tract Size: The requirement for reservation of land shall apply to
all tracts containing at least five (5) times the area required for a single family house lot
in the underlying zoning district.
6.21.2 Minimum Area To Be Reserved: With the exceptions stated in this
paragraph, no less than ten (10) percent of each residential subdivision to which the
reservation requirements applies shall be reserved for purchase by the Town or its
designee for housing purposes. The exceptions are as follows:
(a) If reservation of ten (10) percent of the subdivision tract area would reduce by
more than twenty (20) percent the number of lots that could otherwise be
created by the subdivision, then the Planning Board may designate less than
ten (10) percent of the area, but not less than one-half (1/2) acre of buildable
land, for reservation. If reserving one-half (1/2) acre of buildable land would
reduce by more than twenty (20) percent the number of lots that could otherwise
be created, then no area shall be designated for reservation.
(b) The Planning Board may designate less than ten (10) percent of the subdivision
tract area for reservation if it determines that reserving ten (10) percent of the
area would result in a subdivision layout that would be deleterious to the Town.
6.21.3 Designation of Lots: After such consideration of comments from other
Town boards and committees as the Planning Board deems appropriate, the Planning
Board shall designate on the subdivision plan the specific portion of the tract to be
reserved. Such land may be in one or more locations within the subdivision as the
Board may determine.
In determining the areas to be designated for reservation, the Planning Board shall
consider, at a minimum, the following characteristics of the land:
(a) Suitability of soils for location of on-site sewage disposal systems;
(b) Availability of Town sewer;
(c) Availability of Town water;
(d) Relationship of the lots or area to be reserved to the location and type of
vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
(e) Topography;
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
42
(f) Location of the area(s) to be reserved in relation to wetlands, floodplain, and
other surface water and groundwater resources, and;
(g) Location of the area(s) to be reserved in relation to existing and proposed open
space, active recreation areas, and trail networks.
The area or areas designated by the Planning Board for reservation shall be shown
as one (1) or more lots on the Definitive Subdivision Plan approved and endorsed by
the Planning Board.
6.21.4 Period of Reservation: The reservation period shall commence on the date
the Planning Board endorses the Definitive Subdivision Plan and shall end three (3)
years after the date of endorsement. The plan shall bear a notation that identifies the
reserved area and states that no streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements
may be made, built or installed within the reserved area without the Planning Board’s
approval until a release of reservation signed by the Planning Board is recorded in the
South Middlesex Registry of Deeds or, if the reserved area is registered land, is filed
with the Land Court.
6.21.5 Exercise of Rights Under the Reservation:
(a) By the Town: The Town shall be deemed to have exercised its purchase right
with respect to land reserved hereunder if, at any time during the reservation
period, the Town gives the owner of the reserved area written notice (the
“Exercise Notice”) that (i) states the Town’s intention to purchase all or a portion
of the reserved area, (ii) specifically identifies the land to be purchased, (iii)
states the purchase price to be paid therefore, (iv) includes evidence that the
Town Meeting and the Board of Selectmen have authorized the purchase, and
(v) includes a copy of the appraisal report prepared in accordance with the
requirements of the Uniform Procurement Act, G.L.c. 30B, Section 16(b).
(b) By the Town’s designee: The Town’s designee shall be deemed to have
exercised its purchase right with respect to land reserved hereunder if, at any
time during the reservation period, the Town’s designee gives the owner of the
reserved area written notice (the “Exercise Notice”) that (i) states the intention of
the Town’s designee to purchase all or a portion of the reserved area, (ii)
specifically identifies the land to be purchased, (iii) states the purchase price to
be paid therefor, and (iv) includes evidence that the Town has in fact named the
designee to be the Town’s designee hereunder.
(c) Owner’s response: The owner shall be deemed to have agreed to sell the
land identified in the Exercise Notice at the price stated therein unless, within
sixty (60) days after the Exercise Notice is given, the owner gives written notice
to the Town or the Town’s designee, as the case may be (the “Price Objection
Notice”), that (i) states that the owner objects to the purchase price named in
the Exercise Notice on the ground that it does not represent fair market value for
the land to be purchased, (ii) states the purchase price that the owner would
accept for the land to be purchased, and (iii) includes a copy of the written
report of a qualified appraiser that supports the purchase price stated in the
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
43
Price Objection Notice. If the owner does not submit a Price Objection Notice
within sixty (60) days after the Exercise Notice was given, the Town or its
designee, as the case may be, will tender the purchase price named in the
Exercise Notice to the owner and the owner shall give good clear and
marketable title to the land specified in the Exercise Notice to the Town or the
Town’s designee, as the case may be, at a date, time and place mutually
agreeable to the parties, but no later than one hundred and twenty (120) days
after the date the Exercise Notice was given, unless the parties to the
transaction agree otherwise in writing.
(d) Response to Price Objection Notice: If the owner submits a Price Objection
Notice, the Town or its designee, as the case may be, may choose to object to
the purchase price named in the Price Objection Notice and elect to have the
fair market value of the parcel determined by a disinterested, qualified appraiser
to be named by the parties, and said fair market value shall be the purchase
price. If it elects to have the fair market value determined by a disinterested
appraiser, the Town or its designee shall, within sixty (60) days after the Price
Objection Notice is submitted, give the owner written notice of this election and
submit the names of three (3) appraisers whom the Town or its designee would
accept as qualified and disinterested. Within fifteen (15) days after receiving the
foregoing notice, the owner shall respond in writing selecting one (1) of the three
(3) appraisers so named. The cost of the appraisal shall be evenly shared by
the owner and the Town or its designee, as the case may be, and the parties to
the transaction agree that the fair market value established by the appraisal
shall be the purchase price for the property. If the Town or its designee does
not elect, within sixty (60) days after the Price Objection Notice is submitted,
then the parties agree that the purchase price named in the Price Objection
Notice shall be the purchase price for the property.
If the owner submits a Price Objection Notice, then the Town or its designee
shall have one (1) year after the purchase price is established within which to
obtain any additional Town Meeting or Board of Selectmen authorizations or
designations necessitated by the change in purchase price from that stated in
the Exercise Notice (collectively, the “Authorizations”). The Town or its
designee shall attempt to obtain the Authorizations at the next scheduled
Annual or Special Town Meeting following the date on which the purchase price
is established and shall give the owner prompt written notice if the
Authorizations are obtained or, if no Authorizations are necessary within one
hundred and twenty (120) days after the purchase price is established.
(e) Area to be Purchased: The Town or its designee may choose to purchase all
or a specified portion of the reserved area. If it is necessary to modify the
previously approved subdivision plan in order to include the portion of the
reserved area not purchased in either a previously created lot or a new lot, then
the Planning Board shall make such modification in accordance with the
provisions of G.L.c. 41, Section 81W, and the Town or its designee shall pay the
expense of effecting the modifications.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
44
(f) Notices: Any notice given in accordance with these regulations shall be
deemed to have been duly given when mailed by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, postage and registration or certification charges
prepaid. Notices to be given to the Town shall be addressed to the Town
Manager, Town House, Monument Square, Concord, Massachusetts, 01742,
with one copy addressed to each of the following: c/o Town Clerk, the Board of
Selectmen, the Planning Board, and the Affordable Housing Committee.
6.21.6 Release of Reservation: The reserved area shall be released from reserve
status and the owner or developer shall be free to proceed with the improvements on
the previously reserved land in accordance with the approved subdivision plan if
neither the Town nor the Town’s designee takes the actions set forth in Paragraph
6.21.5 to exercise its rights with respect to the reserved land within the time periods
specified in Paragraph 6.21.5. If the conditions for release of the reservation have
been met, the Planning Board shall promptly, upon request of the owner, provide the
owner with a recordable form of Release of Reservation signed by the Planning Board.
6.21.7 Just Compensation: The Town or its designee shall justly compensate the
owner of the land by paying fair market value for that portion of the reserved land that
the Town or its designee elects to purchase. Fair market value shall be determined in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Paragraph 6.21.5.
6.21.8 Maximum Number of Units on Reserved Land: No more than one (1)
housing unit shall be built for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land purchase
or acquired by the Town or its designee hereunder.
6.21.9 Applicability: The reservation shall be binding upon the owner, the
developer, any mortgagee that acquires an interest in the property after the subdivision
plan is approved or otherwise benefits from the subdivision plan approval, and any
successor in interest, whether through purchase, foreclosure or deed in lieu thereof,
bankruptcy, or other transfer.
6.21.10 The requirement established herein for reservation of land shall not apply to
residential compound subdivisions, residential cluster subdivisions, or planned
residential development subdivisions.
6.21.11 The requirement for reservation of land shall not apply to a subdivision tract
created from a larger tract in which land was reserved for housing purposes after April
1987.
6.21.12 Options in Lieu of Reservation: Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of
6.21, the Planning Board may, at its discretion and at any time, release an owner or
developer from the requirements for the reservation of land provided that a majority of
the Board of Selectmen have agreed to accept, at no cost to the Town, for affordable
housing purposes, adequate alternative contributions of land, housing, and/or money
to the Town or its designee.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN
45
In releasing the owner or developer from the reservation requirement, the Planning
Board shall find that the alternative proposal adequately addresses the purpose of this
regulation while being sufficiently advantageous to the town to warrant departure from
the reservation requirement.
CONCORD SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
46
[This page has been intentionally left blank.]

