Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
1
TOWN OF EAST LONGMEADOW
GENERAL BYLAWS
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
CHAPTERS
1. General Provisions…………………………………. 3
2. Town Elections and Town Council………………… 5
3. Budgets and Appropriations……………………….. 6
4. Town Entities and Officials………………………… 8
5. Town Departments…………………………………. 19
6. Business Regulations………………………………. 23
7. Vehicles and Traffic……………………………….. 25
8. Personal Regulations………………………………. 27
9. Animal Control…………………………………….. 41
10. Special Committees and Commissions…………….. 46
Legislative Acts Accepted by the Town and Special Votes……. 56
Index…………………………………………………………….. 61
Addendums……………………………………………………… 67
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
3
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
1.010 General Provisions
1.020 Definitions and Construction
1.030 Effective Date of Bylaws
1.040 Validity
1.010 General Provisions
(A) These bylaws are hereby entitled, “General Bylaws for the Town of East Longmeadow,
Massachusetts,” to distinguish them from bylaws of the Town dealing with special subjects
such as zoning and sub-divisions.
(B) These bylaws shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, any penalty incurred, any
suit, prosecution or proceedings pending, or the tenure of office of any person holding office,
at the time when they take effect.
(C) Any or all of these bylaws may be repealed or amended or other bylaws may be
adopted by the Town Council pursuant to the requirements in the Town Charter.
(D) Whoever violates any of the provisions of these bylaws whereby any act or thing is
enjoined or prohibited, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, forfeit and pay a fine,
not exceeding two hundred ($200.00) dollars, for each offense.
1.020 Definitions and Construction
The following rules of construction shall be observed in construing these bylaws, unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent or the context:
1. Words importing the singular shall include the plural; words importing the plural
shall include the singular; and words importing the masculine gender shall include
the feminine.
2. The words “streets, ways and highways” shall be construed to include all public
ways, town ways, highways, bridges, streets, traveled parts of highways, so far as
such construction is not contrary to law.
3. The word “owner” applied to a building or land shall include part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building
or land.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
4
4. The word “tenant” or “occupant” applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land either alone or
with other persons.
5. The word “person” shall include limited liability companies, corporations, societies,
associations, partnerships, or other legally formed entities.
6. Words prohibiting anything from being done, except in accordance with a license,
permit or authority from a board or office, shall be construed as giving such board
or office power to license, permit or authorize such a thing to be done.
7. Minutes: A record of action taken and matters considered.
8. These bylaws shall be construed as ordinances where appropriate under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
9. Any references to M.G.L. will mean a reference to Massachusetts General Laws.
1.030 Effective Date of Bylaws
These bylaws shall take effect when duly adopted by Town Council, pursuant to the
requirements of the Town Charter and published or posted pursuant to the requirements of
the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended.
1.040 Validity
The invalidity of any section or provision of these bylaws shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
5
Chapter 2
ANNUAL TOWN ELECTIONS AND TOWN COUNCIL MEETING
Sections:
2.010 Annual Town MeetingTown Elections
2.020 The Calling of Town MeetingTown Council Meetings
2.030 Town Meeting Procedures
2.010 Town Elections
Town elections shall be conducted as set forth in Article 7 of the Town Charter, “Town
Elections.” The polls shall be open in all precincts not later than 7:00 AM and close at 8:00 PM.
2.020 Town Council Meetings
Regular meetings of the Town Council shall take place at least once in each month on the second
Tuesday of each month in a handicapped accessible area of a municipal building
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
6
Chapter 3
BUDGETS AND APPROPRIATIONS
Sections:
3.010 Town Accountant
3.020 Town Audits
3.030 Film Multiple Member Body Meetings
3.010 Town Accountant
(A) The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Accountant who shall be sworn to the faithful
performance of his duties, and shall hold no other Town Office involving the receipt or
disbursement of money, except that he shall be eligible to hold the position of Director of
Municipal Finance, and shall hold office for three years and until his successor is qualified.
The Town Accountant shall perform the duties and possess the powers of the Town Auditor
as defined in M.G.L. chapter 41 sections 50 to 53 inclusive, as amended.
(B) The Town Accountant shall keep a complete set of books wherein shall be entered the
amount of each specific appropriation, the amounts and purposes of expenditures made therefrom,
the receipts from each source of income, the amount of each assessment levied, and the
abatements made; and he shall keep his accounts, so far as practicable, in conformity with the
classifications and forms prescribed by the state director of accounts in accordance with
M.G.L. chapter 44 section 43 and in conformity with any systems, classifications, forms and
designations prescribed pursuant to regulations of the state board of education for use by
school committees. The Town Accountant shall have custody of all contracts of the town,
shall keep a register of the sureties on all bonds of indemnity given to the town, shall keep a
detailed record of the town debt, showing the purpose for which it was incurred, when
incurred, when due, the rate of interest and the provisions made for payment of the debt.
(C) The Town Accountant shall notify the Town Manager and all departments, including
the School Department, monthly of the balance in his hands of any appropriation to their
credit.
(D) All town departments, including the School Department, shall provide any financial
information or financial documentation that the Town Accountant shall request.
(E) The Town Accountant shall immediately upon the close of each calendar year compile
a written report showing the amounts appropriated and the amounts expended from each
appropriation during the preceding fiscal year, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal
year and the amounts expended from such appropriations during the first six (6) months of
such year and the amounts estimated to be expended from such appropriations during the
second six (6) months of such year and the estimates for the next ensuing fiscal year, and
shall forthwith furnish a copy thereof to the Town Manager.
(F) Water Enterprise Fund. All water revenue shall be placed in a special account and
appropriated by vote of Town Council. Water revenue shall include water rates, water
entrance fees, water service and sales charges and interest and penalties on the collection of
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
7
these bills. The amounts appropriated from the Water Enterprise Fund shall be used to cover
all or a portion of the cost of providing domestic water to the Town, and maintenance of the
Water Division of the Board of Public Works and the annual payment of debt and interest on
outstanding debt for water bonds, where possible. Funds to cover the Town’s share of any
water project may be appropriated from the Water Enterprise Fund.
(G) Sewer Enterprise Fund. All sewer revenue shall be placed in a special account and
appropriated by vote of Town Council. Sewer revenue shall include sewer use fees, sewer
entrance fees, sewer service and sales charges and interest and penalties on the collection of
these bills. The amounts appropriated from the Sewer Enterprise Fund shall be used to cover
all or a portion of the cost of sewage treatment for the Town, and maintenance and operation
of the Sewer Division of the Board of Public Works and the annual payment of debt and
interest on outstanding debt for sewer bonds, where possible. Funds to cover the Town’s
share of any sewer project may also be appropriated from the Sewer Enterprise Fund.
3.020 Town Audits
(A) The Town Accountant shall, on June 30 of every year, count the cash on hand of the
Town Treasurer, Town Clerk, and Collector of Taxes.
(B) The Town Accountant shall balance the year-ending cash of the Town Treasurer
including the balancing of all checking and savings accounts of the Town.
(C) The Town shall have an audit of the financial books and accounts of the town made
annually pursuant to Article 6 Section 5 of the Town Charter.
(D) The Town Council shall have a special audit made of the books and accounts held by
the Town Treasurer, Town Clerk, Town Accountant, Director of Municipal Finance and the
Collector of Taxes as of the last day of employment of any of said officials.
3.030 Film Multiple Member Body Meetings
All open session portions of regularly scheduled meetings of the Town Council, School
Committee, Board of Public Works, Planning Board, Board of Assessors and Library Trustees
shall be filmed by the East Longmeadow Community Access Television department and shall be
broadcast regularly on Community Access Television. This bylaw is not intended to expand the
requirements of the open meeting law and the failure to film a meeting shall not affect the
legality of such a meeting
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
8
Chapter 4
TOWN ENTITIES AND OFFICIALS
Sections:
4.010 Town Entities and Reports
4.020 Town Manager
4.030 Board of Health
4.040 Town Clerk
4.050 Town Treasurer
4.060 Collector of Taxes
4.070 Board of Assessors
4.080 Board of Public Works
4.090 School Committee
4.100 Library Trustees
4.110 Planning Board
4.120 Board of Appeals
4.010 Town Entities and Reports
(A) All meetings of any governmental body within the Town shall conform to the
requirements of the Open Meeting Law of the Massachusetts General Laws, as amended.
(B) The minutes of every meeting shall be delivered to the Town Clerk in final typed or
electronic form within thirty (30) days of the date of said meeting, but shall be available for
public inspection within ten (10) days of said meeting.
(C) Each multiple member body shall elect a chairman and a clerk, per the Charter.
(D) The annual town report shall be issued in hard copy under the direction of the Town
Manager. It shall include reports from all departments including the School Department and
the Town Council.
(E) No multiple member body of the Town shall receive compensation for their services,
except as recommended by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council.
(F) No Town Councilor shall hold any other Town appointed position except as a member
of an advisory committee created by the Council, or as an ex-officio member of a committee
created by the Town Manager, or as permitted by the Charter.
4.020 Town Manager
(A) The Town Manager shall make, from time to time, such rules and regulations for the
government, management and disposition of the Police and Fire Departments or other
departments under his control as he may deem expedient.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
9
(B) All Town department heads, including the Superintendent of Schools, shall submit an
inventory of all property, both real and personal, within their department annually to the
Town Manager.
(C) The Town Manager shall have the authority to employ special counsel to assist the
Town Attorney when necessary.
(D) Departments having surplus or obsolete Town property not being traded in, shall notify
other departments through the Town Manager of the availability of said property and shall
send notice of sale to the Town Manager prior to disposal.
(E) No person shall erect in or upon any street or sidewalk in the Town any staging or place
thereon any material of any kind in such manner as to obstruct or impede the free use of such
street or sidewalk for public travel, without a written permit from the Department of Public
Works Superintendent or his designee, and no person shall place any material upon any
street, sidewalk or tree belt in the Town which may damage or injure any person, animal or
vehicle traveling thereon.
(F) The Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee shall require and
regulate the numbering of buildings on all public or private ways and may order, in writing,
the owner of said buildings to place on their building such numbers required. The owner of
the building, upon receipt of such an order, shall comply with said order within ten (10) days.
House numbers shall be no less than three (3) inches in height and shall be visible from the
street.
(G) Any person receiving a permit from the Town shall execute a written agreement and
furnish a bond if the Town Manager so demands to indemnify and save harmless the Town
against all damage or cost by reason of any claim for damages, or by reason of any process,
civil or criminal, arising from the use of said permit or license, and the Town Manager may
impose such conditions, terms and limitations as he shall see fit for the safety of the general
public.
(H) License to Store Inflammables. The following fees are established for licenses to use
land for the keeping, storage or sale of petroleum fluids or compounds for resale or other
commercial use:
Not more than 1,000 gallons or 8,000 pounds $45.00
Not more than 5,000 gallons or 40,000 pounds $75.00
Not more than 10,000 gallons or 80,000 pounds $105.00
Not more than 30,000 gallons or 240,000 pounds $135.00
Not more than 100,000 gallons or 800,000 pounds $165.00
Not more than 200,000 gallons or 1,600,000 pounds $240.00
More than 200,000 gallons or 1,600,000 pounds $330.00
and the fee for any annual certificate or registration required under M.G.L. chapter 148,
section 13, shall be one-half of the original license fee in accordance with the above
schedule.
(I) All wholesale and retail business entities licensed to store or sell petroleum products,
shall be required to install emergency break-away hose couplings on each pump or similar
dispensing device, in accordance with the regulations and specifications adopted by the Fire
Chief. The penalty for violating this section shall be a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), and each day shall constitute a separate violation.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
10
4.030 Board of Health
(A) The Town Manager shall appoint a Health Inspector for one year. The Health Inspector
shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that shall contain a
report of the year’s work in the field of Health Inspection, according to the duties under
the State Sanitary Code of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, divisions of
Housing, Food and Drugs, and the Department of Environmental Protection.
(B) The Board of Health shall keep records of:
Complaints made to them, and disposition thereof.
Nuisances abated and how abated.
Unusual sickness of the Town.
Violations of the State Sanitary Code.
Any other records required by statute.
(C) Mandatory Recycling. In order to implement a program of recycling in conjunction with
ordinary waste disposal, residents of every household shall separate waste material into the
following categories before depositing same for disposal: (1) glass and containers; (2) paper;
(3) other waste. If no separation takes place, waste material shall not be accepted for
collection at the disposal location.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance
with the provisions of Section 1.010 of these bylaws.
All other current regulations of the Board of Health for dumping and disposal of
refuse will remain in effect and copies are available in the Town Clerk’s Office.
4.040 Town Clerk
(A) The Town Clerk shall keep and cause to be permanently bound one or more files of
Town reports. He shall furnish all boards and committees with a copy of all votes affecting
them. He shall not allow original papers or documents of the Town to be taken from his
office, except as they remain in his custody or by authority of law.
(B) The Town Clerk shall record suitable minutes of Town Council meeting proceedings
and the results of all votes cast at Town Council meetings held during his term of office.
(C) The Town Clerk shall keep a file of all reports submitted by all multiple member bodies
of the Town and all documents relating to the affairs of the Town, which come into his
custody. He shall suitably index all such reports and all Town Council meeting votes. The
results of all primaries and elections held must also be duly recorded.
(D) The Town Clerk shall charge the following fees:
Fees
1. For filing and indexing assignment for the benefit of creditors. $10.00
2. For entering amendment of a record of the birth of an illegitimate
child subsequently legitimized. $25.00
3. For correcting errors in a record of birth. $25.00
4. For furnishing certificate of a birth. $10.00
5. For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of birth. $10.00
6. For entering delayed record of birth. $10.00
7. For filing certificate of a person conducting business under any title
other than his real name. $30.00
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
11
8. For filing by person conducting business under any title other than
his real name of statement of change of his residence, or of his
discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal from, or of a change of
location of such business. $20.00
9. For furnishing certified copy of certificate of person conducting
business under any title other than his real name or a statement by
such person of his discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal from such
business. $5.00
10. For recording the name and address, the date and number of the
certificate issued to a person registered for the practice of podiatry in
the commonwealth. $20.00
11. For correcting errors in a record of death. $25.00
12. For furnishing a certificate of death. $10.00
13. For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of death. $10.00
14. For entering notice of intention of marriage and issuing certificates
thereof. $40.00
15. For entering certificate of marriage filed by persons married out of
the commonwealth. $40.00
16. For issuing certificate of marriage. $10.00
17. For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of marriage. $10.00
18. For correcting errors in a record of marriage. $25.00
19. For recording power of attorney. $5.00
20. For recording certificate of registration granted to a person to
engage in the practice of optometry, or issuing a certified copy
thereof. $20.00
21. For recording the name of the owner of a certificate of registration
as a physician or osteopath in the commonwealth. $20.00
22. For recording order granting locations of poles, piers, abutments
or conduits, alterations or transfers thereof, and increase in number of
wires and cable or attachments under the provisions of M.G.L. chapter
166, section 22. $40.00
23. For examining records or papers relating to birth, marriage or
deaths upon the application of any person, the actual expense thereof,
but not less than. $5.00
24. For copying any manuscript or record pertaining to a birth,
marriage or death. $3.00
25. For receiving and filing of a complete inventory of all items to be
included in a “closing out sale” etc.
1st page: $10.00
each additional page: $2.00
26. For filing a copy of written instrument or declaration of trust by
the trustees of an association or trust, or any amendment thereof as
provided by M.G.L. chapter 182, section 2. $20.00
27. For recording deed or lot or plot in a public burial place or
cemetery. $5.00
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
12
28. Recording any other documents.
1st page: $10.00
each additional page: $2.00
29. Voter’s card.
30. Dog License.
$5.00
$10.00
31. Dog License (non-spayed/neutered).
32. Dog License Renewal (Late Fee).
$20.00
$25.00
(E) The Town Clerk shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that
shall contain:
1. A copy of every Town Council meeting vote acted upon, showing in detail the
number for and against or whether the vote was by majority or by unanimous vote.
The report of every Town Council meeting will also show the opening and closing of
the meeting.
2. A full report of the annual Town Election and every State or special Election, but
need not include primaries.
3. A complete list of the elected Town officers, with their salaries or compensation,
the organization of the different boards and the expiration of the term of office of
each member.
4. A complete list of all appointees for the year and other appointments of the Town
Manager, and the expiration of the term of office of each member, where possible.
5. A statement of fish and game licenses sold, dog licenses issued and other fees
collected and turned over to the Town.
6. A report of the number of births, marriages and deaths showing a comparison
with the two previous years.
(F) No resignation of a member of a multiple member body shall be deemed effective
unless and until such resignation is filed with the Town Clerk or such later time certain as
may be specified in such resignation.
(G) Upon receipt of a resignation, the Town Clerk shall notify the remaining members of
the multiple member body, if the resignation is received from a multiple member body, and
he shall further notify the Town Manager and such notification shall include the effective
date of the resignation.
(H) The Town Clerk shall give bond to the Town for the faithful performance of his duties
in a form approved by the Commissioner of Revenue, in such sum, not less than the amount
established by said Commissioner, or shall be fixed by the Town Manager.
(I) The surety bonds of the Town Treasurer, Collector of Taxes, Deputy Collector of
Taxes, and Town Clerk, shall be in the custody of the Town Clerk and kept in the Town
vault.
4.050 Town Treasurer
(A)The Town Treasurer shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that
shall contain:
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
13
1. A classified statement showing the items of the Town debt, date when each
was contracted, its original amount, rate of interest, date on which it will be
due, and purpose for which the bonding was made.
2. A statement of all money borrowed by the Town during the year, and for what
purposes, the amount of increase or decrease in the Town debt, and the object
for which it was increased.
3. The relation of the Town debt to the percent limit of indebtedness if the
relevant data supplied to him by the Commonwealth is available to him in
time for insertion in the report. If such data is not supplied to him in time for
insertion in said report, he may include general remarks on this subject in
whatever form may best serve to inform the Town under the circumstances.
(B) He shall give bond to the Town for the faithful performance of his duties in a form
approved by the Commissioner of Revenue, in such sum, not less than the amount
established by said Commissioner.
(C) The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all bonds and insurance policies belonging to the
Town, except that the surety bonds of the Treasurer, Collector of Taxes, Deputy Collector of
Taxes, and Town Clerk shall be in the custody of the Town Clerk.
(D)The funds of the Town should be retained in long-term investments whenever possible
and all funds kept in interest bearing accounts
(E) Sale of Town Land Taken For Taxes. The Town Treasurer, with the approval of the
Town Manager and the Town Council, is authorized to sell and convey by public sale, any or
all parcels of real estate to which the Town has acquired, or may hereafter acquire title to,
either by foreclosure of tax titles in the Land Court, or by procedure under M.G.L. chapter 60
sections 79 and 80 , as amended, pertaining to land of low value.
Abutters to any land proposed for sale shall be notified by mail at least ten (10) days prior to
the sale, unless the land proposed for sale is one (1) of several parcels offered for sale in a
public advertisement appearing twice at least ten (10) days before the date of the sale.
(F) Trust Funds. All trust funds, if not otherwise provided in the conditions of the trust, and
the income of all trust funds shall be held in the custody of the Town Treasurer, and shall be
paid out by him for the purpose named in the trust only upon orders duly drawn upon him by
the Town Manager.
4.060 Collector of Taxes
(A) The Town Treasurer may act as Collector of Taxes and shall be possessor of all
statutory powers to collect all accounts due the Town pursuant to M.G.L. chapter 41, sections
38 and 38A.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
14
(B) The Collector of Taxes and any appointed Deputies shall give bond for the faithful
performance of their duties in such sum and in such form and subject to such conditions as
the Commissioner of Revenue shall prescribe.
(C) The Collector of Taxes, if a separate official, shall have the combination of all safes and
vaults wherein Town records and monies are kept.
(D) The Collector of Taxes shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report
that shall contain a statement of the amounts committed to him for collection including the
amount of abatements and refunds. The statement shall also show in detail the amounts of all
uncollected taxes from any source including water and sewer charges, sewer, street and
sidewalk betterment assessments.
(E) The Collector of Taxes, also known as the Town Collector or Tax Collector, shall have
charge of the keeping of the books, acts involving collection of monies due the Town and the
preparation of such returns and reports as it may be required to make. The Collector of Taxes
shall report annually to departments concerned, the receipts and collections for each
department.
(a) The Collector of Taxes or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter
referred to as the Collector of Taxes shall annually furnish to each department,
board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing or permitting
authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of
any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party,
that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments,
or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve (12) month period, and that
such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such
tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
(b) The licensing or permitting authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said
list furnished to the licensing or permitting authority from the Collector of Taxes or
with respect to any activity, event, or other matter which is the subject of such
license or permit and which activity, event, or matter is carried out or exercised or is
to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned or controlled by any
party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing or permitting
authority from the Collector of Taxes; provided however, the written notice is given
to the party and the Collector of Taxes, as required by applicable provisions of law,
and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days after
said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or
suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Collector of Taxes shall have
the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license or
permit denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing or
permitting authority with respect to such license or permit denial, revocation or
suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
15
relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from
such license or permit denial, revocation, or suspension. Any license or permit
denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed
until the licensing or permitting authority receives a certificate issued by the
Collector of Taxes that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all
local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to
the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(c) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, upon
approval of the Town Manager, thereby allowing the licensing or permitting
authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and
the validity of said license or permit shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be
grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided,
however, the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable
provisions of law.
(d) The Town Manager may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if he finds
there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in M.G.L.
chapter 268A section 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning; M.G.L. chapter
48 section 13, as amended; bicycle permits; M.G.L. chapter 85 section 11A, as amended; sales of
articles for charitable purposes, M.G.L. chapter 101 section 33, as amended; children work
permits, M.G.L. chapter 149 section 69, as amended; clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverage licenses, M.G.L. chapter 140 section 21E, as amended; dog licenses, M.G.L. chapter
140 section 137, as amended; fishing, hunting, trapping license, M.G.L. chapter 131 section 12,
as amended; marriage licenses, M.G.L. chapter 207 section 28, as amended; and theatrical
events, public exhibition permits, M.G.L. chapter 140 section 181, as amended.
4.070 Board of Assessors
The Board of Assessors shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that
shall contain:
1. A statement showing the number of parcels of real estate assessed, broken down
by classification category and the assessed valuation of each group, also showing the
percentage of valuation of each group.
2. A statement showing the number of personal property taxes and assessed value.
3. A statement of all categories of taxes assessed for the year, showing the total
amount of taxes assessed for each kind of tax.
4. A statement listing State receipts due the Town in the setting of the most recent
tax rate, and a listing of amounts due to the State and County governments.
5. A statement listing general Town receipts estimated in the setting of the most
recent tax rate.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
16
6. A list of exempt property by category and valuation, also including property
owned by the Town.
7. A comparison report showing a five (5) year history of:
a. Latest tax rate.
b. Total real and personal property valuation.
c. Total number of parcels assessed.
d. Total real and personal property taxes committed.
4.080 Board of Public Works
(A) The Board of Public Works shall recommend to the Town Manager rules and
regulations for water, sanitary sewers, storm drains, highways, parks, forestry or any other
division of the Department of Public Works.
(B) No person or persons, except employees of the Department of Public Works or their
agents, shall break or dig up or obstruct any street or sidewalk or excavate within any public
way without a permit from the Department of Public Works which may require said person
to furnish a bond if the Department of Public Works Superintendent so demands, to
indemnify and save-harmless the town against all damages or costs by reason of any claims
of damages or by reason of any process, civil or criminal, on account of the existence of such
obstruction or excavation, and the Department of Public Works may impose such conditions,
terms and limitations as it deems necessary. All work shall be in accordance with the
Department of Public Works specifications. The Department of Public Works shall notify the
Police Department, Fire Department, and the Town Manager of any such permit.
(C) Any person licensed or permitted to obstruct any street or break or dig the ground of the
same, shall put up and keep at all times a suitable railing around the parts of the sidewalk or
street so obstructed or dug up, so long as the same shall be unsafe or inconvenient for
traveling. The person so licensed or permitted shall also keep enough lighted warnings at or
near the parts of the street so obstructed or dug up, from twilight through the whole night, as
shall be sufficient to warn travelers.
(D) No person shall permit water from the eaves or lead pipes of any building, owned or
cared for by him to be discharged upon or run on the public sidewalk or shall suffer his
building to shed water on, or make or permit any drain, sluice, gully or conduit upon his land
to discharge water upon a sidewalk, tree belt or traveled way within a public way. When said
person is notified of violating this section by the Department of Public Works, he shall,
within ten (10) days, abate said violation. If the violator fails to abate the situation within said
timeframe the Department of Public Works Superintendent, with the approval of the Town
Manager, shall take reasonable means to abate the violation, which may include, but not
limited to, the issuance of tickets pursuant to the non-criminal disposition procedure
authorized under section 8.130 of these bylaws in addition to or in place of any criminal or
civil actions.
(E) The Town Manager or his designee is authorized and empowered to declare a state of
water emergency as may be necessary from time to time, in order to conserve water resources
of the Town, and ban or restrict the use of water on certain uses. Any person who, upon
approval of the foregoing restrictions for a state of water emergency, by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, shall violate the ban or
restrictions, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed the sum of one hundred
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
17
dollars ($100.00) for each violation, and each day in which a violation occurs will be
considered a separate violation. This section shall be subject to the provision of M.G.L.
chapter 21G, and the regulations adopted there under.
(F) Agricultural and Horticultural Water Rate: The Town Council shall establish a rate for
water usage by properties that are certified by the Board of Assessors as being used for
agricultural and horticultural uses pursuant to M.G.L. chapter 61A and that said water rate
be set at seventy-five percent (75%) of the residential water rate. Provided, however, if any
such property receiving the water rate set forth herein is converted to a non-agricultural or
non-horticultural use the owner or lessee shall pay to the Collector of Taxes a sum equal to
the difference between said agricultural and horticultural water rate and the residential rate
for each year the discounted rate was received by the property prior to the conversion,
provided further, that said repayment shall not be for more than fifteen (15) years preceding
the conversion. To qualify for the water rate reduction the M.G.L. chapter 61A registered
applicant must also be an I.R.S. registered farm with two thirds (2/3) of its annual income
being derived from farming.
4.090 School Committee
(A) The School Committee shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a
report that shall contain:
1. A report of the year’s work in the schools, with such recommendations and
suggestions regarding educational work as they deem fitting.
2. The school calendar for the year.
3. A tabulated statement of membership, attendance and truancy for each school.
4. A statement of their expenditures and receipts during the year.
5. A list of teachers.
(B) No person shall, except for school cafeteria personnel, offer for sale, sell or cause to be
sold to any school pupil any articles of food, or any articles suitable for or intended for
human consumption, within the limits of the public ways and within one hundred (100) yards
from the nearest boundary of any public ways between the hours of 7:00 AM and 4:00 PM
on days when the public schools are in session.
4.100 Library Trustees
(A) The Library Trustees shall recommend and advise the Town Manager regarding the
appointment of a Library Director to supervise the operation of the library.
(B) The Library Trustees shall annually prepare or cause to be prepared and submit to the
Town Manager a report in writing covering clearly and concisely the work of its department
for the preceding year, for inclusion in the Annual Town Report.
4.110 Planning Board
(A) Vacancies occurring in the Planning Board shall be filled by the Town Manager.
(B) The Planning Board shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report in
writing covering clearly and concisely the work of its department for the preceding year for
inclusion in the Annual Town Report.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
18
(C) Statutes, powers and duties of the Planning Board are prescribed in M.G.L. chapter 41,
sections 70 to 72 and 81A to 81I, inclusive, as amended.
(D) The Planning Board shall act as Special Permit Granting Authority. (see Zoning
bylaws.)
4.120 Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members, whose terms shall be three (3) years
each, one appointed in one year and two appointed in each of the next succeeding years, by
the Town Manager.
Two or more associate members may be appointed by the Town Manager (Reference M.G.L.
chapter 40A).
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
19
Chapter 5
TOWN DEPARTMENTS
Sections:
5.010 Police Department
5.020 Fire Department
5.030 Inspector of Weights and Measures
5.040 Town Attorney
5.050 Building Inspector
5.010 Police Department
(A) The Police Chief shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that
shall contain:
1. A tabulated report of the number of arrests during the year, showing the cause of
arrest, and the sex of the persons arrested, by age categories.
2. A statement of the number of persons taken into custody for alcohol intoxication
by age and sex.
3. A statement of the value of stolen property recovered and the value of stolen or
lost property returned to the owner.
4. A statement of Police vehicles and emergency and rescue equipment.
5. A roster of the members of the Police Department and their duty assignments.
(B) All Police officer appointments shall be made by the Town Manager acting as Police
Commissioner in the Town with the recommendations of the Police Chief.
(C) All Police officers appointed by the Town Manager shall be issued a badge and
identification with picture, by the Police Chief.
(D) The Police may temporarily close any public or private way to vehicular traffic, in an
impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession
provided there is reasonable justification for said closing. For the same reasons, Police may
prohibit parking and remove any vehicles parked in violation. Exempted from these rules are
emergency vehicles, repair vehicles, and Fire and Police vehicles. Persons using said street
are not exempted from the consequences of any reckless operation.
(E) Police officers shall have the authority to direct all traffic either in person or by means of
a visible or audible signal. In the event of an emergency, Fire personnel may direct traffic
for the safety of all persons and all persons are required to obey their commands.
(F) The Police Department is authorized to assist another Police Department by request, in
an emergency. The Police Department is authorized to request assistance from other
departments in similar instances.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
20
(G) The Police Department shall keep a true and accurate inventory of all Police equipment,
including guns and ammunition. The inventory should show the original purchase price,
description and number of the item and the date of purchase. Equipment valued over one
hundred dollars ($100.00) will be included in the inventory. The inventory will be brought
up-to-date yearly and filed with the Town Manager and Town Accountant.
5.020 Fire Department
(A) The Fire Chief shall act as Forest Fire Warden and Fire Warden.
(B) All fire fighter appointments shall be made by the Town Manager, acting as Fire
Commissioner in the Town, with the recommendations from the Fire Chief.
(C) The Fire Chief shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report that shall
contain
1. A listing of the number of alarms made during the year and an estimate of
property damage and loss.
2. A roster of the members of the Fire Department and their duty assignments.
3. A listing of the Department’s fire-fighting equipment.
(D) Wood and/or coal-burning stoves shall be inspected by the Fire Chief or his designee
after application to the Building Inspector and before such stove installation is put into
service.
(E) Installation of all fuel tanks for the storage of inflammable liquids must have a permit
issued by the Town Manager. The Fire Chief or his designee shall supervise the installation
of the tanks with a final inspection by the Fire Department.
(F) The Fire Department shall keep a true and accurate inventory of all Fire equipment. The
inventory should show the original purchase price, description and number of the item and
the date of purchase. Equipment valued over one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be included
in the inventory. The inventory will be brought up-to-date yearly and filed with the Town
Manager and Town Accountant.
(G) Fire Lanes.
1. The Fire Chief or his designee may designate fire lanes within the limits of any
private way, parking area, or driveway for the access of fire apparatus, ambulances or
other emergency vehicles to multiple-family dwellings, stores, schools, health care
facilities, elderly housing complexes and places of public assembly.
2. The owner of record of any area designed as a fire lane shall provide and install
signs that shall read, “Fire Lane – No Parking – Loading or Unloading – Violators
Can Be Subject To a Fine of Fifteen Dollars ($15.00).” The signs shall be twelve
inches (12”) wide and eighteen inches (18”) high. They shall be installed at a height
of six foot six inches (6’-6”) from ground level to the bottom of the sign. Location of
the signs shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his designee prior to installation.
3. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block any area designed as a Fire Lane with a
vehicle or by any other means.
4. The registered owner of any vehicle parked or left unattended within the limits
designated as a Fire Lane shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each offense.
(H) Any building other than a residential building of less than six (6) units, which has a fire
alarm system or other fire protection system, shall provide a secure key lock box installed in
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
21
a location accessible to the Fire Department in case of an emergency. This key lock box
shall contain keys to the fire alarm system control panel and any other keys necessary to
operate or otherwise service the fire protection systems. The key lock box shall be of a type
approved by the Fire Chief or his designee and shall be located and installed as instructed by
the Fire Chief or his designee.
5.030 Inspector of Weights and Measures
(A) The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall annually prepare and submit to the Town
Manager a report that shall contain:
1. A list of all scales, meters, capacity and measuring devices tested and sealed,
including the number not sealed and condemned.
2. A list of other items checked and sealed and other inspections prescribed by the
State Director of Standards.
3. A statement of general interest to citizens concerning the year’s activity.
(B) The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall turn over all fees received to the Town
Treasurer at least monthly.
(C) The Inspector of Weights and Measures may at his discretion, stop and examine any
device or measure in any location and check hawkers and peddlers for permits, all as
prescribed by the State Director of Standards.
(D) The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall keep a true and accurate inventory of all his
equipment. The inventory should show a description of all weights and measures in his
charge. A copy of the inventory, up-dated annually, shall be filed with the Town Manager
and Town Accountant.
5.040 Town Attorney
(A) The Town Manager shall annually, in June, and whenever a vacancy shall exist, appoint
a member of the Massachusetts Bar to act as Town Attorney. He shall be subject at any time
to removal by the Town Manager.
(B) The Town Attorney shall be paid for his services in advising Town officials on all
matters of a recurring nature, for planning and attendance at board, council and committee
meetings, for drafting of contracts and other instruments, a salary established annually by the
Town Council appropriation. He, and special counsel, when engaged, shall also be paid at an
hourly rate agreed upon with the Town Manager for time-use in all Town matters litigated in
courts, before administrative bodies, the Appellate Tax Board, etc., and for non-recurring
type negotiations with other attorneys, towns or officials, on Town matters, land damage
claims, zoning and sub-division controversies, preparation of witnesses, title-searching, and
similar legal exercises. Such payment to be made from the Legal Services Fund, established
for such purpose in 1960, or, as to tax title matters initiated by the Collector of Taxes or
Treasurer, from that official’s tax title expense funds.
(C) The Town Attorney shall represent the Town in all matters to which it is a party, in any
court or administrative tribunal, and in the trial or hearing of all litigated matters.
(D) The Town Attorney shall draw all deeds, leases, contracts, conveyances, and other legal
instruments, or review the same, and take every legal action, requested of him by the Town
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
22
Manager, Town Council, or School Committee. He shall furnish a written opinion on any
legal question submitted to him on any matter concerning the Town and its officials, and
furnish legal advice to Town officials who require his opinion on matters within the scope of
their official duties.
(E) The Town Attorney shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report
describing legal services rendered.
(F) All Town officials, boards and committees requiring the services of the Town Attorney,
shall keep the Town Manager aware of such requests for services, notifying him in writing or
by sending copies of any communications to him.
5.050 Building Inspector
(A) The Town Manager shall appoint a Building Inspector for one year.
(B) The powers and duties of the Building Inspector are defined in the rules and regulations
issued by the State Building Code Commission.
(C) The Building Inspector shall annually prepare and submit to the Town Manager a report
that shall include the number, and types of permits issued and the number of permit
applications denied.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
23
Chapter 6
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sections:
6.010 Hawkers and Peddlers
6.020 Second Hand or Junk Dealers
6.030 Soliciting Money
6.040 Public Entertainment
6.010 Hawkers and Peddlers
No person shall hawk or peddle any merchandise within the limits of the Town, except as
authorized by law, without first applying for a license in the Town Clerk’s Office. Final
approval is given by the State Director of Standards.
6.020 Second Hand or Junk Dealers
No person shall be a collector of or a dealer in junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, or a
keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or second-hand articles
without first applying for a license from the Town Manager.
6.030 Soliciting Money
(A) No person shall solicit money on any public way or other public place, or go from house
to house for the purpose of soliciting money, or sell any tag, badge, or other article of any
intrinsic value for the purpose of obtaining money, without first having the written
permission to do so from the Police Chief or his designee. Every such written permit shall
state the following:
a. Name of the organization.
b. Name and address of person in charge of the solicitation.
c. Number of persons involved in soliciting.
d. Exact dates and hours for solicitation.
e. That no soliciting is permitted after dark.
(B) Failure to register properly with the Police Chief or his designee will result in a fine of
not more than twenty dollars ($20.00).
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
24
6.040 Public Entertainment
(A) For purposes of this section, the term outdoor public entertainments shall mean any
outdoor public gathering, which two hundred (200) or more persons attend and for which an
admission or attendance charge is made for profit, except for school functions held on school
property.
(B) No outdoor public entertainment shall be held within the Town without a permit issued
by the Town Manager or his designee.
(C) An application for such a permit shall be submitted to the Town Manager or his designee
at least forty-five (45) days prior to the date on which the public entertainment is held.
(D) The Town Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief and such other town officials as the Town
Manager or his designee shall deem appropriate shall meet jointly to consider each
application for such a permit. The joint meeting shall have the authority to:
1. Prescribe public safety and health regulations for the outdoor public
entertainment.
2. Prescribe the hours during which the outdoor public entertainment may be held.
3. Require a bond or other security to secure compensation to the Town or its
citizens for damage, which may result from the public entertainment.
4. Determine the amount of the fee to be charged for the permit; said fee to be based
on the anticipated expense to the Town.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
25
Chapter 7
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Sections:
7.010 Parking Ban
7.020 Removal of Vehicles from Streets and Ways
7.030 Handicapped Parking
7.040 Off-Street Parking
7.010 Parking Ban
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than acting in an emergency, to park
said vehicle on any street when the Town Manager or his designee has declared a parking
ban.
7.020 Removal of Vehicles from Streets and Ways
(A) The Department of Public Works Superintendent, or his designee, for the purpose of
removing or plowing snow or removing ice from any street or way, may declare a snow or
ice removal emergency.
(B) When such emergency is declared by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or
his designee, the Police Department shall be notified immediately and vehicles parked on
streets and ways that hinder the removal of snow or ice, shall be towed to a convenient
storage facility according to a policy directed by the Police Chief. Vehicles removed under
this section shall be subject to a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each offense in addition to
any reasonable removal, storage charges and the cost of publishing or sending any notices.
(C) The Police Chief shall keep or cause to be kept, a record of each vehicle removed under
this bylaw. Such record shall describe each vehicle, its registration number, and the location
of the storage facility. He shall, within forty-eight (48) hours, notify the lawful owner by
mail, in writing, at his address as recorded by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, as to the
location of the removed vehicle.
(D) If the owner of the removed vehicle is unknown, the Police Chief shall, within fortyeight
(48) hours, cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, the
description and registration number, if any, of the removed vehicle and the location of the
storage facility. If, after a reasonable time, the owner of the removed vehicle remains
unknown and reasonable effort has been made to locate the lawful owner; said vehicle will
be disposed of according to Massachusetts General Laws, to satisfy removal, storage and
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
26
administrative charges. The remaining balance of such disposal shall be put into the General
Fund of the Town.
(E) Before any person shall be permitted to reclaim a vehicle removed under this section, he
shall:
1. Furnish evidence to the Police Department of his identity and ownership of the
removed vehicle.
2. Pay the reasonable vehicle removal charges, the maximum being established by
the Office of the Massachusetts Attorney General, and any reasonable daily storage
charges together with the cost of publishing or sending any notices required by this
section.
7.030 Handicapped Parking
(A) No person shall allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in the
spaces designated as reserved for handicapped persons under M.G.L. chapter 22, section
13A, unless the motor vehicle is used to transport a disabled veteran or handicapped person
and bears a distinctive plate or placard authorized by M.G.L. chapter 90, section 2.
(B) The registered owner of any vehicle, which is in violation of this bylaw, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
(C) This bylaw shall not apply to off-street parking areas owned or controlled by the United
States of America or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
7.040 Off-Street Parking
Any person or persons proposing to construct “off-street” parking for more than one
thousand (1000) square feet, which will have access to and from any street or way, shall first
submit a plan showing the proposed work to the Department of Public Works Superintendent
or his designee and obtain his approval prior to issuance of any building permit.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
27
Chapter 8
PERSONAL REGULATIONS
Sections:
8.010 Depositing Filth, Rubbish or Other Substances
8.020 Consuming Intoxicating Beverages on Public Ways or Other
Public Property; Penalties
8.030 Bushes, Shrubs, Interfering with Vehicular Traffic
8.040 Clearing Sidewalks of Ice and Snow
8.050 Hours of Parks and Recreation Areas
8.060 Dumping Snow and Ice from Outside the Town
8.070 Stormwater Management
8.080 Discharge of Firearms within the Town
8.090 Disturbing and Unnecessary Noise
8.100 Limitation on the Use, Sale, Keeping and Storage of Fuel Burning
Portable Space Heaters
8.110 Fine for Carrying Firearms
8.120 False Alarms
8.130 Non-criminal Disposition Procedure
8.140 Municipal Charges Lien
8.010 Depositing, Filth, Rubbish or Other Substances
(A) No person, shall without license of the Board of Health, throw, or leave in or upon any
street, court, square, lane, road, public square, public enclosure, and or body of water or
vacant land within the limits of the Town, any filth, rubbish or other substance. Any person
who shall refuse or neglect to forthwith remove the same, after being requested by a police
officer to do so, may be arrested and, if the identity of such person is unknown to the police
officer, that person may after arrest be detained without a warrant until his identity is
ascertained. Reasonable diligence shall be exercised by the arresting officer in ascertaining
the identity of the offender and, when identified, he shall be released from arrest unless a
warrant has been issued against him.
(B) No person shall behave himself in a disorderly manner or use any indecent, profane, or
obscene language or gesture, not in furtherance of his constitutional first amendment rights of
free speech, in a street or elsewhere in any other public place in the Town to the annoyance
or disturbance of any person. Whoever shall accost or address another person with such
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
28
profane or obscene language or gesture, or otherwise behave himself in a disorderly manner
shall be subject to arrest. If the identity of the offender is unknown to the police officer, such
person may be arrested without a warrant and detained until his identity is ascertained,
whereupon the arresting police officer may release him from arrest unless a warrant has been
issued against him, or he may be further detained until he can be taken before a court having
jurisdiction of the offense.
(C) No person shall, in violation of M.G.L. chapter 272, section 59, or any amendments
thereto, linger, continue to sit, stand, or occupy any part of the public street, public place,
public building, or any property not his own or under his control, so as to obstruct or impede
the free passage of, or in any manner annoy or disturb any other person, after being instructed
or directed by a police officer to move on. Any person refusing to comply with this section,
after he shall be requested to do so by a police officer, shall be subject to arrest. If the
identity of such person is unknown to the police officer, such person may be arrested without
a warrant and detained until his identity is ascertained, unless a warrant has been issued
against him, or he may be further detained until he can be taken before a court having
jurisdiction of the offense.
(D) The penalty for any violation of the foregoing sections shall be a fine of not more than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
8.020 Consuming Intoxicating Beverages on Public Ways or Other Public
Property; Penalties
(A) Whoever shall, within the Town, whether that public way be a Town way, County
highway, or a private way open to the public, or in any other place where the public shall
have access, consume intoxicating beverages shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty
dollars ($50.00). This section shall also be construed so as to prohibit the consumption of
intoxicating beverages by any person while such person is standing, sitting, walking, running,
or otherwise present within such way or public place as hereinabove defined, or within any
vehicle, whether parked or moving, which is within the limits of such public way or place as
herein defined.
(B) Whoever shall consume any intoxicating beverages in any public building, or on any
public property, including parks, cemeteries, schoolhouses and school grounds, public
squares, or in any private way or parking area regulated under the provisions of M.G.L.
chapter 90, section 18, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).
(C) The foregoing paragraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply to any activity duly licensed by the
Town Council under the applicable provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws. A
violation of this bylaw shall be deemed to be a breach of peace.
(D) It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to arrest any person who violates
the provisions of paragraph (A) and (B) and to cause such persons to be detained until he can
be taken before a court having jurisdiction of the offense.
8.030 Brushes, Shrubs, Interfering with Vehicular Traffic
(A) No person shall erect or maintain upon his property a fence, trees, shrubs or bushes,
which interferes unreasonably with the view of travelers, upon an abutting way, and any
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
29
order from the Town Manager or his designee for the partial or total removal of such fence,
trees, shrubs or bushes shall be complied with forthwith.
(B) No owner or foreclosing mortgagee (hereinafter “owner”) shall allow grass, trees,
bushes, shrubs or any other vegetation to constitute a nuisance, as determined by the Health
Agent, to the health, safety or appearance of the neighborhood where the property is located.
If the Health Agent notifies the owner of the existence of a nuisance and said owner fails to
correct the situation identified in said notice within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the
Town may correct the nuisance through an independent contractor or its employees.
The cost of correction plus administrative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be
assessed against the property and shall be a municipal charges lien under section 8.140 of
these bylaws and enforced as set forth therein.
8.040 Clearing Sidewalks of Ice and Snow
Residents on property or owners of property, where there exists a sidewalk, in front of or
abutting a traveled way constructed of concrete, cement, brick, stone or other hard matter
lying between the property lines and the traveled way designated by the Town Manager or
his designee under Town control, shall clear said walks of ice and snow within twenty-four
(24) hours after the snow ceases to fall. Should the said sidewalks become covered with ice
that cannot be readily removed, the said abutters or residents shall be required to place sand
or salt or other material thereon to render said walks safe for pedestrians.
8.050 Hours of Parks and Recreation Areas
The Town Manager or his designee shall post the official hours of parks and recreation areas
within the Town.
8.060 Dumping Snow and Ice from Outside the Town
The dumping or disposal, from outside the Town, of snow or ice containing salt or other
chemical substance is hereby prohibited. Violators of this section shall be fined not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
8.070 Stormwater Management
8.070.010 Definitions
The following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this bylaw:
Adverse Impact: Harmful effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity,
surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which
are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to
biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the
enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.
Best Management Practices (BMP): Structural or biological devices that temporarily store or
treat stormwater runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants, and provide other amenities.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
30
They can also be nonstructural practices that reduce pollutants at their source. Examples of
BMP’s are described in the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s
(MassDEP) stormwater design manual: Stormwater Management Handbook, Volume 2:
Chapter 2: Structural BMP Specifications for the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
(February 2008, MassDEP, as updated or amended).
Town Manager or His Designee: The permitting and enforcement agency.
Construction Activity: Disturbance of the ground by removal of surface cover, grading,
excavation, clearing or filling.
Detention: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to control the
“peak discharge” rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.
Discharge of Pollutants: The addition of a pollutant or combination of pollutants into a
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or into the waters of the Commonwealth
from any source.
Groundwater: Water beneath the surface of the ground.
Illicit Discharge: Direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to an MS4, except as
specifically exempted in Illicit Stormwater Section 8.07.100. (D). The term does not include
a discharge in compliance with a National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System
(NPDES) stormwater discharge permit or resulting from fire fighting or other municipal
activities, not including Construction Activities.
Illicit Connection: Surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an illicit
discharge into an MS4. Illicit connections include conveyances which allow a nonstormwater
discharge to an MS4 including sewage, process wastewater or wash water and
connections from indoor drains, sinks or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was
previously allowed, permitted or approved before the effective date of this bylaw.
Infiltration: The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4): The system of conveyances designed or
used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including road or street with a drainage system,
gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, drain
channel, reservoir, and other drainage owned or operated by the Town of East Longmeadow.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit: A
permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
Non-Stormwater Discharges: Discharge to the MS4 not composed entirely of stormwater.
Peak Discharge: The maximum rate of flow during a storm.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
31
Permeable Soils: Soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration rate so as to greatly
reduce or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff.
Person: An individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company,
business, organization, trust, estate, administrative agency, public or quasi-public entity, the
commonwealth or political subdivision thereof or the federal government, to the extent
permitted by law and an officer, employee or agent of such person.
Pollutant: Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial, commercial or
residential waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a
point or nonpoint source, that is introduced into the MS4 or waters of the Commonwealth.
Pollutants shall include, but not be limited to: dredged spoil, solid waste, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, hot fluids, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, and industrial,
municipal, agricultural and residential waste discharged into water.
Retention: The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or emergency bypass.
Runoff: Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
Stormwater: Runoff from precipitation or snowmelt.
Stormwater Management Facility: A structural stormwater management measure, including
stormwater management basins and filtration or other treatment systems.
Uncontaminated Water: Water containing no pollutants.
Uncontaminated Groundwater: Groundwater containing no pollutants.
Waters of the Commonwealth: All waters within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth,
including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries,
wetlands, coastal waters and groundwater.
Wastewater: Sanitary waste or sludge and water used during manufacturing, cleaning or
processing of materials that enters the MS4 or waters of the Commonwealth.
8.070.020 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to better manage land development in order to protect,
maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of East
Longmeadow by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse
impacts associated with stormwater runoff.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
32
8.070.030 Authority
The Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee shall administer, enforce
and implement this section. The Town Manager or his designee shall promulgate rules,
regulations and a permitting process to effectuate the purposes of this section. Failure by the
Town Manager or his designee to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the
effect of suspending or invalidating this section.
8.070.040 Applicability
(A) Applicability. This bylaw shall apply to activities that result in disturbance of one (1) or
more acres (43,560+ square feet) of land. In determining whether an activity is subject to
jurisdiction under this bylaw, the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his
designee and applicant shall consider the entirety of the project, including any likely future
expansion, and not separate phases or segments thereof. The applicant shall not phase or
segment a project to evade, defer or curtail review under this bylaw. Except as authorized by
the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee, no person shall perform an
activity that results in disturbance of one (1) or more acres of land.
(B) Exemptions. The following uses and activities are exempt from compliance with this
bylaw:
1. Stormwater discharges resulting from land disturbance activities that are subject to an
Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission under the Wetlands Protection
Act;
2. An agricultural activity which is in compliance with an approved soil conservation plan
prepared or approved by the United States Natural Resource Conservation Service;
3. Logging which is in compliance with a timber management plan approved under the
Forest Cutting Practices Act by Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation;
4. Activities that do not disturb more than one (1) acre (43,560 square feet) of land;
5. Construction of municipal utilities;
6. In-kind repairs to a stormwater treatment system deemed necessary by the East
Longmeadow Department of Public Works Superintendent; and
7. An emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or
the environment, as determined by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his
designee.
(C) Waivers. The Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee may waive
strict compliance with any requirement of this bylaw or the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder upon written findings of the fact setting forth the basis for the waiver
by the Department of Public Works Superintendent.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
33
8.070.050 Permit Requirements
(A) Permit required. Prior to the approval of a Special Permit, Site Plan or waiver thereof or
Building Permit for an activity regulated hereunder, a Stormwater Management Permit must
be approved by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee.
(B) Permit fees. For Stormwater Management Permit fee shall be based on the amount of
land to be disturbed at the site and the fee structure shall be established by the Department of
Public Works Superintendent by regulation. If, in the judgment of the Department of Public
Works Superintendent, or his designee consulting services are necessary or appropriate, the
applicant shall, prior to a determination on an application, deposit with the Town, an amount
determined by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee to be
sufficient to cover the full costs of such services. All such consultants shall be selected by
the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee and paid out of said deposit.
The Town will reimburse the applicant for any credits remaining after a consultant has been
paid within thirty (30) days of said payment. In the event the deposit is insufficient to cover
consultant services, the outstanding balance is to be paid by the applicant within thirty (30)
days of receipt of invoice for the outstanding balance.
(C) Stormwater and erosion control plan. The application for a stormwater management
permit shall consist of submittal of a stormwater management and erosion control plan
prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations.
(D) Stormwater Management Performance Standards. Projects that require a permit under
this bylaw must meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards.
8.070.060 Performance Bond
The Department of Public Works Superintendent shall require from the developer a cash
bond prior to the submittal of a building permit application for the construction of a
development requiring a stormwater management facility. The amount of the security shall
not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management facility
including the applicable prevailing wage cost for the project. The bond shall be forfeited for
failure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management permit,
compliance with all of the provisions of this bylaw and other applicable laws and rules and
regulations, and any time limitations. No portion of the bond shall be released without an
inspection of the work by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee.
The bond shall not be fully released without submission to the Department of Public Works
Superintendent or his designee of acceptable “as-built” plans and certification of completion
that the stormwater management facilities are in compliance with the permit and plans
approved thereunder.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
34
8.070.070 Certificate of Completion
The Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee shall issue a letter certifying
completion upon receipt and approval of the final inspection reports, final plans, including
evidence of recording of permanent easements, and/or upon otherwise determining that all
work of the permit has been satisfactorily completed in conformance with this bylaw.
8.070.080 Illicit Discharges Purpose
The purpose of this portion of the bylaw is to regulate illicit connections and discharges to
the MS4, to protect East Longmeadow’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the
public health, safety, welfare and the environment, by:
(a) preventing pollutants from entering East Longmeadow’s MS4;
(b) prohibiting illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4;
(c) requiring the removal of all such illicit connections;
(d) establishing the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provision of this bylaw
through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
8.070.090 Illicit Discharges Applicability
This section shall apply to flows entering the MS4.
8.070.100 Illicit Discharges Prohibited Activities
(A) Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged a
pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into MS4s or into waters of the Commonwealth.
(B) Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue an illicit
connection to an MS4, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
(C) Obstruction of storm drain system. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal
flow of stormwater into or out of an MS4 without prior approval from the Department of
Public Works Superintendent or his designee.
(D) Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following non-stormwater discharges or
flows provided that the source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to MS4s:
1. waterline flushing;
2. flow from potable water sources;
3. springs
4. natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
35
5. diverted stream flow;
6. rising groundwater;
7. uncontaminated groundwater infiltrating (entering the MS4 from the ground through such
means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes), or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater;
8. water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), sump pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
9. discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
10. water from individual residential car washing;
11. discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one (1) ppm chlorine)
provided the water is allowed to stand for one (1) week prior to draining and the pool is
drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance;
12. discharge from street sweeping;
13. discharge or flow resulting from ice and snow control operations;
14. dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Department of Public Works
Superintendent or his designee prior to the time of the test;
15. discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities;
16. non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the
permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations;
17. discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the Department of Public
Works Superintendent or his designee as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare,
and the environment; and
18. incidental discharge (e.g., dust, drops of fluids) from maintenance and normal activities
related to allowed uses, which results in de minimus levels of pollution entering the MS4 or
Waters of the Commonwealth in East Longmeadow. This bylaw does not supersede any
other local, state or federal requirements.
8.070.110 Notification of Spills
Notwithstanding any other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation has information of a known or suspected release of materials at that facility
operation which is resulting or may result in illicit discharge of pollutants that person shall
take the necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a
release enters the MS4 or Waters of the Commonwealth in East Longmeadow, the person
shall immediately notify the East Longmeadow Department of Public Works Superintendent.
Written confirmation of telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications shall be provided to
the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee within three (3) business
days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial
facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site a written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained by
said facility owner or operator for at least three (3) years.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
36
8.070.120 Enforcement
Any officer, employee, person or entity observing or having actual knowledge of a violation
of this bylaw or a rule or regulation adopted hereunder that he is responsible for enforcing
may, as an alternative to seeking a criminal penalty for violation of this bylaw, give the
offender a ticket in a form in compliance with the requirements of and in the manner
established in M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21D and section 8.130 of the East Longmeadow
General Bylaws. The Department of Public Works Superintendent shall designate the person
or persons responsible for enforcement.
The penalty for each violation of this stormwater management portion of the bylaw and the
rules and regulations adopted hereunder shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each day
or part thereof shall constitute a separate violation.
The Department of Public Works Superintendent, in addition to issuing said tickets, may
enforce the provisions of this bylaw by injunctive relief if it determines that the health, safety
or welfare of any resident or member of the public or that the well being of the community is
or will be endangered by the violation(s).
Any permit issued pursuant to this bylaw shall contain language requiring the applicant to
pay any and all costs, including attorney fees and expert witness fees, incurred by the town in
seeking court action regarding the enforcement of this bylaw and the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder.
The prior provisions of this bylaw notwithstanding, the Department of Public Works
Superintendent or his designee may enter onto a person’s land to inspect any work performed
under a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw. The Department of Public Works
Superintendent may also enter any property to determine if such property is in violation of
this bylaw or rules and regulations if it has a good faith basis to believe an activity requiring
a permit is being performed on the property without such a permit.
The Department of Public Works Superintendent may, for cause shown, suspend or terminate
a person’s connection to the MS4 and any permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
Notice of the intent to suspend or terminate a person’s connection to the MS4 or a permit
shall be given in writing to the owner of the property and the permit holder, if different, by
delivering, to the owner to the address listed for taxation purposes in the Assessor’s Office,
and the permit holder at the address listed in the application; a copy of the notice of hearing
shall be delivered at least ten (10) business days before said hearing date and shall, in
addition, be mailed by 1st class mail, postage prepaid at least fourteen (14) days before said
hearing.
The notice shall contain the:
1. Name and address of the owner of the property;
2. The name and address of the permit holder if different than the owner;
3. The action contemplated;
4. Statement of violations believed to exist; and
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
37
5. A statement that the owner and permit holder may present evidence regarding alleged
violations.
If the Department of Public Works Superintendent or his designee determines in writing that
the public health, safety or welfare requires immediate action, it may suspend or terminate
MS4 service and any permit immediately. However, in such a case, notice as set forth above,
shall be delivered and mailed to the owner and permit holder, if different, informing them
that they have fifteen (15) days from the date of the suspension or termination to appeal said
action of the Department of Public Works Superintendent.
8.070.130 Transitional Provisions
Property owners shall comply with the illicit discharges sections of this bylaw, but such
property owners shall in no case have more than six (6) months from the effective date of the
bylaw to comply with its provisions, unless good cause is shown for the failure to comply
with the bylaw during that period.
8.080 Discharge of Firearms within the Town
Rifles larger than .22 cal., pistols larger than .38 cal., and shotguns larger than 12 gauge may
not be discharged within the limits of the Town without a permit from the Town Manager.
This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel in the performance of their official
duties.
8.090 Disturbing and Unnecessary Noise
(A) Except as otherwise provided herein, the creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noise in the Town is prohibited.
(B) The following acts, among others, are declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said examples shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
1. Motor Vehicles. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another
vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion as a danger signal after or as
brakes are being applied and deceleration of a vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, including unmufflered
vehicles, and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time.
2. Radios, phonographs, and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or
any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours
between 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of person
in any dwelling, or other type of residence.
3. Churches, schools. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
church, school or other institution of learning or adjacent to any institution for the care of the
aged or infirm, which unreasonably interferes with their use.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
38
4. Power Equipment. The operation of bulldozers, power shovels, rollers or other similar
heavy equipment other than between the hours of 7:00 AM and 8:00 PM Monday through
Saturday is prohibited. No such equipment shall be operated on Sundays. Emergencies
involving the health and welfare of the citizens are exempted from the conditions of this
section.
8.100 Limitation on the Use, Sale, Keeping and Storage of Fuel Burning
Portable Space Heaters
(A) No person shall keep, store, sell, or cause to allow to be used in any building any fuel
burning portable space heater. “Portable space heater” is defined as a space heater which
when installed in a building is not firmly affixed in place by a rigid pipe connection or
otherwise and is not permanently connected to a chimney, stack or flue.
(B) Paragraph (A) above shall not apply to approved salamanders used by the building
trades in buildings under alteration or construction.
1. An approved salamander is defined as one that has been approved by the
Underwriters Laboratories or the Factory Mutual Laboratories.
2. An alteration is defined as a change in or addition to a building, which changes the
internal or external shape of the building.
8.110 Fine for Carrying Firearms
Any person, who, without the written permission of the owner, enters upon the improved or
unimproved land of another while carrying firearms, shall be punished by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100) for each such offense. This bylaw shall be enforced by police officers and may be
administered under the provisions of M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21D, the Non-Criminal
Disposition Law.
8.120 False Alarms
In any calendar year, if the Fire Department responds to a fire alarm, which is transmitted
to the department by an electronic fire alarm located at any dwelling or business premises, and
which alarm is found to be false, the owner or occupant of said premises shall be liable for a fine
in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation of the above, after the third false alarm
in any given calendar year. For the purposes of this section a “false” alarm shall be defined as
the activation of an electronic fire alarm system which results in the response of the Fire
Department to the premises, and is found to be for any cause other than a fire on the premises,
which requires the services of the Fire Department. This bylaw section shall be enforced by the
Fire Chief or his designee under the provisions of M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21D, the Non-
Criminal Disposition Law.
8.130 Non-Criminal Disposition Procedure
(A) Violations of Certain Bylaws, Rules and Regulations. A non-criminal disposition
procedure, using the civil infraction procedure in M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21D, is enacted
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
39
for violations of the Town of East Longmeadow General Bylaws, Rules or Regulations of the
Town.
(B) Issuance Of Citations. Citations for violations of the bylaws, rules or regulations made
enforceable under this section shall be issued by the designated enforcing officer authorized
in writing by the appointing authority which has voted to have the designated bylaw rule
and/or regulation enforced under this bylaw.
(C) Any authorized employee observing a violation of a rule or regulation is empowered to
enforce and shall give to the offender a ticket in a form in compliance with the requirements
of and in the manner established by said Section 21D.
(D) Violations and Penalties. The penalty under civil infraction procedure for each
violation of any bylaw rule or regulation shall be as designated in each bylaw, rule, or
regulation enforced under this bylaw. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate
violation. This penalty is an alternative to the criminal penalties that are set for the in this
bylaw.
(E) Enforcement Officer: Report on Fines. It shall be the responsibility of the Chief
Procurement Officer or his designee to purchase, distribute and track the citations issued
under this section. The Collector of Taxes shall monthly forward a report of the fines
received pursuant to this section, showing by Department, Board or Committee, the amount
received as a result of tickets issued by each such Department, Board or Committee.
8.140 Municipal Charges Lien
(A) Authority: This bylaw is adopted pursuant to the authority of M.G.L. chapter 40, sections 21
and 58.
(B) Purpose: The purpose of the establishment of a Municipal Charges Lien is to provide a cost
effective method of collecting a charge and/or fee assessed against an owner of real property in
the Town who fails and/or refuses to pay said charge and/or fee when due, by placing a lien upon
real estate owned by the property owner.
(C) Charge and/or Fee: The Municipal Charges Lien shall apply to the following municipal
charge and/or fees:
1. Charges or penalties for violations of the zoning bylaws including interest and costs
to record said liens in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
2. Charges or penalties for violation of the general bylaws, including interest and costs
to record said liens in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
3. Fees for licenses and permits and penalties for violations of the rules and
regulations of the Board of Health including interest and costs to record said liens in
Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
(D) Recording of Lien: The Municipal Charges Lien will take effect upon the recording of a
statement of unpaid municipal charges and fees, setting forth the amount due, including
recording costs, the address(es) of the land to which the lien is to apply and the name of the
assessed owner.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
40
(E) Collection of Lien:
a) The Collector of Taxes shall be in charge of collecting the lien.
b) The Town Clerk shall notify the Assessors of all tickets that have not been
paid or appealed to the court at the end of each month.
c) The Assessors shall prepare a statement of Municipal Charges Lien for each
person from the list(s) received from the Town Clerk or person responsible for
collecting the charge or penalty and shall forward said statement to the Collector of
Taxes who shall cause said statement(s) to be recorded in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds.
(F) Unpaid Municipal Charges Liens:
a) If a charge or fee secured by the lien is unpaid when the Assessors are
preparing the real estate tax list and warrant, the Collector of Taxes shall certify the
charge or penalty to the Assessors’ Department and the Assessors shall add the
charge or fee to the next property tax bill to which it relates, and commit it with the
warrant to the Collector of Taxes as part of the tax.
b) If the property to which the charge or fee relates is tax exempt, the charge or
fee shall be committed as a tax on said property.
(G) Release of Lien: The Municipal Charge Lien may be discharged by filing a certificate from
the Collector of Taxes that all municipal charges or fees including interest and costs constituting
a lien have been paid or legally abated.
(H) Abatement: The Assessors, prior to a charge or fee being certified to the Assessors by the
Tax Collector under section 6, may abate any charge or fee for justifiable cause which shall be
effective upon issuing of a written statement setting forth said cause, and filing of said statement
with the Collector of Taxes. The cost of recording any documents required to release a lien in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
41
Chapter 9
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections:
9.010 Animal Control (Leash Law)
9.015 Removal of Dog Waste
9.020 Animal Inspector
9.025 Prolonged Confinement of Dogs Outside
9.010 Animal Control (Leash Law)
(A) No person owning or keeping a dog in the town shall allow such animal to roam at large
upon the land of another, except if it be on the premises of another person with the
knowledge and permission of such other person. Such owner or keeper of an animal in the
Town which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises of another person with
the knowledge and permission of such person shall restrain such animal by a chain or leash
not exceeding six (6) feet in length.
(B) The unauthorized presence of any animal on the land of any person other than the owner
or keeper of such animal when such animal is not restrained as above mentioned shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this section.
(C) A violation of section 9.010, including subsection (I), this section shall be punishable by
a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
second through fourth subsequent offense within the calendar year. The fourth subsequent
offense shall be punishable by a mandatory hearing and a fine of seventy five dollars
($75.00). The owner of any dog picked up shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to
the Town before the release of the dog from the pound. The pound fee for animals held in
violation of this Animal Control Law shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). In addition to the
above described procedures, the provisions of this section may also be enforced by the
Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the Town, by non-criminal disposition
procedure pursuant to Section 8.130.
(D) The fee required by M.G.L. chapter 140, sections 137 to 174 inclusive, as amended, for
the licensing of dogs within the town, shall be increased by twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
any license purchased after the due date, said additional fees shall be retained by the Town.
Dogs shall be required to be vaccinated against rabies and proof of same shall be required
before licensing.
(E) Pound and other fees for violation of the Animal Control Law shall be collected by the
Animal Control Officer and shall be turned over to the Town Treasurer.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
42
(F) The Town Manager or his designee may designate times and places on Town property
where dogs may be exercised or trained off the leash but under the control and supervision of
their masters.
(G) Any animal found to be at large in violation of this section shall be caught and confined
by the Animal Control Officer and/or his assistants, who shall notify forthwith the licensed
owner or keeper of such animal, giving the owner or keeper of such animal a period of ten
(10) days within which to recover such animal. Animals confined under the authority of this
order shall be confined in a place suitable for the care and detention of animals, or they may
be placed in the care of the holder of a kennel license, such place or holder of a kennel
license to be designated by the Town Manager or his designee. At the end of the ten (10) day
period, any animal not so claimed may be disposed of in the manner provided by law. The
owner or keeper of such animal shall be required to pay the reasonable expense of
maintaining such animal in confinement, including, but not limited to, cost of feeding,
medical care, medicines, and the like. Return of the animal to the licensed owner or keeper
shall be dependent upon admission of ownership or the keeping of the dog and the
assumption of responsibility by the licensed owner or keeper. The Animal Control Officer
shall enter and prosecute a complaint against the owner or keeper of any animal taken into
custody under this section; provided, that if within the twelve (12) months next preceding
this offense the owner or keeper has not been convicted for violation of this section or an
animal owned or kept by him has not been taken into custody for violation of this section, the
Animal Control Officer may waive prosecution.
(H) The Town Manager or his designee shall appoint an Animal Control Officer and such
assistants as are deemed necessary to administer and enforce this law and the sections of
M.G.L. chapter 140, as amended, relating to dogs.
(I) If any person shall make a complaint in writing to the Town Manager or his designee that
any animal owned or harbored within the Town is a nuisance by reason of vicious
disposition, excessive barking, or other disturbance, the Town Manager shall take any action
as provided in M.G.L. chapter 140, sections 137 to 174 inclusive or any other chapter, and
any amendments thereto. Such disturbance causing a nuisance shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
1. Biting of persons.
2. Running in packs.
3. Breaking or damaging shrubbery or crops and gardens.
4. Chasing cars.
5. Running at large in violation of this bylaw.
Said written complaint to the Town Manager or his designee shall include the name and
address of the owner and keeper of such animal and the name and address of the person(s)
making complaint.
(J) The Town Manager or his designee may appoint the Animal Control Officer a special
police officer or constable.
(K) No bull or vicious animal shall be kept within the Town unless securely confined within
an enclosure adequate to prevent its escape there from. The Fire and Police Department are
to be notified of areas where there are animals trained to attack.
(L) No animal shall be driven or ridden on any sidewalk, public park or school grounds
under the control of the Town.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
43
(M)Horses, cows, goats, swine, poultry and other animals are regulated by the Board of
Health.
(N) Copies of the regulations of the Board of Health are available in the Town Clerk’s Office
for a fee.
9.015 Removal of Dog Waste
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, walking, in possession, custody or
control of any dog to allow or permit such dog to defecate upon any public or private
property unless such person shall remove all feces deposited by such dog before leaving such
property.
(B) The provision of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind
person.
(C) Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a
fine of twenty dollars ($20.00).
(D) This section may also be enforced by the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in
Section 8.130. The penalty for each violation shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
violation.
(E) The Animal Control Officer and any Police Officer of the Town are authorized to enforce
the provisions of this section.
9.020 Animal Inspector
(A) The Town Manager or his designee shall appoint the Animal Inspector for one year.
(B) The Animal Inspector shall make an annual report to the Town Manager that contains the
number of inspections made and facts of general interest.
9.025 Prolonged Confinement of Dogs Outside
(A) Prolonged chaining or tethering of dogs is prohibited. No person owning or
keeping a dog in the town shall chain or tether a dog to a stationary object including
but not limited to any structure, dog house, pole or tree for longer than six (6) total
hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as prohibiting a person from walking a dog on a hand-held leash.
(B) Permissible Outside Confinement. A person owning or keeping a dog in the town
may confine such dog outside for longer than six (6) total hours in a twenty-four (24)
hour period through the use of any of the following three (3) methods:
(1) A pen or secure enclosure, if the following conditions are met: (a) The pen or
secure enclosure has adequate space for exercise with a dimension of at least
one-hundred (100) square feet. Commercial dog kennels with pens intended for
the temporary boarding of dogs are exempt from this requirement. (b) The pen or
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
44
secure enclosure is constructed with chain link or other similar material as
determined by the Building Inspector, with all four (4) sides enclosed.
(2) A fully fenced or otherwise securely enclosed yard wherein a dog has the
ability to run but is unable to leave the enclosed yard.
(3) A trolley system or a tether attached to a pulley on a cable run, if the following
conditions are met:
(a) Only one (1) dog may be tethered to each cable run.
(b) The tether must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness worn
by the dog, with enough room between the collar and the dog’s throat
through which two (2) adult fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars
are prohibited for the purposes of tethering a dog to a cable run.
(c) There must be a swivel on at least one end of the tether to minimize
tangling of the tether.
(d) The tether and cable run must be at least ten (10) feet in length and
mounted at least four (4) feet but not more than seven (7) feet above ground
level.
(e) The length of the tether from the cable run to the dog’s collar or harness
must allow continuous access to water and appropriate shelter as described
in paragraph (C) of this bylaw. The trolley system or tether must be of
appropriate configuration to confine the dog to the owner’s property, to
prevent the trolley system or tether from extending over an object or an
edge that could result in injury or strangulation of the dog; and to prevent the
trolley system or tether from becoming tangled with other objects or animals.
(C) Access to Water and Shelter. Any person owning or keeping a dog in the town
confined outside in accordance with paragraph (B) of this section must provide the
dog with access to water and an appropriate dog shelter. The dog shelter must allow
the dog to remain dry and protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be fully
enclosed on three (3) sides, roofed, and have a solid floor. The entrance to the
shelter shall be flexible to allow the dog’s entry and exit, and sturdy enough to block
entry of wind and rain. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the dog’s body
heat and large enough to allow the dog to stand and turn comfortably. The enclosure
shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Suitable drainage must be provided so
that water is not standing in or around the shelter.
(D) No Outside Confinement at Night. No person owning or keeping a dog in the
town may leave a dog chained, tethered or confined outside between the hours of
11:00 PM and 6:00 AM.
(E) Hazardous Weather Conditions. The Animal Control Officer shall determine if weather
conditions are hazardous to a particular dog or dogs chained, tethered or confined outside in
accordance with paragraphs (A) or (B) of this section. Upon such determination, the Animal
Control Officer shall order the owner or keeper of the dog to provide the dog with immediate
access to an approved area. The failure of the owner or keeper of a dog to provide access to
an approved area pursuant to the Animal Control Officer’s order shall constitute a violation
of this section.
(F) Consequences of Violation. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a
written warning for the first offense. Subsequent offenses shall be punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) each, and the Animal Control Officer and/or his
assistant shall have the authority to impound and confine the dog in accordance with
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
45
paragraph (G) of this section. In addition to the above described procedures, the
provisions of this section may also be enforced by the Animal Control Officer or any
police officer of this town, by non-criminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of
M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21 D.
(G) Impounded Dogs. Animals impounded under the authority of this section shall be
confined in a place suitable for the care and detention of animals, or they may be
placed in the care of the holder of a kennel license, such place or holder of a kennel
license to be designated by the Town Manager or his designee. The owner or
keeper of the dog will be notified in writing of the impoundment and will have a
period of ten (10) calendar days within which to recover the dog. The owner or
keeper of the dog shall be required to pay the reasonable expense of maintaining
the dog in confinement, including, but not limited to cost of boarding, feeding,
medical care, and medicines. Return of the animal to the licensed owner or keeper
shall be dependent upon admission of ownership or the keeping of the dog and the
assumption of the responsibility by the licensed owner or keeper. If the owner or
keeper fails to claim the dog or perform all actions necessary for the return of the
dog in said ten (10) days, the dog officer shall find permanent placement for the dog
in a new home or rescue. If placement is not obtainable, as in the case of a vicious
dog, the dog may be ordered euthanized.
(H) Payment of Fines and Fees. Fines and fees for violation of this section shall be
collected by the Town Clerk and shall be turned over to the Town Treasurer. Failure
of the owner or keeper of the dog to tender the applicable fines or fees to the Town
Clerk within thirty (30) days shall result in the imposition of a municipal charge lien
on any property in the Town of East Longmeadow owned by the dog owner or
keeper.
(I) Consequence of Multiple Violations. If any owner or keeper of a dog in the town
violates this section more than five times, the Animal Control Officer may after a
hearing, with not less than ten (10) days notice to owner or keeper, confiscate the
dog or order the person to permanently surrender the dog for placement. If
placement is not obtainable, as in the case of a vicious dog, the dog may be ordered
euthanized.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
46
Chapter 10
SPECIAL COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
Sections:
10.010 Conservation Commission
10.011 Conservation Commission – Consultant Fees - Definitions
10.012 Conservation Commission
10.020 Council on Aging
10.030 Historical Commission
10.040 Housing Authority
10.050 Industrial Development Committee
10.060 Industrial Development Financing Authority
10.070 Recreation Commission
10.080 Community Preservation Committee
10.010 Conservation Commission
The membership of the Conservation Commission consists of seven (7) members serving three
(3) year terms by appointment of the Town Manager.
10.011 Conservation Commission – Consultant Fees - Definitions
Consultant Fees. The Conservation Commission is authorized to require any applicant
to pay the reasonable costs and expenses borne by the Commission for specific expert
engineering and consultant services deemed necessary by the Commission to review a Notice of
Intent, as described in paragraphs 1 through 4 below. Said payment can be required at any point
in the deliberations prior to a final decision rendered. Said services may include but are not
necessarily limited to wetlands survey and delineations, hydrogeologic and drainage analysis,
wildlife evaluation, and environmental/land-use law. The Commission may require the applicant
to pay fees directly to the consultant designated by the Commission, not to exceed the following:
1. Projects proposing one thousand (1,000) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet of alteration of the one hundred (100) foot buffer zone, or fifty (50) linear feet of a
bank or waterway alteration, the Consultant Fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
2. Projects proposing one thousand five hundred (1,500) to two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of alteration of the one hundred (100) foot buffer zone, or fifty (50) to
two hundred (200) linear feet of bank or waterway alteration; the Consultant Fee shall not
exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00).
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
47
3. Projects proposing two thousand five hundred (2,500) to ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of alteration of the one hundred (100) foot buffer zone or two hundred (200) to four
hundred (400) linear feet of bank or waterway alteration, the Consultant Fee shall not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
4. Projects proposing more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of alteration of a one
hundred (100) foot buffer zone or more than four hundred (400) linear feet of bank or
waterway alteration, the Consultant Fee shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
The minimum qualifications of the consultant chosen by the Commission shall consist either of
an educational degree in or related to the field of issue or three or four more years of practice in
the field at issue or a related field. Hourly fees charged by Consultants shall be made available
to the applicant at the applicant’s request.
DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw.
Alter shall include, without limitation, the following actions when undertaken to, upon,
within or affecting resource areas protected by this bylaw:
a. Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate material of any
kind;
b. Changing of pre-existing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity
distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns of surface and subsurface water or flood
retention characteristics;
c. Drainage or other disturbance of water level of water table;
d. Dumping, discharging or filling of any material or in any manner which may
degrade water quality or interfere with any of the interests protected by this bylaw;
e. Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structures of any kind;
f. Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water;
g. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
h. Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical or
chemical characteristics of the water.
10.012 Conservation Commission
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to protect the wetlands, related water resources
and adjoining land areas of the Town of East Longmeadow by controlling activities found by
the Conservation Commission (hereinafter “Commission”) likely to have a significant or
cumulative effect upon the following wetland values: Protection of public or private water
supply and groundwater, protection of fisheries, flood control, sedimentation and erosion
control, serving as a drainage area for storm water runoff, prevention of water pollution,
protection of water quality and the provision for and protection of wildlife habitat
(collectively “the interests protected by this bylaw”).
(B) Jurisdiction. Except as permitted by the Commission or as provided in this bylaw, no
person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon or alter the following resource areas: upon or
within one hundred (100) feet of any bank, bordering fresh water wetland, flat, marsh, wet
meadow, bog swamp, isolated wetland or temporary wetland, or upon or within one hundred
(100) feet of any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake, or upon or within one hundred
(100) feet of any land under said waters or upon or within one hundred (100) feet of any
bordering or isolated land subject to flooding, or within one hundred (100) feet of one
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
48
hundred (100) year flood line. The jurisdiction of the Commission over any temporary
wetland and the one hundred (100) foot buffer around such wetland shall exist only if any
such temporary wetland is found by a qualified wildlife expert to be vital to the survival of
any animal species that uses such wetland exclusively for its reproductive cycle.
(C) Exceptions. The permit and application required by this bylaw shall not be required for
maintaining, repairing or replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing
an lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public and used to provide
electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer, telephone, telegraph and other
telecommunication services, provided that written notice has been given to the Commission
prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms to performance
standards and design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
This bylaw shall not apply to any emergency project as defined in the Wetlands
Protection Act, M.G.L. chapter 131, section 40 (hereinafter “The Wetlands Protection Act”)
and the regulations pursuant thereto or to any mosquito control project authorized by any
laws of the Commonwealth.
The Commission may exempt by regulation the application of this bylaw to work
performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land actively devoted to agricultural
use at the time of the application, provided that such regulations are consistent with the
provision applying to agricultural exemptions in the Regulations promulgated under the
Wetlands Protection Act.
(D) Applications for Permits and Requests for Determinations. Written applications shall be
filed with the Commission to perform activities regulated by this bylaw affecting resource
areas protected by this bylaw. The application shall include such information and plans as
are deemed necessary by the Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects
upon the environment. No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with
a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
The Commission may accept as the application and plans under this bylaw the Notice
of Intent and plans filed under the Wetlands Protection Act.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject to
this bylaw may in writing request a determination from the Commission. Such a request for
determination shall contain data and plans specified by the regulations of the Commission.
The Commission may in an appropriate case accept such data and plans as are submitted in
compliance with the Wetlands Protection Act. Any resource area found by the Commission
to meet the definitions contained in this bylaw shall be subject to the protection of this bylaw.
(E) Notice and Hearings
Any person filing a Notice of Intent with the Commission shall complete the filing in
accordance with 310 CMR 10.00. The Commission reserves the right to ask for any
additional information it deems necessary to evaluate a project.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a Notice of Intent within twenty one (21)
days of its receipt. The East Longmeadow Conservation Commission may request an
extension of twenty one (21) days; such extension must be agreed upon by the applicant in
writing. If the Commission deems necessary, copies of the application shall be sent by hand
delivery, to the Town Manager, the Planning Board, Department of Public Works
Superintendent, the Building Inspector and the Board of Health. The Commission shall
provide written notice of the hearing, at the expense of the applicant, five (5) working days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Community.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
49
Any person filing a Notice of Intent with the Commission shall give written notice
thereof, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to abutters of the land to
their mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the Assessors,
including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters
to the abutters within three hundred (300) feet of the property line, including any in another
municipality or across a body of water. The notice to abutters shall enclose a copy of the
Notice of Intent with the plans, or shall state where copies may be examined and obtained by
abutters free of charge. An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy of the
notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission.
The Commission shall issue its decision in writing within twenty one (21) days of the
close of the public hearing thereon unless an extension is authorized in writing by the
applicant.
The Commission may combine its hearing under this bylaw with a hearing conducted
under The Wetlands Protection Act.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue the hearing to a date and time
certain announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing, which may include receipt
of additional information offered by the applicant or others, information and plans required
by the applicant, deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion, or comments and
recommendations of boards and officials listed in the second paragraph of this Section E.
The Commission shall adopt by regulation a procedure providing for the coordination of
its activities with those of other Town Departments, which also assert or may thereafter
assert jurisdiction over the same parcel of land.
(F) Permits, Determinations And Conditions. If the Commission after a public hearing
determines that the activities which are the subject of the application are likely to have a
significant or cumulative effect upon the interests protected by this bylaw and are within the
jurisdiction established by this bylaw, the Commission, within twenty one (21) days after the
close of the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. If the
Commission issues a permit it shall impose conditions, which the Commission deems
necessary or desirable to protect these interests and all activities shall be performed in
accordance with those conditions.
If the Commission determines that the activities, which are subject to the application,
are not likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon the interests protected by this
bylaw, the Commission shall issue a permit without conditions within twenty one (21) days
after the public hearing.
Failure by the Commission to take any action within forty five (45) days after the close
of a hearing at which the applicant has produced all the required information shall be deemed
to be finding by the Commission that, in the case of a request of determination, the area is not
subject to this bylaw or, in the case of an application, the activities which are subject of the
application will not have a significant or cumulative impact upon the interests protected by
this bylaw. Such procedure shall apply only to areas of Commission jurisdiction that exceed
that established under the Wetland Protection Act.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of
this bylaw; for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the
Commission; for failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards and other
requirements in regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable
significant or cumulative effects upon the interest protected by this bylaw; and where no
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
50
conditions are adequate to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given by the
Commission to any demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as presented
at public hearing.
A permit shall expire three (3) years from the date of issuance, and all work shall be
completed prior to expiration. The Commission may extend a permit for an additional one
(1) year period.
The Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued under this bylaw after notice to
the holder of the permit, notice to the public, abutters, and town boards pursuant to Section E,
and public hearing, for two or more violations of Notice of Intent and Order of Conditions.
The Commission may combine the permit or other action on an application issued
under the bylaw with the Order of Conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the permit issued by the
Commission with respect to such work has been recorded in the registry of deeds, or, if the
land affected thereby be registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the
district wherein the land lies, by the holder of the permit or, if provided in regulations of the
Commission, by the Town of East Longmeadow and until the holder of the permit certifies in
writing to the Commission that the permit has been so recorded or that the Town of East
Longmeadow has recorded said permit.
(G) Pre-Acquisition Violation. Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires
real estate upon which work has been performed in violation of the provisions of this bylaw
or in violation of any order issued pursuant to this bylaw shall forthwith comply with any
such order or restore such land to its conditions prior to any such violation provided,
however, that unless the violation is found by the Commission, after notice and hearing, to
pose a substantial and material threat to the interests protected by this bylaw, no action, civil
or criminal, shall be brought against such person unless such action is commenced within
three (3) years of following the recording of the deed or the date of the death by which such
real estate was acquired by such person and the order of conditions which is being violated or
any enforcement order relating to the violation was appropriately recorded.
(H) Burden of Proof. In general the applicant shall have the burden of providing by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not harm
the interests protected by this bylaw. As to activities which may impact isolated wetlands
and temporary wetlands which are not also subject to the Commission’s jurisdiction under
the Wetlands Protection Act, the Commission shall not require that the applicant prove that
the proposed alteration will not have cumulative effect on the interests protected by this
bylaw but shall require only that the applicant demonstrate that the proposed activity will not
have a significant effect on the interests protected by this bylaw.
(I) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw.
1. Alter shall include, without limitation, the following actions when undertaken to,
upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this bylaw;
a.Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand gravel or aggregate material of
any kind;
b. Changing of pre-existing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics,
salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns of surface and
subsurface water or flood retention characteristics;
c.Drainage or other disturbance of water level of water table;
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
51
d. Dumping, discharging or filling with any material or in any manner which
may degrade water quality or interfere with any of the interest protected by this
bylaw;
e.Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structure of any kind;
f. Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water;
g. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
h. Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical
or chemical characteristics of the water.
2. Applicant shall mean a person giving notice of intention to build, remove, fill,
dredge or alter or making a request for determination.
3. Banks, bordering fresh water wetland, flat, marsh, wet meadow, bog,
swamp, estuary, creek, river, pond, lake and bordering and isolated land subject
to flooding shall, unless otherwise defined in this bylaw, have the same meaning as in
the Wetlands Protection Act and the regulations there under.
4. Person shall include any individual, group of individuals, associations,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town bylaws,
administrative agencies, public or quasi-public corporations or bodies, the Town of
East Longmeadow, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
5. Isolated Wetlands are areas of wetland vegetation (as defined in Section J.3 of
this bylaw) which are subject to flooding and consist of isolated depressions or closed
basins which serve as a ponding area for run off or high ground water and which
remain wet on a year-round basis except for extended dry periods. Such areas must
be at least four hundred (400) square feet in area and may include kettle holes and
bogs.
6. Temporary Wetlands are those areas of at least four hundred (400) square feet
in areas which are periodically flooded on a purely seasonal basis by high ground
water or runoff and include vernal and autumnal ponds. Prior to exercising
jurisdiction over any temporary wetlands which is not also subject to the
Commission’s jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act, the Commission shall
publish the location of such areas on a map, after notice and hearing. No such areas
not already under the Commission’s jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act
shall be subject to the Commission’s jurisdiction unless a qualified wildlife
professional has determined that the area is vital to the survival of a species of animal
which uses that area exclusively in its reproductive process.
7. Significant Effect. An activity has a significant effect on the interests protected
by this bylaw if such activity has a measurable impact on a resource covered by this
bylaw and tends to reduce the capacity of that resource area to support or sustain the
interests protected by this bylaw.
8. Cumulative Effect. An activity has a cumulative effect on the interests
protected by this bylaw if such activity, added to or in conjunction with similar
activity which has occurred or has been proposed and which affects the same resource
area, has a measurable impact on a resource area covered by this bylaw and tends to
reduce the capacity of that resource area to support or sustain the interests protected
by this bylaw. The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
52
credible evidence that the activity has no cumulative effect on the values protected by
this bylaw.
9. Other Definitions. The Commission may adopt additional definitions not
inconsistent with Section J in its regulations promulgated pursuant to Section H of
this bylaw.
(J) Security. As part of a permit issued under this bylaw, in addition to any security required
by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the Commission may require that
the performance and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in
part by a proper bond or a deposit of money or negotiable securities in an amount determined
by the Commission to be sufficient and payable to the Town of East Longmeadow.
In addition or in the alternative, the Commission may accept as security a conservation
restriction, easement or other covenant running with the land, executed and properly recorded
(or registered, in case of registered land) by the owner of record to the benefit of the Town of
East Longmeadow.
(K) Enforcement. After notice to the landowner, the Commission, its agents, officers, and
employees shall have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to be made such
examination, surveys or sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw or any conditions of a permit
issued pursuant to it shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00). Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
If the Town of East Longmeadow has adopted a comprehensive “ticketing” program
based on M.G.L. chapter 40, section 21D, the Commission shall adopt such program through
its regulations. If such a program has not been adopted, the Commission may thereafter elect
to enforce this bylaw pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D, and the Chairman of the
Commission or the Town Conservation Enforcement Officer, if one has been appointed, may
enforce this by bylaw under the provision of that section.
Upon petition of the Commission, the Town Manager and Town Attorney may take
such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this bylaw and permits issued pursuant to it.
(L) Appeals. A decision of the Commission may be appealed by any person aggrieved
thereby in the following manner:
1. Such person may, within ten (10) days of the decision, request that the matter be
settled through a mediation process conducted by a disinterested environmental
professional who is mutually agreed upon by the Commission and the aggrieved
party. If no such professional can be agreed upon, then one shall be appointed by the
Chairman of the Conservation Law Foundation. Once the aggrieved party and the
Commission agree to such procedure the results thereof shall be binding on both
parties. An applicant whose application involves a total parcel size of less than two
(2) acres (including all upland areas not under the jurisdiction of the Commission)
and an abutter to the property which is the subject of the application may require that
the Commission agree to such procedure. Such professional shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days of the commencement of the mediation proceedings unless the
professional requests additional information not in the control of either party. The
mediator shall determine how the costs of the proceeding will be allocated between
the parties. The decision of the mediator shall constitute a final decision which may
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
53
be enforced in any court of competent jurisdiction with the costs of such enforcement
procedures to be borne by the party who has refused to comply with such order. Such
procedures shall comply with the rules of the American Arbitration Association to the
extent not otherwise agreed upon; or
1. The decision shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action filed within
sixty (60) days thereof in accordance with M.G.L. chapter 249, section 4, provided
that no such appeal may commence prior to a final decision by the Department of
Environmental Protection on any matter which is subject both to this bylaw and the
Wetlands Protection Act and which has been appealed to that Department.
(M) Relation to Wetlands Protection Act. This bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of
the Wetlands Protection Act and regulations thereunder.
(N) Legal Rendering by Courts. The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall
not invalidate any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any order of
conditions which has previously become final.
10.020 Council on Aging
The membership of the Council on Aging consists of six (6) members sixty (60) years of age
or over, representing the elderly; four (4) members of any age, representing the community at
large, and the Town Manager and the Director of the Council on Aging to be ex-officio
members, without vote.
10.030 Historical Commission
The membership of the Historical Commission consists of seven (7) members serving terms
of three (3) years by appointment of the Town Manager.
10.040 Housing Authority
The membership of the Housing Authority consists of four (4) members appointed by the
Town Manager to five (5) year terms, one expiring each year. The fifth member is appointed
by the State to a five (5) year term.
10.050 Industrial Development Committee
The membership of the Industrial Development Committee consists of five (5) members
appointed by the Town Manager with ex-officio members representing the Town Manager,
Department of Public Works and Planning Board.
10.060 Industrial Development Financing Authority
The membership of the Industrial Development Financing Authority consists of five (5)
members appointed by the Town Manager who serve for terms of five (5) years.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
54
10.070 Recreation Commission
The membership of the Recreation Commission consists of nine (9) members serving terms
of three (3) years by appointment of the Town Manager.
10.080 Community Preservation Committee
Create a Community Preservation Committee to act in an advisory capacity to the Town
Manager.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
55
Special Town Meeting, Adjourned Session held November 1, 1982.
Town of East Longmeadow
MOTION MADE UNDER ARTICLE 18*
1982
BY-LAW
REVISION
Voted that the Town re-enact all the present Sections of the General
Bylaws, 1955, the subjects of which have not been revised and reenacted
at this Town Meeting, especially those of Article 6, Sections
63-110; and which are not repugnant to, or inconsistent with, any new
By-Law provision voted at this Town Meeting; and the same to
continue in full force and effect, constituting both sets as the “General
Bylaws of the Town of East Longmeadow, Revision 1982”.
Voted Unanimously
Note: The above vote was taken at the completion of voting on the By-Law
Revision, prior to the final motion requesting funds to print the new
revision.
A True Record:
Attest:
Richard A. Clark,
Town Clerk
*Editor’s Note: The following vote was taken under Article 8 of the Annual Town
Meeting of May 6, 1996.
Repeal of 1955 General Bylaws:
Voted that the Town repeal those portions of the East Longmeadow General Bylaws,
1955 version, not previously repealed; said Bylaws having been replaced by General By-Law
revisions enacted under Article 18 of the Special Town Meeting dated October 26, 1982.
Passed Unanimously.
The Bylaws herein were approved by Attorney General Francis X. Bellotti on January 11,
1983.
This is to certify that I have published these Bylaws by posting copies as required by law, on
January 26, 1983, thereby constituting the same as the effective date.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
56
Richard A. Clark, Town Clerk
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
57
LEGISLATIVE ACTS ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN AND SPECIAL VOTES
Date of Acceptance Chapter/Section Subject
3-14-1904 Ch. 11, Sec. 363,364 Official Ballots
3-9-1908 Ch. 49, Sec. 42 Establish grades, sidewalks; assess abutters.
3-11-1912 Ch. 11, Sec. 359 Elect moderator for one year.
3-11-1912 Ch. 104, Sec. 1 Adopt a building code.
11-5-1912 Ch. 503, Acts 1912 Pensioning laborers.
11-4-1913 Ch. 807, Acts 1913 Workmen’s Compensation.
3-9-1914 Ch. 494, Acts 1911 Eight-hour day.
11-3-1914 Ch. 217, Acts 1914 Laborers’ vacations.
11-3-1914 Ch. 688, Acts 1914 Saturday, half-holiday.
11-3-1914 Ch. 790, Acts 1914 Political party enrollment.
2-1-1915 Ch. 835, Sec. 406. Acts
1913 Selectmen act as Overseer of the Poor.
2-7-1916 Ch. 49, Sec. 43 Sidewalk construction; portion of costs assessed
to abutters.
12-19-1919 Ch. 59, Acts 1916 Time for holding town meetings.
11-4-1919 Ch. 311, Acts 1919 Continuation of schools.
2-2-1920 Ch. 191, Acts 1907 Establish Board of survey.
2-2-1920 Ch. 655, Acts 1913 Sec. 1, 2, & 4 through 10. To revise and codify
building laws of Commonwealth.
3-21-1920 Ch. 240, Acts 1920 To permit under public regulation and control
certain games and sports on the Lord’s Day.
2-6-1922 Ch. 41, Sec. 31 Selectmen to act as Overseer of the Poor.
3-14-1922 Ch. 41, Sec. 97 Establish a Police Department.
3-14-1922 Ch. 14, Acts 1921 Assessors to appoint assistant assessors.
2-12-1923 Ch. 516, Acts 1922 Installation of accounting system.
2-13-1924 Ch. 40, Sec. 42A thru 42F Collection of water rates.
2-13-1924 Ch. 82, Sec. 37 Relative to building lines.
2-13-1929 Ch. 136, Sec. 7,8 Licensing for sale of articles on Lord’s Day.
2-13-1929 Ch. 139, Sec. 1, 2, 3 Disposition of burnt and dangerous buildings.
2-10-1932 Ch. 107, Acts 1924 Collection of water rates.
3-29-1935 Ch. 131, Sec. 105B Taking of fur-bearing animals; use of traps.
8-12-1942 Ch. 211, Acts 1936 Establish a Planning Board.
2-17-1943 Ch. 31, Sec. 48 Police Department under Civil Service.
2-20-1946 Ch. 723, Acts 1945 Furnish information, assistance to veterans.
2-13-1950 Ch. 158, Acts 1949 Borrowing to construct, furnish school buildings.
2-8-1954 Ch. 265, Acts 1953 Police Chief under Civil Service
2-17-1954 Ch. 265, Acts 1947 Closing of Town Hall offices on Saturday
2-23-1955 Ch. 147, Sec. (C) Five-day week for members of Police Department
2-23-1955 Ch. 39, Sec. 20 Establish precinct voting for town officers.
2-14-1956 Ch. 41, Sec 69(C) to
69(F) Establish a Board of Public Works.
2-23-1956 Ch. 44, Sec. 65 Vacation-pay advances to town employees
2-23-1956 Ch. 670, Acts 1955 Increased pensions of former employees
3-2-1956 Ch. 41, Sec 1, 91A, 91B Two constables to be chosen by ballot
2-21-1958 Ch. 41 Establish a 3-member Art Commission
2-21-1958 Ch. 54, Sec. 103A Absentee ballots at town elections
6-26-1958 Establish a 10-member Council on Aging
11-6-1958 Ch. 41, Sec. 91A Selectmen appoint constables as necessary
2-20-1952 Ch. 41, Sec. 2 Increase members of School Committee from 3 to
5
2-10-1959 Ch. 32B Acceptance of Group Insurance for town
employees (voted at Annual Town Election)
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
58
Date of Acceptance
6-25-1959
Chapter/Section
Ch. 121, Sec. 26K
Subject
Establish East Longmeadow Housing Authority
3-5-1960 Ch. 40, Sec. 5(25) Establish a Recreation Commission
10-6-1960 Ch. 136, Sec. 4B Operation of bowling alleys on Lord’s Day
10-6-1960 Ch. 41, Sec. 111A Paid vacations for members of Police Department
3-4-1961 Ch. 40, Sec. 42G,42H,42I Special assessments; water mains
3-4-1961 Ch. 85, Sec. 6 Permit snow removal from sidewalks and
assessment of costs against owners
2-21-1957 Division into three precincts
6-25-1959 Annual Town meeting changed to 1st Saturday in
March
3-4-1961 Division into four precincts
12-18-1961 Ch. 118B Create East Longmeadow-Wilbraham Welfare
District
2-13-1962 Ch. 32B, Sec. 9A Town pays ½ cost of group insurance for retired
employees
2-13-1962 Ch. 552, Acts 1961 Increased allowances for widows of deceased
members of County Retirement System
3-7-1964 Ch. 478, Acts 1963 Increased allowances to former employees and
widows
3-7-1964 Ch. 409, Acts 1962 Regulating use of ways by pedestrians
3-5-1966 Ch. 40, Sec. 42A thru 42F Delinquent water accounts become liens on real
estate taxes
3-5-1966 Ch. 40B, Sec. 7 Membership in Lower Pioneer Valley Regional
Planning District
3-5-1966 Ch. 111, Sec. 142B, 142C Membership in Lower Pioneer Valley Air
Pollution Control District
3-7-1966 Ch. 40, Sec. 8C Establishment of Conservation Commission
12-8-1966 Home Rule Act
2-23-1955 Establishment of Industrial Development
Committee
4-17-1967 Increase Recreation Commission to 9 members
4-17-1967 Ch. 40, Sec. 44A, 44B Establishment of Regional Refuse Disposal
Planning Committee
2-13-1968 Ch. 32, Sec. 11A Allow employees to pay 100% of additional
optional life insurance
3-2-1968 Ch. 90, Sec. 20C Violations of motor vehicle parking rules
6-6-1968 Ch. 381, Acts 1968 Tenure until 60 for present Town Engineer
3-7-1970 Ch. 40, Sec. 8d Establish 7-member Historical Commission
3-9-1970 ATM. 3-9-70, Art. 35 Recreation Commission Revolving Fund; Home
Rule vote
2-9-1971 Ch. 32B, Sec. 11B Extend group insurance benefits to elderly
persons retired from the service of the town
3-6-1971 Division into five precincts
2-8-1972 Ch. 32B, Sec. 9D Surviving spouses of active or retired employees
to pay 50% of group insurance costs
3-7-1972 Ch. 40, Sec. 8C Establish a Conservation Fund
3-7-1972 Ch. 40D Establish an Industrial Development Financing
Authority
3-3-1973 Annual Town Election changed to 2nd Tuesday in
April
3-3-1973 Annual Town Meeting changed to 1st Saturday in
May
3-6-1973 Ch. 40, Sec. 42G thru 42I Special assessments to meet cost of laying water
mains
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
59
Date of Acceptance
3-6-1973
Chapter/Section Subject
Council on Aging; Change in membership
3-6-1973 Ch. 44, Sec 53C Revolving fund for payments to off-duty police
officers
5-6-1974 Ch. 140, Sec. 139 $10.00 penalty added for late licensing of dogs,
after 60 days
5-6-1974 Council on Aging; Eliminate voting rights of exofficio
members
5-6-1974 Ch. 40B, Sec. 3 Establishment of Lower Pioneer Valley
Transportation Authority
1-20-1975 Annual Town Meeting changed to 1st Monday in
May
4-8-1975 Ch. 10, Sec. 39 Licenses granted for game of beano
5-6-1975 Audit of financial books of Town by private
auditing firms
1-20-1975 Ch. 143, Sec. 3 Enter agreement with one or more towns to
combine and share expenses of Building
Inspector
4-13-1976 Ch. 32B, Sec. 8A Distribute to employees share of group insurance
dividends after deducting administrative costs
10-12-1976 Ch. 41, Sec. 41B Permit employee compensation to be paid to
certain banks and credit unions
5-3-1977 Membership of Appropriations Committee
increased to seven
12-15-1977 Town Meeting quorum reduced to 200 voters
5-2-1978 Ch. 40A; Chap. 808 Acts of 1975, Zoning Act
5-2-1978 Planning Board named Special Permit Granting
Authority
12-28-1978 Ch. 71, Sec. 71E Permit Town Treasurer to set up a special
revolving account for certain school funds
12-28-1978 Ch. 83, Sec. 16A to 16F Collection of sewer charges for sewer services by
the Town
5-14-1979 Ch. 40, Sec. 8G Town to enter into Mutual Aid Agreements for
police services
1-20-1975 Ch. 468, Acts of 1974 Town declines to participate in Hampden County
Mosquito Control District
10-13-1981 Ch. 41, Sec. 55 Appointment of Town Accountant
10-13-1981 Ch. 44, Sec. 35-43 Installation of accounting system
10-13-1981 Ch. 41, Sec. 55 Abolish Town Auditor
10-13-1981 Ch. 40, Sec. 5B Create a Stabilization Fund
4-13-1982 Ch. 258, Sec. 13 Indemnification of town officers
5-3-1982 Ch. 59, Sec. 5, Clause
17C
Provides for certain elderly exemptions
5-3-1982 Ch. 90, Sec. 20A½ Appointment of parking clerk to handle parking
violations
5-2-1983 Ch. 41. Sec. 100G Funeral/burial expenses; Firefighters and Police
Officers
5-3-1983 Ch. 148, Sec. 26C Smoke/heat detectors in multiple dwelling unit
structures
11-8-1983 Ch. 59, Sec. 5, C1.37A Limited Real Property exemptions for certain
blind persons
11-8-1983 Ch. 59, Sec. 5, C1.41B Limited Real Property exemptions for certain
persons over 70 years of age
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
60
Date of Acceptance
11-8-1983
Chapter/Section
Ch. 60A, Sec. 1
Subject
Grant motor vehicle excise tax exemptions to
former prisoners of war
5-5-1986 Ch. 71, Sec. 40, amended $18,000 minimum teacher salaries
5-5-1986 Ch. 40, Sec. 4G Bids not required on purchases of $4,000 and less
of equipment, supplies, materials.
5-5-1986 Ch. 40, Sec. 5D Pension reserve for Contributory Retirement
Assessment
6-23-1986 Ch. 124, Acts 1986 Nonpartisan preliminary elections
1-14-1987 P.L. 99-272 Establish Medicare Tax Account
5-4-1987 Ch. 73, Acts Granting elderly exemptions
5-4-1987 Ch. 73, Acts 1986 Granting certain elderly exemptions, surviving
spouses, minors
6-5-1989 Ch. 134, Acts 1989 Combining positions of Town Clerk, Treasurer,
Collector and appointment by Selectmen
5-1-1989 Ch. 245, Acts 1988 Planning Board authorized to expend monies of a
developer in default
5-1-1989 Ch. 60A, Sec. 1 (5) Motor vehicles leased by charitable corporations
exempt from taxation
10-15-1990 Ch. 71, Sec. 71F Authorizes School Committee to receive and
expend tuition monies
5-6-1991 Ch. 291, Acts 1990 Enhanced 911 service
5-6-1991 Ch. 148, Sec. 26G Installation of automatic sprinklers
5-6-1991 Ch. 148, Sec. 26I Installation of automatic sprinklers
5-6-1991 Ch. 40, Sec, 5D Rescinds 5-5-86 action requiring bids on
purchases of $4,000 or more
5-4-1992 Ch. 40, Sec. 49K Establish Enterprise Fund for school
transportation
5-4-1992 Ch. 59, Sec. Cls.41A Increase exemption allowance to $40,000
5-4-1992 Ch. 59, Sec. 5 Cls.8 Hardship exemption for military duty
5-1-1995 Ch. 268A, Sec. 21A Selectmen appointed ex-officio committee
members
5-1-1995 Ch. 41, Sec. 23A Executive secretary to be appointed
5-5-1997 Ch. 59, Sec. 5
Cls.17(D) enacted as
Ch. 181, Sec. 1,
Acts 1995
Assessors-Increase of Widow’s Tax Exemption
11-24-1997
5-4-1998
Ch. 41, Sec. 108L
Ch. 40, Sec. 57
Accepts provisions of the Quinn Bill
Denial Permits/Licenses for non-payment of taxes
5-3-1999 Ch. 40, Sec. 57 Restrictions on Permits & licenses
5-7-2001 Ch. 32, Sec. 90A Retirement Allowances
5-6-2002 Ch. 59, Sec. 5
Cls. 17(E) enacted as
Ch. 380, Sec.2 Acts 2000
Increase in Exemption Amount
5-6-2002 Ch. 59, Sec. 5
Cls. 41(D) enacted as
Ch. 380, Sec.2 Acts 2000
Increase in Income and Assets Amount
5-5-2003 Ch. 59, Sec. 5
Cls. 41(C) enacted as
Ch. 184, Sec. 51 Acts
2002
Increase Income Limit and Asset Limit
5-5-2003 Ch. 59, Sec. 5K Senior Work-Off Abatement Program
5-5-2003 Ch. 4, Sec. 73 Acts 2003 Temporary Tax Amnesty Program
5-2-2005 Ch. 40, Sec. 21 & Sec. 58 Municipal Charges Lien
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
61
Date of Acceptance
5-2-2005
Chapter/Section
Ch. 59, Sec. 5 Cls 41A
Enacted as Ch 138, Sec
126 Acts 1991
Subject
Increase Gross Receipts Amounts
5-2-2005 Ch. 44, Sec. 3-7 Community Preservation Fund
6-20-2005 Ch. 44B, Sec 3-7 Community Preservation Act
10-15-2007 Ch 71, Sec 37M Streamline cost effectiveness
5-19-2008 Ch. 33, Sec. 59 Effect of Military Service on Salary & Vac.
5-18-2009 Ch. 59, Sec. 8A Not impose Farm Animal Excise Tax
5-18-2009 Ch. 3 Film Elected Boards & Committees
10-26-2009 Ch. 39, Sec. 23D Adjudicatory Hearings, voting
5-17-2010 Ch. 44, Sec. 53E ½ Establish C.O. A. Revolving Fund
5-17-2010 Ch. 71, Sec 37M Consolidate School IT & Town IT Dept.
5-17-2010 Ch. 71, Sec 37M Consolidate School & Town Bldg. Maintenance
5-16-11 Ch. 59, Sec 57c Quarterly Tax Billing
5-16-11 Ch. 59, Sec 5 clause (54)
Acts 2000
Exempt from taxation personal property under
$1,500.00
5-16-11 Ch. 44, Sec. 53E ½ Establish Library Revolving Fund
9-26-11 Ch. 653 Sec 40 Acts 1989 Taxation of buildings built between Jan.-June
5-21-12 Ch. 44 Sec 53E ½ Establish a Library Revolving Fund
5-21-12 Ch. 61A Agricultural & Horticultural Water Rate
5-19-14 Ch. 44 Sec. 53F ½ Establish a Water Services Enterprise Fund
5-19-14 Ch. 44 Sec. 53F ½ Establish a Sewer Enterprise Fund
5-19-14
5-18-15
5-18-15
Ch. 44 Sec 53D
Ch. 64L Sec S2
Ch. 59 Sec 5K
Establish a Recreation Revolving Fund
Local Option Meals Tax
Increase hours of Senior Work-off Abatement
Program
10-19-15 Ch. 41 Sec 108P Additional compensation Collector-Treasurer
10-19-15 Ch. 41 Sec 19J Additional compensation Town Clerk as Registrar
10-19-15 Ch. 41 Sec 19K Additional compensation Town Clerk
10-19-15 Ch. 32B Sec 20 Establish Other Post Employment Benefits Trust
Fund (OPEB)
10-19-15
8-8-17
6-25-18
6-25-18
6-25-18
11-27-18
Ch. 40 Sec 13D
Ch. 59 Sec. 5L
Ch. 59 Sec. 5 clauses (22)
Ch. 60A Sec. 9
Ch. 40 Sec 8J
Establish Accrued Liabilities Reserve Fund
General Bylaws brought into conformity with the
Town Charter
Deferral of taxes for National Guard et al
Veterans residency requirement
Deferral of excise for National Guard et al
Establish a Commission on Disabilities
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
62
INDEX
- A -
ACCOUNTANT, TOWN
Account establishment, appropriation
sewer revenue 3.040I
water revenue 3.040H
Annual report
compiling 3.040F
contents 3.040G
Appointment 3.040A
Audit duties 3.050
Inventory 3.040B
Monthly statements 3.040E
Personnel board clerk,
recordkeeping 3.040C
Recordkeeping 3.040D
ADMINISTRATION, TOWN
See also TOWN MEETING
Board, chairman, clerk election
required 4.010G
Committee, compensation restricted
4.010I
Equipment, materials bidding
regulation 4.010J
Funds investment 4.060D
Meeting
minutes 4.010D
notice posting 4.010B
recordkeeping
book form, storage 4.010E
required 4.010C
regulation 4.010A
Property sale
department notification 4.030J
foreclosed, authority 4.060E
generally 4.030H
notice 4.030I
Record, document
annual reports book contents 4.010H
disposition 4010F
Trust fund 4.060F
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
Public consumption
arrest 8.020D
exception 8.020C
prohibited 8.020A
violation, penalty 8.020B
ANIMAL
At large
confinement in pound 9.010G
prohibited 9.010A
violation
designated 9.010B
penalty 9.010C
Complaint, nuisance 9.010I
Control officer
appointment 9.010H
impounding 9.010G
pound fees collection 9.010E
special police authority 9.010J
Dog
at large
See At large
leash not required when 9.010F
license 9.010D
wastes removal 9.015
Enforcement 9.010H
Health board regulation
copies available 9.010N
designated 9.010M
Inspector
annual report 9.020B
appointment 9.020A
Pound, fees collection, deposit 9.010E
Prolonged Confinement, outdoors 9.025A
Riding on sidewalk prohibited 9.010L
Vicious, restriction 9.010K
APPEALS BOARD
Organization, appointment 4.130
APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE
See also CAPITAL PLANNING
COMMITTEE
Estimates review, appropriations 3.030
Organization 3.010
Petitioned articles, appropriations for,
report duties 3.060
Powers, duties 3.020
ASSESSORS BOARD
Annual report 4.080
Election 2.010B
AUDITS
See ACCOUNTANT, TOWN
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
63
- B -
BOARD
See Specific Board
ADMINISTRATION, TOWN
BOND
Clerk, town 4.050H
Tax collector 4070B
Treasurer 4.060B
Wetlands development 10.012K
BUDGET AUTHORITY
See APPROPRIATIONS
COMMITTEE
BUILDING INSPECTOR
Annual report 5.060C
Appointment 5.060A
Powers, duties 5.060B
- C -
CAPITAL PLANNING COMMITTEE
Established, membership 3.052A
Investigations, hearings 3.052E
Recommendations, report 3.052C
Study duties, authority 3.052B
CAPITAL PROGRAM
Creation, publication 3.052C
Expenditures 3.052F
Presentation, final action 3.052D
CLERK, TOWN
Annual report 4.050E
Appointment, term, powers, duties,
removal, vacancy 4.041
Bond
deposit required 4.050H
officer, custodian duties 4.050I
Fee charging 4.050D
Minute taking 4.050B
Moderator absent, duties when 2.030C
Municipal Charges Lien 8.140
Officer resignation
filing 4.050F
notification duties 4.050G
Peddler, hawker license issuance 6.010
Recordkeeping
binding requirement 4.050A
requirements generally 4.050C
CODE
Definitions, construction 1.020
Effective date 1.030
Repeal of provisions 1.010C
Scope 1.010B
Severability 1.040
Title 1.010A
Violation, penalty 1.010D
COLLECTOR
See TAX COLLECTOR
COMMITTEE
See Specific Committee
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
Appeals 10.012M
Applicability of provisions 10.012B
Authority for provisions 10.012N
Consultant fees 10.011
Definitions 10.012J
Established, organization 10.010
Exceptions from provisions 10.012C
Permits, determinations
applications 10.012D
bond, deposit, security 10.012K
burden of proof 10.012I
generally 10.012F
notice, hearing 10.012E
Purpose of provisions 10.012A
Regulations promulgation 10.012H
Severability of provisions 10.012O
Violation
penalty, enforcement 10.012L
pre-acquisition 10.012G
COUNCIL ON AGING
Established, organization 10.020
COUNSEL, TOWN
Annual report 5.040E
Appointment 5.040A
Compensation 5.040B
Powers, duties generally 5.040D
Representation duties 5.040C
Request for services 5.040F
Wetlands regulations enforcement 10.012L
- D -
DOG
See ANIMAL
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
64
- E -
ELECTION
See Specific Officer
ENVIRONMENT
See CONSERVATION COMMISSION
- F -
FALSE ALARMS
See FIRE DEPARTMENT
FEES
See CLERK, TOWN
FESTIVAL
See PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
See also FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
Appointment 5.020C
Chief
annual report 5.020D
appointment 5.020A
festival permit issuance 6.040D
fire lane establishment 5.020H
fuel tank installation supervision 5.020F
powers, duties 5.020B
wood stove inspection 5.020E
False alarms, fine when 8.120
Fire lane establishment 5.020H
Inventory keeping 5.020G
Key lock box requirements 5.020I
Regulation promulgation 4.030B
Space heater regulations
See FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
FIREARM
Carrying restrictions 8.110
Discharge restrictions 8.080
FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
Fuel-burning portable space heater
exception 8.100B
prohibited 8.100A
Storage
license, fees 4.030N
pump, hose safety equipment 4.030O
- G -
GARBAGE
See RECYCLING
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
- H -
HAWKER
See PEDDLER, HAWKER
HEALTH BOARD
Animal regulation 9.010M
Chairman selection 4.040A
Inspector appointment, report duties
4.040B
Recordkeeping 4.040C
Recycling program 4.040D
Rule, regulation availability 4.040E
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
Established, organization 10.030
HOUSING AUTHORITY
Election 2.010B
Established, organization 10.040
- I -
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Committee established, organization
10.050
Financing authority established 10.060
INFLAMMABLES
See FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
INTOXICATING BEVERAGE
See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
- J -
JUNK DEALER
See SECONDHAND DEALER
- L -
LIBRARY TRUSTEES BOARD
Annual report 4.110C
Director appointment 4.110B
Election 2.010B
Organization 4.110A
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
65
LICENSE
Dog 9.010D
Granting generally 4.030E
Inflammables storage 4.030N
Peddler, hawker 6.010
Secondhand dealer 6.020
LOITERING
Prohibited 8.010C
Violation, penalty 8.010D
- M -
MOTOR VEHICLE
See PARKING
TRAFFIC
VEHICLE
- N -
NOISE
Designated 8.090B
Prohibited 8.090A
NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION
PROCEDURE
Citations issuance 8.130B
Enforcement officer 8.130E
Fines report 8.130E
Violations, penalties 8.130A, D
NUSIANCE
Animal 9.10I
- O -
OFFICER, TOWN
See also Specific Officer
ADMINISTRATION, TOWN
Election 2.010B
Vacancy filling 2.010C
OFF STREET PARKING
See TRAFFIC
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
See PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE
Established 10.080
- P -
PARK
See RECREATION AREA
PARKING
Handicapped 7.030
Off-street, construction plan
required 7.040
Severe weather restriction 7.010
PEDDLER, HAWKER
License required 6.010
PERMIT
Bond required when 4.030M
Firearm discharge 8.080
Flammable fuel tank installation 5.020F
Granting generally 4.030E
Soliciting 6.030
Street, sidewalk
excavation 4.090D
obstruction 4.030K
Wetlands development 10.012B
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
See FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
PLANNING BOARD
Annual report 4.120C
Election 2.010B
Organization 4.120A
Powers, duties 4.120D
Special permit granting authority 4.120E
Vacancy filling 4.120B
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Assistance, other police departments
5.010F
Badge, identification 5.010C
Chief
annual report 5.010B
appointment 5.010A
festival permit issuance 6.040D
vehicle removal recordkeeping 7.020
Inventory keeping 5.010G
Regulation promulgation 4.030B
Soliciting permit issuance 6.030
Street closure authority 5.010D
Traffic control authority 5.010E
POUND
See ANIMAL
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
66
PROFANITY, OBSCENITY
Prohibited 8.010B
Violation, penalty 8.010D
PROPERTY SALE
See ADMINISTRATION, TOWN
PROSECUTOR, TOWN
See also COUNSEL, TOWN
Appointment 5.050A
Code violation prosecution 5.050D
Criminal prosecution 5.050C
District court appearance 5.050B
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
Definitions, defined 6.040A
Permit
application 6.040C
issuance, conditions 6.040D
required 6.040B
PUBLIC WORKS BOARD
Election 2.010B
Organization 4.090A
Powers, duties 4.090B
Regulation 4.090C
Sewer division maintenance funding
2.040I
Water division maintenance funding
2.040H
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Revenue accounts
See Specific Account
Street, sidewalk excavation
permit issuance 4.090D
violation notification 4.090F
Superintendent snow plowing,
Vehicle removal authority 7.020
Water emergency declaration
authority 4.090G
- R -
RECREATION AREA
Hours of operation 8.050
RECREATION COMMISSION
Established, organization 10.070
RECYCLING
Separation of waste for 4.040D
REGISTRARS BOARD
Petition signature verification 2.020H
REVENUE COMMISSIONER
Bond approval
clerk, town 4.050H
tax collector 4.070B
treasurer 4.060B
- S -
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Annual report 4.100B
Election 2.010B
Food sale restrictions 4.100C
Organization 4.100A
SECONDHAND DEALER
License required 6.020
SEWER DIVISION
See PUBLIC WORKS BOARD
SEWER REVENUE ACCOUNT
Established 3.040I
SNOW, ICE
See STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SOLICITING
Permit required 6.030
SPACE HEATERS
See FLAMMABLE MATERIAL
STORM DRAIN
Dumping foreign substances into
prohibited 8.070
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Animal on
See ANIMAL
Building numbering 4.030L
Draining onto, prohibited 4.090F
Excavation
permit issuance 4.090D
regulation 4.090E
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
67
Garbage deposit
prohibited 8.010A
violation, penalty 8.010D
Obstruction
permit required 4.030K
Snow, ice
dumping prohibited 8.060
removal regulation 7.020
- T -
TAX COLLECTOR
Annual report 4.070D
Appointment, term, powers, duties,
removal, vacancy 4.041
Bond deposit 4.070B
Designated, powers 4.070A
Recordkeeping 4.070E
Safe, vault combination possession
4.070C
TOWN OFFICERS
See Specific Officer
OFFICER, TOWN
TRAFFIC
See also PARKING
VEHICLE
Bushes obstructing view prohibited
8.030
Fire lane
See FIRE DEPARTMENT
TREASURER, TOWN
Annual report 4.060A
Appointment, term, powers, duties,
removal, vacancy 4.041
Bond
custodian 4.060C
deposit 4.060B
Budget estimate duties 2.030
Foreclosed property sale 4.060E
Tax collection
See TAX COLLECTOR
Town funds investment 4.060D
Trust fund custodian 4.060F
- V -
VEHICLE
See also TRAFFIC
Towing during snow removal 7.020
- W -
WATER DIVISION
See PUBLIC WORKS BOARD
WATER EMERGENCY
Declaration 4.090G
WATER REVENUE ACCOUNT
Establishment 43.040H
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
INSPECTOR
Annual report 5.030A
Fees deposit 5.030B
Inspection 5.030C
Inventory keeping, filing 5.030D
WETLANDS
See CONSERVATION COMMISSION
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
68
ADDENDUM A
Additions to the General Bylaws – 2018
Approved by Town Council 1-23-18
Motion: Councilor Federici made a motion to approve the proposed bylaw amendment to
MGL Chapter 40, Section 57, regarding License and Permit Denials by changing existing
language on overdue municipal charges from 12 months to 6 months. Councilor Ford seconded
and there was a roll call vote: Councilor O’Connor – aye; Councilor Federici – aye – Councilor
Ford – aye; President Manley – aye; Councilor Anderson – aye; Councilor Hill – aye; Councilor
Kane – aye. The motion passed unanimously.
4.60 Collector of Taxes
(D) The Collector of Taxes, also known as the Town Collector, shall have charge of the
keeping of the books, acts involving collection of monies due the Town and the preparation of
such returns and reports as it may be required to make. The Collector of Taxes shall report
annually to departments concerned, the receipts and collections for each department.
(a) The Collector of Taxes or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter
referred to as the Collector of Taxes shall annually furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing or permitting authority,
that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person,
corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other
municipal charges for not less than a six (6) month period (as referenced in MGL
Chapter 40 Section 57 adopted by the Town on 5/4/1998), and that such party has not
filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the appellate tax board.
Approved by Town Council 2-13-18
Motion: Councilor Hill made a motion to approve the liquor license authority (LLA) and
permit-granting authorities of the Town to deny or revoke any local license or permit who has
neglected to pay any municipal charges and is not in compliance with the State Building
code, sanitary code and town bylaws, including all health, fire, and police and building codes,
with amendments. Councilor Kane seconded and a roll call vote was taken. Councilor
O’Connor – aye; Councilor Federici – aye; Councilor Anderson – aye; Councilor Hill – aye;
Vice President Kane – aye.
The Council enact the following bylaw establishing a procedure by which the various town
departments shall provide notice to the licensing authorities that a license holder’s premises is in
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
69
violation of any state or local law, bylaw, rule or regulation and as a result thereof, it shall deny,
revoke, suspend or modify any such locally issued license.
Section 1. Title
Revocation of Municipal Licenses for violations of local or state laws related to the Premises.
Section 2. Authority
The bylaw is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 89 of the Amendments to the
Construction of the Commonwealth, the East Longmeadow Home Rule charter, and any other
applicable statutes.
Section 3. Purpose
The purpose is to provide a uniform and cost effective method for insuring a locally licensed
business by the Town it is in and remains in compliance with safety, health and other laws,
bylaws, rules and regulations applicable to a premises holding licenses issued by the Licensing
Authority allowing the operation of a business in the Town.
Section 4. Definitions
In construing this bylaw the following words shall mean:
(A)License or Locally Issued License: Any license, permit or written authorization to
operate or perform any work or provide any good or service within the Town issued by a
Licensing Authority or an employee or agent thereof.
(B) Licensing Authority: Any board, committee, commission, council, department or
employee of the Town that issues any License.
Section 5. Procedure
A. Any municipal department head that has determined that a premises to which a License
has been issued is in violation or non-compliance with any law, bylaw rule or regulation
enforceable by his department shall, after unsuccessfully taking appropriate actions to
bring the premises into compliance, notify the Licensing Authority of the continuing
violation(s) in writing and in detail set forth the basis for his determination of the
existence of the violation(s). The notice to the Licensing Authority shall include a
request for the renovation, suspension or modification of said License. Until the
Licensing Authority has held a hearing, as hereinafter set forth, it shall not transfer or
modified said License, unless the department head files a written statement with the
Licensing Authority that the premises has been brought into compliance and withdraws
the complaint.
B. The Licensing Authority may suspend, modify or revoke any License, including renewals
and transfers, of any License that is the subject of department head’s complaint; provided
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
70
that written notice is given to the Licensee and the department head that a hearing will be
held by the Licensing Authority. Said notice is mailed to the Licensee by certified mail,
and the department head shall be notified by hand delivered letter from the Town Clerk,
indicating the date and location of said hearing at least fourteen (14) days before the date
of said hearing. The letter shall inform the Licensee of the violation(s) to be considered,
along with a copy of the department head’s complaint and shall state that he has the right
to present evidence as to the existence of the violations and why the License should not
be suspended, modified, or revoked.
C. Said department head’s detailed statement of the existing violations filed with the original
complaint shall be prima facie evidence the violation and shall be sufficient reason,
unless rebutted, for the revocation, modification or suspension of the License.
D. Any finding made by the Licensing Authority with respect to a License revocation,
modification or suspension shall be made only for the purpose of such proceeding and
shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for an appeal
from such revocation, modification of suspension.
E. Any License modified, revoked or suspended under the bylaw shall not be reissued or
renewed until the License Authority receives a certificate issued by the department head
that the Party has brought the licensed premises into compliance with the applicable law,
bylaw, rule or regulation as of the date of the certificate.
A Party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a compliance agreement, thereby
allowing the License Authority to issue certificate setting forth any limitations to the
License and the validity of said License shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds
for suspension, modification or revocation of said License; provided, however, the Party
in breach is given a hearing as set forth in Section 5.B above.
Section 6. Invalidation
The invalidation of any section or portion of any section of this bylaw shall not affect the legality
or enforceability of the remaining section or portions.
The Council enact the following bylaw establishing a procedure by which the Tax Collector shall
provide notice to the licensing authorities that a license holder has unpaid municipal charges
requiring, as a result thereof, that it deny, revoke, suspend or modify any locally issued license.
Section 1. Title
Revocation of Municipal Licenses for Unpaid Municipal Taxes or Charges.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
71
Section 2. Authority
The bylaw is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 89 of the Amendments to the
Construction of the Commonwealth, the East Longmeadow Home Rule Charter, General Laws,
c. 40, § 57 and any other applicable statutes.
Section 3. Purpose
The purpose is to provide a uniform and cost effective method for the collection of municipal
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges or obligations of whatever
nature for persons or entities holding licenses issued by a Licensing Authority or Permit Granting
Authority that are not paid when due.
Section 4. Definitions
In construing this bylaw the following words shall mean:
(A) License or Locally Issued License: Any license, permit or written authorization to
operate or perform any work or provide any good or service within the Town issued by a
Licensing Authority or an employee or agent thereof, except any license or permit listed
in General Laws, c. 40, §57(d).
(B) Licensing Authority: Any board, committee, commission, council, department or
employee of the Town that issues any License.
(C) Taxes: Any municipal taxes, fees and charges of whatever nature owed to the Town.
Section 5. Procedure
(A)The Tax Collector shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to the Licensing
Authorities a list of any person, corporation or business enterprise, that has or is
requesting a License from the Town, (hereinafter referred to as a “Party”), that has
neglected or refused to pay any Taxes, and that such Party has not timely filed, or does
not have, a pending application for an abatement or appeal of such Tax.
(B) The Licensing Authority may deny, suspend or revoke any License, including renewals
and transfers, by any Party whose name appears on said list or with respect to any
activity, event or other matter which is the subject or such License and which activity,
event or other matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or
about real estate owned by a Party whose name appears on said list; provided that written
notice is given to the Party and the Tax Collector that a hearing will be held by the
Licensing Authority and the notice of said hearing is mailed to the Party indicating the
date and location; provided that said hearing shall be held more than fourteen (14) days
after the date of said notice.
(C) Said Tax Collector’s list shall be prima facie evidence of for denial, revocation or
suspension of a License to a Party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in
any hearing conducted with respect to a License denial, renovation, suspension or
modification.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
72
(D)Any finding made by the Licensing Authority with respect to a License denial,
renovation, modification or suspension shall be made only for the purpose of such
proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law,
except for an appeal from such denial, revocation or suspension.
(E) Any License denied, revoked or suspended under this bylaw shall not be reissued or
renewed until the License Authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that
the Party has paid all outstanding obligations to the Town or that an acceptable agreement
has been reached providing for the payment of all outstanding Taxes as of the date of the
certificate.
A Party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby
allowing the License Authority to issue certificate setting forth any limitations to the
License and the validity of said License shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds
for suspension or revocation of said License; provided, however, the Party in breach is
given a hearing as set forth in section 5.B above.
Section 6. Waiver
The Licensing Authority may waive a denial, revocation or suspension, if at said hearing, it finds
there is not business interest, direct or indirect, between the Party and the person, corporation or
business entity, including its officers of shareholders, if any, or member of such person’s
immediate family, as defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268A of the General Laws, owning the
property containing the licensed premises. If a determination is made that there is such a
relationship the Licensing Authority may order any payments are due, or that may become due,
from the Party to the property owner for the lease, rental, use of occupancy of the licensed
premises shall be paid to the tax collector until any monies owed to the Town are paid in full;
provided that the property owned is given notice of the hearing to consider such action
conformity with Section 5.B above and has the opportunity to object to the entry of such order,
before any such finding and order becomes effective.
Section 7. Exempt Licenses
This bylaw shall not be applicable to the licenses listed in General Laws c.40, §57 (d).
Section 8. Invalidation
The invalidation of any section or portion of any section of this bylaw shall not affect the legality
or enforceability of the remaining section or portions.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
73
Approved by Town Council 3-19-18
Motion: President Manley made a motion to approve a new general new general bylaw
prohibiting the use, growth, cultivation, manufacture and/or sale of recreational marijuana as read
into the minutes at the February 27 and March 13, 2018 Town Council Meetings. Councilor Ford
seconded and a roll call vote was taken: Councilor Kane – aye; Councilor Hill – aye; Councilor
Anderson – aye; President Manley – aye; Councilor Ford – aye; Councilor O’Connor – aye.
To see if the Town Council will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of East
Longmeadow by adding amending section 3.01 Prohibited Uses – under General Uses by adding
the following language:
3.01 Prohibited Uses
General Uses
g. Recreational Marijuana (Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed by a licensed physician)
including all marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers,
marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses.
To see if the Town Council will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of East
Longmeadow by amending Section VIII – Definitions to include the following:
VIII: Definitions
"Manufacture": to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana
product.
"Marijuana accessories", equipment, products, devices or materials of any kind that are intended
or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the
human body.
"Marijuana cultivator", an entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, to deliver
marijuana to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers. "Marijuana establishment", a marijuana cultivator,
marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of
licensed marijuana-related business.
"Marijuana product manufacturer", an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and
package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to
marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
"Marijuana products", products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract
from marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
74
and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products,
beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
“Marijuana testing facility", an entity licensed to test marijuana and marijuana products, including
certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
"Marijuana retailer", an entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products
from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana
products to marijuana establishments and to consumers.
Approved by Town Council 6-26-18
Motion: Councilor Ford made a motion to approve the new Revolving Fund General Bylaw
as read into the minutes at the May 22, 2018 and June 12, 2018 Council meetings with the
four amendments as shown in Attachment C and set forth by the General Bylaws
Subcommittee. Councilor O’Connor seconded and all were in favor.
Recommended Amendments to Chapter 11, Department Revolving Funds.
1. Under Section 2, Expenditure Limitations, Part C, insert the word “jointly” as indicated:
“ C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorizes
by the town Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of
that authorization that id later approved during that fiscal year jointly by the Town
Council and Town Manager.”
2. Under Section 5, Authorized Revolving Funds, Part E, Restrictions or Conditions on
Expenses Payable from Fund, insert the following:
“Legal fees, i.e., lawyer, attorney fees.”
Rent.
3. Under Section 5, Authorized Revolving Funds, Part G, Fiscal Years, insert the following:
“Beginning July 1 and ending June 30”
4. Under Section 5, Authorized Revolving Funds, Part F, Other Requirements/Reports,
insert the following:
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
75
“An additional report identifying year-to-date income and expenses for each fund
shall be provided to the Town Council by March 15 of each fiscal year.”
Chapter 11 DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
1. Purpose. This by-law establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by town,
departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection with the operation of
programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the
expenses of
those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½.
2. Expenditure Limitations. A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may
incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by
this by-law without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund
shall also be paid from the fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by
the Town Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that
authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the Town Council and Town
Manager.
3. Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this by-law
shall be credited to the general fund.
4. Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½ and this
by-law, the laws, charter provisions, Bylaws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that
govern the receipt and custody of town monies and the expenditure and payment of town funds
shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this by-law. The Town
Accountant shall include a statement on the collections credited to the fund, the encumbrances
and expenditures charged to each fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular
report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on
appropriations made for its use.
5. Authorized Revolving Funds. The Table establishes:
A. Each revolving fund authorized for use by a town department, board, committee,
agency or officer,
B. The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from
each fund,
C. The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board,
committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the
fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the Town Accountant,
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used,
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund, and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this by-law.
Town of East Longmeadow - General Bylaws – Amended 2018
76
A
Revolving
Fund
B
Department
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
C
Fees,
Charges or
Other
Receipts
Credited to
Fund
D
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable from
Fund
E
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
F
Other
Requirements/Reports
G
Fiscal
Years
Solid
Waste
Disposal
(#2805)
Health
Department
Trash bag
receipts,
recycling
rebates
Salaries,
expenses,
supplies and
contractual
services to
operate the
solid waste
disposal and
recycling
program
Annual reconciliation
of internal records
compared to the general
ledger must be provided
to the Town Accountant
by July 31.
Fiscal
Year 2018
and
subsequent
years
Council on
Aging
(#2809)
Council on
Aging
Council on
Aging
general
programming
and activities,
such as, but
not limited
to: Fitness
room
memberships,
exercise class
fees, event
fees,
facility/room
rental
Salaries,
expenses, and
contractual
expenses to
operate the
general
programming
and activities.
Annual reconciliation
of internal records
compared to the general
ledger must be provided
to the Town Accountant
by July 31. Carryover
of unspent rental funds
is allowed.
Fiscal
Year 2018
and
subsequent
years
Health
Department
(#2812)
Health
Department
Users of the
sharps
recycling
program
Expenses,
such as
containers and
advertisements
to provide a
sharps
recycling
program in the
community
Annual reconciliation
of internal records
compared to the general
ledger must be provided
to the Town Accountant
by July 31
Fiscal
Year 2018
and
subsequent
years

TOWN OF EAST LONGMEADOW ZONING BY-LAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I – PURPOSE ………………………………………………………. 1-1
SECTION II – ZONING DISTRICTS …………………………………………. 2-1
2.0 Types of Districts …………………………………………………… 2-1
2.1 District Locations and Boundaries ………………………………. 2-2
SECTION III – USE REGULATIONS ………………………………………… 3-1
3.0 Schedule of Use Regulations ……………………………………. 3-1
3.01 Prohibited Uses ……………………………………………… 3-2
3.02 General Uses ………………………………………………… 3-4
3.03 Residential Uses …………………………………………….. 3-5
3.04 Community and Public Service Uses ……………………… 3-6
3.06 Commercial Uses ……………………………………………. 3-7
3.07 Business Uses ……………………………………………….. 3-8
3.08 Industrial Uses ……………………………………………….. 3-9
3.09 Accessory Uses ……………………………………………… 3-9
3.1 Reserved ……………………………………………………………. 3-11
3.2 Dimensional and Density Regulations …………………………… 3-12
3.3 Additional Use, Dimensional and Density Regulations ……….... 3-24
3.4 Existing Buildings, Structures and Uses …………………………. 3-29
3.5 Non-Conforming Structures ………………………………………. 3-31
SECTION IV – FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS …… 4-1
4.0 Floodplain Overlay District ………………………………………… 4-1
4.1 Purpose ……………………………………………………………… 4-1
4.2 Boundaries ………………………………………………………….. 4-1
4.3 Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data ………………………. 4-1
4.4 Development Regulations …………………………………………. 4-2
4.5 Reference to Existing Regulations ……………………………….. 4-4
4.6 Permitted Uses ……………………………………………………... 4-4
SECTION V SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS ………………………………… 5-1
5.0 Industrial Garden Park District ……………………………………. 5-1
5.1 Elderly Residential District ………………………………………… 5-2
5.2 Planned Business Development ………………………………….. 5-4
5.3 Planned Unit Residential District …………………………………. 5-9
5.3A Planned Adult Residential District ……………………………….. 5-12
5.4 Golf Recreational District ………………………………………….. 5-15
5.5 Wireless/Telecommunications Service Facilities and Towers … 5-16
5.6 Off-street Parking ………………………………………………….. 5-27
5.7 Car Service Activities ……………………………………………… 5-36
TOWN OF EAST LONGMEADOW ZONING BY-LAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
5.8 Signs ………………………………………………………………… 5-38
5.9 Swimming Pools …………………………………………………… 5-46
SECTION V MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS
AND DISPENSARIES ………………………………………………….. 6-1
SECTION VII ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT …………………. 7-1
7.0 Zoning Board of Appeals ………………………………………….. 7-1
7.1 Enforcement ………………………………………………………… 7-2
7.2 Special Permits ……………………………………………………... 7-5
7.21 Purpose ……………………………………………………….. 7-5
7.22 Authority ………………………………………………………. 7-5
7.23 Procedures ……………………………………………………. 7-5
7.24 Expiration ……………………………………………………… 7-6
7.25 Application and Review Procedures ……………………….. 7-6
7.26 Modification, Amendment, Renewal or Revocation ………. 7-7
7.27 Transfer ……………………………………………………….. 7-7
7.28 Document Distribution ………………………………………. 7-7
7.29 Time Schedule ……………………………………………….. 7-7
7.30 Criteria …………………………………………………………. 7-8
7.31 Earth Removal Criteria ……………………………………….. 7-8
7.32 Family Home Daycare Criteria ………………………………. 7-10
7.33 Additional Criteria for Hospitals, Sanitariums, Medical
Clinics, Convalescent Homes, Assisted Living and Nursing
Homes, Congregate and Elderly and Handicapped Housing . 7-10
7.34 Additional Criteria for Churches & Buildings for Educational
Purposes ………………………………………………………. 7-11
7.35 Additional Criteria for Used Car Lots ……………………….. 7-12
7.36 Additional Criteria for Home Based Trade …………………. 7-13
7.37 Additional Criteria for Massage Therapists & Facilities …… 7-16
7.38 Additional Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries 7-16
7.39 Non-conforming Structures or Uses ………………………… 7-18
7.40 Flood Plan District …………………………………………….. 7-18
7.41 Scientific Research and/or Development …………………... 7-18
7.4 SITE PLAN …………………………………………………………… 7-19
7.40 Review / Design Review …………………………………….. 7-19
7.41 Projects Requiring Site Plan …………………………….. 7-23
7.42 Content ……………………………………………………. 7-23
7.43 Traffic Study ………………………………………………. 7-25
TOWN OF EAST LONGMEADOW ZONING BY-LAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
7.44 Procedure ……………………………………………... 7-25
7.45 Administration ……………………………………………. 7-26
7.46 Standards for Review ……………………………………. 7-27
7.47 Sewer and Water Capacity ……………………………… 7-27
7.5 GROUND MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS …. 7-28
7.6 AMENDMENT ……………………………………………………… 7-37
7.7 VALIDITY …………………………………………………………… 7-37
7.8 PREVIOUS BY-LAWS ……………………………………………. 7-37
7.9 PREVIOUS PERMITS ……………………………………………. 7-37
VIII DEFINITIONS ………………………………………………………………. 8-1
SECTION I - PURPOSE
1.0 PURPOSE
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, morals and welfare of its
inhabitants, the Town of East Longmeadow, under the authority granted by the Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 40A, does hereby enact this Bylaw to be hereafter known and designated
as The Zoning Bylaw of the Town of East Longmeadow. Further purposes of this Bylaw are to
lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to assure maintenance of health and welfare of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to
conserve the value of lands and buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Town; and, to increase the amenities of the Town. The construction, alteration,
location, use and extent of use of lands within the Town of East Longmeadow are hereby
regulated as provided in this Bylaw.
1-1
SECTION II - ZONING DISTRICTS 2.0
TYPES OF DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this Bylaw, the Town of East Longmeadow is divided into the following types
of districts:
2.01 Residence Districts:
AA - Residence AA
A - Residence A
B - Residence B
C - Residence C
ER - Elderly Residential
2.02 Commercial Districts:
COM - Commercial District
2.03 Business Districts:
BUS - Business District
2.04 Industrial Districts:
I - Industrial District
IGP - Industrial Garden Park District
2.05 Recreational Districts:
GR - Golf Recreational District
2.06 Conservation Districts:
FP - Floodplain District
2.07 Planned Unit Residential Districts:
PUR - Planned Unit Residential District
2.08 Planned Adult Residential Districts:
PAR – Planned Adult Residential District
2-1
2.1 DISTRICT LOCATIONS AND BOUNDARIES
The locations and boundaries of zoning districts, except for the Floodplain Districts, shall be
shown on a map entitled "Zoning Districts East Longmeadow, Massachusetts”, May, 2007, as
amended from time to time by a vote of the Town Meeting. Said map is hereinafter referred to as
the Zoning Districts Map, 2007. The Floodplain District is defined on maps described in Section
IV. All maps are deemed to be part of this Bylaw, the originals of which shall be on file with the
Town Clerk.
2.11 Where boundaries are indicated in the right-of-way streets or watercourses, such
boundaries shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
2.12 Where boundaries approximately follow property lines and are not more than 25 feet
wherefrom, the property line shall be the district boundary with the exception of the
Floodplain District wherein boundaries shall always follow natural features and landscape
contours shown on the maps.
2.13 Where boundaries are parallel to a street or road and fixed by dimensions on the
zoning map, the distance shall be measured from the center line of such ways.
2.14 Where distances are not specified on the zoning map nor otherwise determined from the
above provisions the scale of the zoning map shall be used to determine the location of the
district boundary.
2.15 Where the location of a boundary line is uncertain, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
determine its position in accordance with the distance in feet from other lines as given or as
measured from the scale of the map.
2-2
SECTION I I I - USE REGULATIONS
3.0 SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS
3.00 Applicability of Use Regulations
Except as provided elsewhere in this Bylaw, no building or structure shall be erected or
altered, and no building, structure or land shall be used or occupied for any purpose other
than as provided for this section.
3.001 Use Designations
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth
in Table 3-1, East Longmeadow Schedule of Use Regulations. The following notations
apply to the Schedule of Use Regulations:
Y Yes - designates uses allowed by right in the district indicated. Site Plan
Review is required for all uses except for single-family residential
dwellings. (NOTE *** Subdivisions are covered by Town of East
Longmeadow Subdivision Rules and Regulations)
N No - designates uses prohibited in the district indicated.
SP Special Permit - designates uses only allowed in the district with a
Special Permit and Site Plan Review as outlined in Section 7.2 “Special
Permits”.
3.002 Uses Subject to Other Regulations
Uses permitted and uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with all
density and dimensional regulations and any other pertinent requirements of this Bylaw.
3.003 Exemptions
Uses for Federal Government or the Commonwealth, Not-for-Profit Educational
Organizations, and Religious Organizations.
In accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40A, any facilities or uses where owned and/or
operated by the Federal Government or the Commonwealth, or not-for-profit
educational organizations or religious organizations are exempt from the Special
Permit process of this bylaw. See Section 7.2.
3-1
3.01 Prohibited Uses
Any use not listed herein or otherwise permitted in a district shall be deemed as
prohibited.
Additionally, all enterprises or industrial uses commonly regarded as
hazardous or offensive are specifically prohibited in all districts
Prohibited uses shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
3.011 Industrial Uses
a. Acetylene gas, cyanide compound or oxygen manufacture.
b. Asphalt manufacture or refining.
c. Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
d. Creosote manufacture.
e. Distillation of coal or wood.
f. Drop forge shop.
g. Explosives, fireworks or ammunition manufacture.
h. Fertilizer manufacture.
i. Fumigation plants.
j. Glue or size manufacture from fish or animal offal.
k. Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of Paris manufacture.
l. Incineration or reduction of or dumping of offal, garbage, or refuse on a
commercial basis (except where controlled by the Town).
m. Junk yard, junk storage, scrapping of autos and parts and the
salvage thereof.
n. Linoleum manufacture.
o. Paint and lacquer manufacture.
p. Match manufacture.
q. Petroleum refining and the bulk storage of petroleum products.
r. Potato chip plant.
s. Pyroxylin plastic manufacture.
t. Rubber, natural or synthetic, or gutta-percha manufactured from crude
or scrap material.
u. Sewage disposal plant (except where controlled by the Town).
v. Soap, tallow, grease, or lard manufacture.
w. Slaughterhouse.
x. Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
y. Tannery.
z. Tar or asphalt roofing manufacture.
aa. Tar products manufacture.
bb. Tire re-capping or re-treading.
cc. All re-capping or re-treading.
3-2
General Uses
a. Mobile homes, except as required by law.
b. Outdoor motion picture establishments.
c. Any establishment offering drive-up or drive-through services for the
sale and/or purchase of item(s) for human consumption.
d. Trailer camps, overnight camps, cabins, motels or other such
facilities for temporary lodging.
e. Mobile home park.
f. Body and fender work.
3-3
TYPES OF DISTRICTS PERMITTED USES
AA Residence AA ER Elderly Residential IGP Industrial Garden Park
A Residence A COM Commercial GR Golf Recreational
B Residence B BUS Business PUR Planned Unit Residential
C Residence C I Industrial PAR Planned Adult Residential
Y YES, Use Permitted
N NO, Prohibited
SP Use allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
3.02 GENERAL USES
3.020 Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, aquaculture uses. On
parcels of land more than 5 acres
including:
a. Commercial Livestock, dairy,
poultry farm.
b. Farm business commercial
greenhouse, farm stand
See Section VIII Definitions
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
3.021 Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, aquaculture uses. On
parcels of land less than 5 acres
including:
a. Commercial Livestock, dairy,
poultry farm.
b. Farm business commercial
greenhouse.
c. farm stand.
Ninety (90) percent of products sold must
have been raised or produced on the
premises.
For the sale and display of farm products
ninety (90) percent of which must have
been raised or produced on the premises.
Y Y N N N N N N N Y Y Y
TABLE 3-1
EAST LONGMEADOW SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS
3-4
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
General Uses (Continued)
3.022 (Reserved)
3.023 Commercial riding academy, boarding
stable
Must be over five acres, farm related Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
3.0235 Commercial Kennel N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.0236 Pet day Care and Grooming See Section 7.2 N N N N N N SP SP N N N N
3.024 Forestry, wood harvesting tree farm,
nursery
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
3.025 Golf Recreation Uses are permitted as
golf recreation uses:
a. Area and facility for practice golf,
basketball or tennis
b. A swimming pool
c. A golf club house with accessory
buildings for caddies, golf
professional shop, and storage for
the gold course maintenance
equipment.
d. The conduct of a restaurant in the
golf club house, together with the
right to act as a common victualer.
e. A golf course.
N N N N N N N N N Y N N
3.026 Area and facility for sporting activity Does not apply to family use. N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.0265 Recreational facility, commercial and
private
See Section 7.2 N N N N N N N SP N SP N N
3.027 Commercial landing strip or heliport N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.028 Non-conforming structures or uses See Section 3.5 and 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
3.03 RESIDENTIAL USES
3.030 Single-family detached dwelling Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y
3-5
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
Residential Uses (Continued)
3.031 Multi-family dwelling Permitted in the Elderly Residential
District
N N N N Y N N N N N N N
3.032 Multiple dwelling town property Managed by the Housing Authority in
conformity with Chapter 121 of the
Massachusetts General Laws,
including dwellings for the aged
Y Y Y Y N Y N N N Y Y Y
3.033 Mobile Home A mobile home is not a single-family
dwelling. The owner or occupier of a
residence which has been destroyed
by fire or disaster may place a trailer
or mobile home on the site of such
residence and may, by right, reside in
such trailer or mobile home for a
period not to exceed twelve (12)
months while the residence is being
rebuilt. Any such trailer or mobile
home shall be subject to the
provisions of the State Sanitary Code.
N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.034 Mobile Home Park N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.04 COMMUNITY AND PUBLIC
SERVICE USES
3.040 Town buildings, playgrounds and parks
and associated accessory buildings
As may be ordered by the Board of
Public Works or Town Officials
having charge of the land upon which
said accessory buildings are or will be
erected.
Y Y Y Y N Y N N N Y Y N
3.041 Ground Mounted Photovoltaic Arrays See Section 7.5 N N N N N N N Y Y N N N
3.042 Public or non-profit School and College See Section 7.34 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
3.043 Childcare Facility Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
3.044 Family Home Day Care and Large
Family Home Day Care
See Section 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N SP N
3.045 Church or other place of worship See Section 7.34 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N
3-6
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
Community and Public Service
Uses (continued)
3.046 Public library, museum See Section 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP Y N N N Y SP N
3.047 Public or commercial garage See Section 7.2 N N N N N N SP SP SP N N N
3.048 Telephone exchange buildings,
public utility sub-station
See Section 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N
3.0481 Wireless/Telecommunications
Service Facilities and Towers See Section 7.2 N N N N N SP SP SP SP N N N
3.049 Cemetery Must be adjacent to or extension
of an existing cemetery.
Y Y Y Y N Y N N N Y Y N
3.050 Crematory Must be situated within existing
cemetery.
Y Y Y Y N Y N N N Y Y N
3.051 Membership club, lodge, social,
recreational and community center
organization
N N N N N N Y N N N SP N
3.052 Convalescent, Assisted Living,
congregate elderly, handicapped
housing or nursing home
See Section 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N SP N
3.053 (Reserved)
3.054 Hospital or sanitarium, medical clinic See Section 7.2 SP SP SP SP SP N N N SP N SP N
3.06 COMMERCIAL USES
3.060 Professional office Including, but not limited to
doctors, architects and lawyers.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.061 Bank, financial, brokerage and loan
office
N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.062 Insurance and real estate office N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.063 Dental, medical & scientific labs N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.064 General consultant office N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.065 Telephone and utility office N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3-7
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
(Commercial Uses Continued)
3.066 Studio for professional photographer and
artist
N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.067 Travel agency N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.068 Commercial School N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.069 Sales Office Provided no goods for sale are stored
on the premises and no retail sales are
conducted from the location.
N N N N N Y Y Y Y N N N
3.07 BUSINESS USES
3.070 Retail Store See Section 7.39 for IGP allowance N N N N N N Y Y SP N N N
3.071 Convenience Store N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.072 Wholesale business N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.073 Planned Business Development Includes Shopping Centers. See
Section 5.2
N N N N N N SP SP N N N N
3.074 Supermarket N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.075 Personal Service Shop N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.075.1 Massage Therapist Facility or Licensed
Massage Therapy Salon
See Sections 7.2, 7.3 and 7.37 N N N N N SP SP SP N N N N
3.076 Gasoline Filling Station Body and fender work prohibited. See
Section 5.7
N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.0761 Gasoline Filling Station with
Convenience Store
Body and fender work prohibited. See
Section 5.7 and Section 7.2.
N N N N N N SP SP N N N N
3.0762 Car Washing Facility See Section 5.7 and Section 7.2. N N N N N N SP SP N N N N
3.0763 Automobile repair shop, storage battery
service, greasing station
Body and fender work prohibited. See
Section 5.7
N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.0764 Used Car Lot See Section 5.7 and 7.2. N N N N N N SP N N N N N
3.077 Restaurant See Section 7.2 N N N N N N SP SP N N N N
3.078 Funeral establishment N N N N N N Y Y N N N N
3.079 Veterinary hospital All animals must be kept inside
permanent buildings
N N N N N Y Y Y N N N N
3.079.1 Gaming Establishments N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.079.2 Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers
Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
See Sections 7.2, 7.3, 7.38, 6.0, 6.01,
6.02, 6.03 and 6.04
N N N N N N N N SP N N N
3-8
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
3.08 INDUSTRIAL USES
3.080 Industrial uses, not commonly
considered hazardous or noxious
All industrial uses are permitted
except those uses listed in Section
3.01. No use shall be permitted
which would be detrimental or
offensive or tend to reduce
property values in the same or
adjoining districts by reason of dirt,
odor, fumes, smoke gas, sewage
refuse, noise, excessive vibration or
danger of fire or explosion.
N N N N N N N Y Y N N N
3.081 Wholesale trade and warehouse
operations
N N N N N N N Y Y N N N
3.082 Construction supply establishment
(including a lumber yard)
N N N N N N Y Y Y N N N
3.083 Open quarrying and removal of
sandstone
N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.09 ACCESSORY USES
3.090 Home office or studio The use of a portion of a home by a
bona fide resident of the premises
as an office or studio for the private
conduct of a profession, home
occupation, or trade shall be
considered accessory to the use of
the residence provided that:
a. A Waiver of Site Plan approval
for a private home office or studio
must be granted by the Planning
Board prior to any business being
conducted at the residence.
b. the home occupation is to be
conducted in an office or studio in
the primary dwelling and is carried
on only by members of the resident
family living on the premises.
Y Y Y Y N Y Y N N Y Y N
3-9
Table 3-1 (Continued)
Bylaw
Number
Land Use Classification Standards and Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
Accessory Uses (continued)
c. The home occupation is clearly incidental
to and secondary to the use of the dwelling as
a residence.
d. the area devoted to the conduct of the
home occupation does not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the habitable floor area of
the dwelling unit.
e. No external change is made which alters
the residential appearance of the dwelling or
the residential character of the lot.
f. There is no exterior display, signage or
visible storage or other outward evidence
that the premises are being used for any
purpose other than for a residential use.
g. The use will not constitute a nuisance by
reason of an unacceptable level of air or
water pollution, noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, glare, unsightliness,
electrical interference, or other activity which
when produced, is detectable to normal
sensory perception beyond the property line
in amounts exceeding those normal to a
residential property. The use shall not
constitute a safety hazard to abutters.
h. No articles are sold or offered for sale on
the premises.
Y Y Y Y N Y Y N N Y Y N
3.091 Private Garage A private garage or storage space for not
more than five (5) vehicles shall be permitted
on a lot. Not for lease. The Standards &
Conditions in this Section shall not apply to
any business, commercial or industrial use in
the COM, BUS or IGP districts.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y N
3.0901 Home Based Trade The incidental and secondary use of a portion
of the home or accessory building therefore,
as a place for storage in connection with an
off-premises trade by a homeowner and
resident of the premises as a builder,
carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber,
landscaper or similar person. Said use is
specifically limited as enumerated in Section
7.36 of the East Longmeadow Zoning Bylaw.
SP SP SP SP N N N N N N N N
3-10
Bylaw Land Use
Number Classification Standards & Conditions AA A B C ER COM BUS I IGP GR PUR PAR
3.092 Garaging or parking commercial
vehicles
Notwithstanding Section 7.36,
Additional Criteria for Home Based
Trade
Vehicles used primarily for agricultural
purposes on the premises are exempt.
The following Standards and Conditions
shall apply on in the Residential district
(AA, A, B, C and ER):
a. Commercial vehicle shall not be
more than one ton in rated
capacity.
b. Not more than one commercial
vehicle of any size can be kept per
lot.
c. If not garaged, commercial
vehicles must be screened from
view.
d. The lease or rental of garage
storage to an non-resident owner
of a commercial vehicle is not
permitted.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N
3.093 Private stable, not conducted for gain Business operations are prohibited. No
more than 4 horses shall be kept on a
single lot. A minimum area of lot shall
be 10,000 square feet per horse.
Y Y Y Y N Y N N N Y Y N
3.094 Family pool See Section 5.9 Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N Y Y N
3.095 Neighborhood pool, not conducted
for gain
See Section 5.9 Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N Y N
3.096 House Trailer, Mobile Home Not more than one (1) house trailer
may be located on a lot. Cannot be
used as a dwelling unit on the lot.
Must conform to accessory building
setback, side yard and rear yard
requirement of the zone in which it is
located
Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N
(RESERVED)
3.15 Helistop, limited use N N N N N N N N SP N N N
3-11
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
AA Any permitted use 40,000 175 50 35 50 60 35 25 Private stable – for stabling one horse, a lot
must have a minimum lot size of 10,000
square feet. For stabling additional horses, a
lot shall have 10,000 square feet of
additional area for each additional horse.
Town Building 40,000 175 50 35 50 60 50 25
Hospital, Sanitarium, Medical
Clinic, Convalescent, Nursing
Home, Congregate Care,
Handicapped or Assisted
Living Facility
40,000 175 50 50 50 60 35*** 25 No building shall be built within 50 feet of
any property line.
See Section 7.33
Church, Building for
Educational purposes, Public
Library, Museum
80,000 350 70 49 70 80 45 60 There shall be no parking or access
driveways closer than 25 feet to a Residential
District boundary.
See Section 7.34
The entire length of the side and rear yards
abutting a Residential District shall be
landscaped for a depth of 20 feet from the lot
line.
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, steeples or flagpoles. However, no radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an existing man-made structure other
than an antenna structure, shall increase the overall height of such man-made structures by more than 20 feet and in all cases shall be stayed in such a manner to assure stability.
** Any accessory structure constructed at least ten (10) feet behind the principal building can be erected no closer than five (5) feet of the rear and/or side yard property line. Any
other accessory structures must meet the required side and rear yard setbacks as the principal building.
*** Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
3-12
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
A Any permitted use 25,000 140 50 20 50 60 35 25 Private stable – for stabling one horse, a lot
must have a minimum lot size of 10,000
square feet. For stabling additional horses,
a lot shall have 10,000 square feet of
additional area for each additional horse.
Town Building 25,000 140 50 20 50 60 50 25
Hospital, Sanitarium, Medical
Clinic, Convalescent, Nursing
Home, Congregate Care,
Handicapped or Assisted
Living Facility
25,000 140 50 50 50 60 35*** 25 No building shall be built within 50 feet of
any property line.
See Section 7.33
Church, Building for
Educational purposes, Public
Library, Museum
50,000 280 70 28 70 80 45 60 There shall be no parking or access
driveways closer than 25 feet to a
Residential District boundary.
See Section 7.34
The entire length of the side and rear yards
abutting a Residential District shall be
landscaped for a depth of 20 feet from the
lot line.
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, steeples or flagpoles. However, no radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an existing man-made structure
other than an antenna structure, shall increase the overall height of such man-made structures by more than 20 feet and in all cases shall be stayed in such a manner to assure
stability.
** Any accessory structure constructed at least ten (10) feet behind the principal building can be erected no closer than five (5) feet of the rear and/or side yard property line. Any
other accessory structures must meet the required side and rear yard setbacks as the principal building.
*** Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
3-13
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
B Any permitted use 15,000 100 40 15 35 50 35 25 Private stable – for stabling one horse, a lot
must have a minimum lot size of 10,000
square feet. For stabling additional horses,
a lot shall have 10,000 square feet of
additional area for each additional horse.
Town Building 15,000 100 40 15 35 50 50 25
Hospital, Sanitarium, Medical
Clinic, Convalescent, Nursing
Home, Congregate Care,
Handicapped or Assisted
Living Facility
15,000 100 50 50 50 60 35*** 25 No building shall be built within 50 feet of
any property line.
See Section 7.33
Church, Building for
Educational purposes, Public
Library, Museum
30,000 200 56 21 49 66 45 60 There shall be no parking or access
driveways closer than 25 feet to a
Residential District boundary.
See Section 7.34
The entire length of the side and rear yards
abutting a Residential District shall be
landscaped for a depth of 20 feet from the
lot line.
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, steeples or flagpoles. However, no radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an existing man-made structure
other than an antenna structure, shall increase the overall height of such man-made structures by more than 20 feet and in all cases shall be stayed in such a manner to assure
stability.
** Any accessory structure constructed at least ten (10) feet behind the principal building can be erected no closer than five (5) feet of the rear and/or side yard property line. Any
other accessory structures must meet the required side and rear yard setbacks as the principal building.
*** Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
3-14
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
C Any permitted use 10,000 75 25 12 25 35 35 25 Private stable – for stabling one horse, a lot
must have a minimum lot size of 10,000
square feet. For stabling additional horses, a
lot shall have 10,000 square feet of
additional area for each additional horse.
Town Building 10,000 75 25 12 25 35 50 25
Hospital, Sanitarium, Medical
Clinic, Convalescent, Nursing
Home, Congregate Care,
Handicapped or Assisted
Living Facility
10,000 50 50 50 50 60 35*** 25 No building shall be built within 50 feet of
any property line.
See Section 7.33
Church, Building for
Educational purposes, Public
Library, Museum
20,000 150 35 17 35 45 45 60 There shall be no parking or access
driveways closer than 25 feet to a Residential
District boundary.
See Section 7.34
The entire length of the side and rear yards
abutting a Residential District shall be
landscaped for a depth of 20 feet from the lot
line.
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, steeples or flagpoles. However, no radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an existing man-made structure other
than an antenna structure, shall increase the overall height of such man-made structures by more than 20 feet and in all cases shall be stayed in such a manner to assure stability.
** Any accessory structure constructed at least ten (10) feet behind the principal building can be erected no closer than five (5) feet of the rear and/or side yard property line. Any
other accessory structures must meet the required side and rear yard setbacks as the principal building.
*** Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
3-15
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
ER Any permitted use 5 acres 200 50 50 50 50 35*** 25 Unit density is limited to 25 units/acre.
There shall be a maximum of 200 units on
any one lot. Minimum of 8 units for each
principal building.
A 120 foot distance between dwelling
buildings is required.
Vehicular access to a public way or ways
must be provided at a minimum of 2
locations not less than 100 feet apart.
Note: 25 feet landscaped buffer is required
along the front yard, side yard and rear yard
requirements if abutting any other residential
districts.
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, steeples or flagpoles. However, no radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an existing man-made structure other
than an antenna structure, shall increase the overall height of such man-made structures by more than 20 feet and in all cases shall be stayed in such a manner to assure stability.
** Any accessory structure constructed at least ten (10) feet behind the principal building can be erected no closer than five (5) feet of the rear and/or side yard property line. Any
other accessory structures must meet the required side and rear yard setbacks as the principal building.
*** Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
3-16
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
PUR
Planned Unit
Residential
P.U.R.D.** 40 acres (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 35 (6)
Residential Use 40,000 175 50 35 50 60 35 25
Any other permitted use 40,000 175 50 35 50 60 35*** 25 Accessory side and rear yard not less
than 50 feet
*These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, elevator penthouses and required bulkheads.
* *Planned Unit Residential Development (P.U.R.D.): Minimum setback and side/yard dimensions of Residence AA shall pertain to the periphery of the P.U.R.D.
*** For Section 7.33 uses only. Height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet upon Special Permit application and Planning Board review and approval.
(1) Frontage is not applicable
(2) Minimum of 40 feet setback as measured from the center line of street to structure, as applicable.
(3) Minimum of 25 feet side yard between structures.
(4) Minimum of 25 feet rear yard between structures.
(5) Minimum of 40 feet setback as measured from center line of street to structure, as applicable.
(6) Maximum lot coverage is not applicable. The P.U.R.D. density shall not exceed three (3) units per aggregate acre, excluding wetlands of the P.U.R.D. and there shall be no
more than three (3) bedrooms per unit.
3-17
3.2 DIMENSION AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min. **
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Density Comment
PAR
Planned
Adult
Residential
District
PHAR.D.** 25 acres (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 35 (6) (7)
*These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, elevator penthouses and required bulkheads.
* *Planned Adult Residential District (PHAR.D.): Minimum setback and side/yard dimensions pertaining to the periphery of the P.A.R.D. shall be 50 feet.
(1) Frontage not applicable.
(2) Minimum of 40 feet setback as measured from center line of street to structure, as applicable.
(3) Minimum of 24 feet side yard between structures.
(4) Minimum of 25 feet rear yard between structures.
(5) Minimum of 40 feet setback as measured from center line of street to structure, as applicable.
(6) Maximum lot coverage 50% (structures, road pavements and impervious surfaces), excluding one hundred percent (100%) of the wetlands in the calculations.
(7) The P.A.R.D. density shall not exceed the units per aggregate usable acre of the P.A.R.D. based on the average square foot requirements set forth below and there shall be no
more than three (3) bedrooms per unit.
AVERAGE SQUARE FEET OF UNITS UNITS PER USABLE ACRE
< 1600 5
1601-2300 4
>2301 3
Basements, porches and decks shall not be included in the calculation of the square footage of the units. The density calculation shall be the average of all units as depicted on the
site plan submitted to the Planning Board for either the entire P.A.R.D. development or the phase of the P.A.R.D. development identified on the site plan submitted to the Planning
Board and shall be based upon the usable acres developed to said site plan.
3-18
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Comment
COM
Commercial
District
Any permitted use 15,000 100 25 ** 25 25 30 Single story =
40%
Two story =
30%
See “Additional Use Dimensional
and Density Regulations” section
* Height provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, water tanks or hose towers, nor to required bulkheads or elevator penthouses. A residence building shall comply
with the height requirements for residential districts.
** Twelve (12) foot side yard, except where abutting any residential property or district, in which case the side yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
3-19
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2,
Table of Dimension Regulations
TABLE 3 – 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. ft.
or as
noted)
Min.
Frontage
(feet)
Min.
Setback
(feet)
Min.
Side
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Min.
Setback
Accessory
(feet)
Max. *
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
%
Max. Size ***
(sq. ft.)
Comment
BUS
Business
Any permitted Use none 100 25 none none 25 40 25 *** See “Additional Use
Dimensional and Density
Regulations” section.
Residential Use none 75 25 12 25 35 35 25 none
Planned Business
Development
2.5 acres 120 50 5 5 50 40 35 65,000 See Section 5.2
Storage or sale of unused
motor vehicles
20,000 150 25 none none 25 40 75 65,000
(subject to
section 7.35)
See “Additional Use
Dimensional and Density
Regulations” section.
* Height provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, water tanks or hose towers, nor to required bulkheads or elevator penthouses. For a building to be devoted in
whole or in part to residence purposes, the requirements for setbacks, side yards and rear yards prescribed for Residence C district shall apply.
*** For size limits, see Sections 3.333 and 5.235. For any permitted use, except retail use, no maximum square footage. Retail use: 65,000 square foot for maximum building size.
3-20
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimensional Regulations.
Table 3-2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS (continued)
DISTRICT Use Min. Lot
Area
(Sq. feet)
Or as
noted
Min.
Frontage
(Sq. feet)
Min.
Setback
(Sq. feet)
Min. Side
Yard
(Sq. feet)
Min. Rear
Yard
(Sq. feet)
Min.
Setback
Accessory
(Sq. feet)
Max *
Height
(Sq. feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
(%)
Max. Size**
(Sq. feet)
Comment
I Any permitted use None None 25 12 25 25 50 60 ***
See “Additional Use
Dimensional and Density
Regulations” section.
Industrial
Planned Business
Development 2.5 acres 120 50 5 5 50 40 35 65,000 See Section 5.2
Abutting a
Residence District None None 25 50 50 25 50 60 *** See Section 3.34
Abutting a
commercial,
business or
industrial district
None None 25 12 25 25 50 60 ***
* These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, aerators, flag or radio poles, elevator penthouses, gas holders, water tanks, grain elevators, required bulkheads, or
other equipment appurtenant to industrial buildings.
** For size limits see Section 3.3343
*** Any permitted use, except retail use, no maximum square footage. Retail use: 65,000 square feet maximum building size.
Maximum square footage limitation determined by designated use.
3-21
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimensional Regulations
T A B L E 3 - 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS (Continued)
DISTRICT Use Min. Lot Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max.* Max. Lot Comment
Area Frontage Setback Side Rear Setback Height Coverage
(Sq. ft.) or
as noted
(feet) (feet) Yard
(feet)
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
(feet)
(feet) (%)
GR - Golf
Recreational
Residential use 40,000 175 50 35 50 60 35 25
Any other
permitted use
40,000 175 50 35 50 60 35 25 Accessory side and rear yard not less
than 50 feet.
* These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, elevator penthouses and required bulkheads.
3-22
3.2 DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
All permitted uses allowed by Special Permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Table 3-2, Table of Dimensional Regulat
T A B L E 3 - 2
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS (Continued)
DISTRICT Use Min. Lot Min. Min. Min. Min. Min. Max.* Max. Lot Comment
Area Frontage Setback Side Rear Setback Height Coverage
(Sq. ft.) or
as noted
(feet) (feet) Yard
(feet)
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
(feet)
(feet) (%)
IGP
Industrial
Garden Park
Any permitted use 75,000 250 75 40 50 75 50 ** When abutting any residential
district, the rear and/or side yard
shall be 50 feet. A 25 foot
landscaped buffer is required if a
property abuts any residential
district.
Medical Marijuana
Treatment Centers
Registered Marijuana
Treatment Centers
75,000 250 75 40 50 75 50 ** See additional requirements in
Section 7.2, 7.3, 7.38, 6.0, 6.01,
6.02, 6.03, and 6.04
* Height shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, water towers, flagpoles, aerators, antennas or other equipment appurtenances necessitated by the permitted use to which
the building is put.
**Maximum lot coverage in the IGP district: On any lot, building area shall not exceed 405 of the lot area on lots having less than 225,000 square feet of area and 45% of
the lot area on lots having 225,000 square feet or more.
3-23
3.3 ADDITIONAL USE, DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
3.30 General Provisions
3.301 Cornices
Cornices may extend not more than 2 1/2 feet over or into any required front
yard, side yard or rear yard.
3.302 Fences or Walls
a) All boundary fences and/or walls shall require a building permit from the
Building Commissioner.
b) No fence more than one-quarter solid or wall greater than 4 feet in height
shall be erected closer to the front lot line than the setback of the
primary building. The setback is the unoccupied space between the lot
line and the building with said unoccupied space extending the entire
distance across the lot. In the event of a corner lot, the front yard setback
shall apply from all lot lines forming boundaries of a lot. See fence
diagram A and B.
c) All other fences must be at least 6 inches from any lot line.
d) Walls in Residential Districts, except retaining walls, shall be erected not
less than 3 feet from any lot line.
e) Fence requirements, swimming pools, shall conform to the setback,
side yard, and rear yard requirements for a principal building for the
district in which the pool is constructed. (Section 3.314 Setback).
Additional criteria, pool fencing, see Section 5.95 Safety Devices.
f) Fences in Industrial Garden Park, see Section 5.07. Fence screening
outside storage, Industrial Garden Park, see Section 5.04.
3.303 Lights
Lights, floodlights, spotlights or other illuminating devices shall be so
directed as to not constitute a hazard or distraction to vehicular traffic, and
further, shall not be objectionable to any residential area.
3.304 Vision Clearance
Between the lines of streets intersecting at an angle of less than 135 degrees
and a line joining points on such lines 35 feet distant from the point of
intersection, no building or structure may be erected, and no vegetation
maintained between a height of 2 feet and 8 feet above the plane through their
curb grades.
3.305 Preparation and Service of Food and Drink
The preparation and/or service of food and drink in any manner is expressly
prohibited, with the exception of those establishments in which the entire
3-24
process of service takes place within the primary building. In no case shall
the operation of what is commonly known as a drive-in, drive-through or
drive-up restaurant be permitted. Drive-up window service is prohibited.
3.306 Means of Entry or Exit
No entrances, exits, driveways or any other means of effective entry or exit
into any public way shall be hereafter constructed or used without the
approval of the Board of Public Works.
3.307 Waste Disposal Areas
The operation of a public waste disposal area by the Town under the
supervision of the Board of Health shall not constitute a violation of any of the
provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, provided that the location is assigned by the
Board of Health in accordance with statutory provisions and provided that the
only type of waste disposal used therein is the sanitary landfill and cover
method; that no burning of refuse or other nuisance shall be permitted; and that
such disposal area is operated in strict accordance with Board of Health
regulations.
3.308 Unregistered Vehicles
In districts where residential uses are allowed.
The keeping of more than one (1) unregistered or inoperable vehicle, assembled or
disassembled, and in sight of all abutters and public ways, for more than (30)
days on any premises shall not be permitted. The condition of said
unregistered vehicle shall not pose a safety or health issue. All other unregistered
vehicles on residential parcels must be stored in an enclosed building, out of
sight of all abutters and public ways. The use of a tarp or similar material to
satisfy the out of sight requirement is prohibited.
The keeping of unregistered truck trailers or the like, either assembled or
disassembled, on a parcel is prohibited for all residential uses, except the
aforementioned will be exempt when used for agriculture or farm business.
See definitions of Agriculture, Farm Business and Vehicle in section VIII of the
East Longmeadow Zoning Bylaw.
3.309 Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles, or trailers for the purpose of carrying recreational
equipment, may be kept or stored on any lot where the principal use of said
lot is residential in nature. Any such recreational vehicle or trailer shall be
kept in the side or rear yard and/or at least to the rear of the setback line of
the primary building. Recreational vehicles shall not be used for living
quarters.
3-25
3.31 Residential Districts - AA, A, B, and C
3.311 Accessory Buildings in Residential Areas
“Accessory uses customarily incidental to any use or building permitted herein,
provided that such use shall not be offensive nor dangerous to life by reason of health
or fire; and further provided that such accessory use shall not include any business,
industry, trailer camp, manufacturing, or commercial use or other activity conducted
for gain, other than what is specifically set forth in Section 7.36 for Home Based Trade
together with a Special Permit.”
Not more than one (1) house trailer may be located on any lot. Such trailer may not be
used for living quarters. Such trailer shall conform to accessory building setback, side yard
and rear yard requirements of the district in which it is located.
“An accessory building shall not be used for residence purposes”.
3.312 Private Garages
A garage or storage space for private motor vehicles shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be subject to all the applicable provisions of this Bylaw
pertaining to accessory buildings.
3.313 Lot Coverage
No principal building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more than 25 percent of the
area of the lot on which it is located. No principal building shall be erected so as to cover
less than 7 percent of the lot area in which it is located in Residence District C. In the
event that the lot area in Residence District C exceeds the minimum lot area, the
minimum lot coverage shall be no greater than that required for a minimum sized lot
expressed in square feet.
3.314 Setback
a. Accessory structure setback shall be the setback of the district of the primary
building, and the setback, side yard, and rear yard requirements must be met for that
district in which the accessory structure is constructed. Any accessory structure which
shall be constructed within the side yard and/or rear yard in the district in which it is
constructed, shall be erected in such a manner that no portion of this accessory
building shall be closer to the street line or lines than the maximum rear dimension of
the primary building, plus 10 feet, in which event an accessory building may be
constructed within 5 feet of the side-lot line or rear-yard line. Notwithstanding the
setback, side yard, and rear- yard requirements for a principal building for the district
in which such pool is constructed.
b. No part of any building or other structure, including porches, breezeways, or
other structures attached to the primary building, shall be erected so as to be
nearer to the street line than the nearest building located within 250 feet of either
side of the lot facing the same street and located within the same area or district,
3-26
but in no case will the required setback in this section exceed 60 feet. In the
event of a primary structure having been erected prior to this Zoning Bylaw
under conditions which allowed its erection with less than the setback
requirements of this Bylaw, the next building erected adjacent to this lot shall
have its setback determined by the following formula: the setback of the
existing dwelling added to the setback required in this district, and the result
divided by 2. The purpose of this shall be to average the required setback with
that setback of the existing building. Such formula shall be applied within 250
feet of either side of an existing primary structure which does not conform to the
setback requirements in the district in which it is located.
3.32 Commercial District
3.321 Buffer Strip Requirements
Twelve foot (12’) side yards shall be required for a commercial building or structure,
except that when the property abuts a Residence or a Residential District, a side yard
of 25 feet is required. The first 12 ½ feet of such rear or side yard nearest to
the Residence or Residential District shall be left as a wooded buffer, or if none exits,
shall be landscaped by providing trees, shrubs or fencing to provide a practical buffer
between the two properties and/or districts. The establishment of this buffer strip
shall be an integral part of any required parking plan. Sufficient space and facilities
shall be provided for loading and unloading of materials, equipment and merchandise
on the premises and entirely off the traveled way. Proper access to the rear of
buildings for fire control and general safety shall be provided.
3.322 Lot Coverage
In the case of a single-story building, the building area shall not exceed 40
percent of the lot area and a minimum of 24 percent of the lot area shall be left
as landscaped open space; in the case of a two-story building, the building area
shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot area and a minimum of 16 percent of the
lot area shall be left as landscaped open space. Plot plans must be submitted to
the Planning Board for approval of parking provisions in all cases, and to the
Board of Public Works in accordance with the General Bylaw of the Town of
East Longmeadow, Section 7.04, where applicable.
3.33 Business Districts
3.331 Buffer Strip Requirements
No specific side yards shall be required for a business building or structure, except
that when the property abuts a Residence or a Residential District, a side yard or rear
yard of 25 feet is required. The first 12 ½ feet of such rear or side yard
3-27
nearest to the Residence or Residential District shall be left as a wooded buffer, or
if none exits, shall be landscaped by providing trees, shrubs or fencing to provide a
practical buffer between the two properties and/or districts. The establishment of
this buffer strip shall be an integral part of any required parking plan. Sufficient
space and facilities shall be provided for loading and unloading of materials,
equipment and merchandise on the premises and entirely off the traveled way.
Proper access to the rear of buildings for fire control and general safety shall be
provided.
3.332 Lot Coverage
Building area shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. Plot plans must be
submitted to the Planning Board for approval of parking provisions in all cases,
and to the Board of Public Works in accordance with the General Bylaw of the
Town of East Longmeadow, Section 7.04, where applicable.
3.333 LIMITATION ON SIZE OF BUILDINGS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(1) The floor area of any building used for retail sales purposes within a Business
District shall not exceed sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet.
(a) The floor area is to be calculated using all areas accessible to the general
public (i.e. mezzanines and basements), the first floor and all stories above
the first floor, and the area of all portions of the site outside the exterior
walls of the building used for the display, storage or sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or services.
(b) All floor areas within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of one another
shall be aggregated in determining the maximum of sixty-five thousand
(65,000) square feet only if:
i. the buildings are being used for the sale of goods, wares
merchandise or services for retail or storing inventory for sale, and
ii. the floor areas combined are normally operated as a single retail
building or retail outlet for sales purposes, and
iii. the floor space is operated or controlled by a common
owner.
For purposes of this section, "common owner" shall mean any legal entity where an
owner, member of the Board of Directors, partner, officer, member of a limited
liability company, or other legal entity has ownership or management rights in each
retail business.
3-28
3.34 Industrial District
3.341 Buffer Strip Requirements
When abutting a Residence District, the rear yard and/or the side yard shall be 50
feet. The 25 feet of such rear or side yard nearest to the Residence District shall be
left as a natural wooded buffer, or if none exists, shall be landscaped by providing
trees, shrubs or fencing, to provide a practical buffer between the two districts. The
establishment of this buffer strip shall be an integral part of any required parking
plan. For commercial, business or industrial uses, facilities shall be provided for
loading and unloading all materials, equipment and merchandise on the premises,
and entirely off the traveled way.
3.342 Lot Coverage
Plot plans must be submitted to the Planning Board for approval of parking
provisions in all cases, and to the Board of Public Works in accordance with
the General Bylaw of the Town of East Longmeadow, Section 7.04, where
applicable. Building area shall not exceed 60% of the lot area.
3.343 LIMITATION ON SIZE OF BUILDINGS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(1) The floor area of any building used for retail sales purposes within an Industrial
District shall not exceed sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet.
(a) The floor area is to be calculated using all areas accessible to the general
public (i.e. mezzanines and basements), the first floor and all stories above the
first floor, and the area of all portions of the site outside the exterior walls of the
building used for the display, storage or sale of goods, wares, merchandise or
services.
(b) All floor areas within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of one another
shall be aggregated in determining the maximum of sixty-five thousand (65,000)
square feet only if:
i. the buildings are being used for the sale of goods, wares merchandise or
services for retail or storing inventory for sale, and
ii. the floor areas combined are normally operated as a single retail building or
retail outlet for sales purposes, and
iii. the floor space is operated or controlled by a common owner.
For purposes of this section, "common owner" shall mean any legal entity where
an owner, member of the Board of Directors, partner, officer, member of a limited
liability company, or other legal entity has ownership or management rights in each
retail business.
3-29
3.35 Industrial Garden District
3.351 Buffer Strip Requirements
When abutting any residential district, the rear and/or side yard shall be 50
feet.
A 25 foot landscaped buffer is required if a property abuts any residential
district.
3.352 Lot Coverage
On any lot, the building area shall not exceed 40% of the lot area on lots
having less than 225,000 square feet of area and 45% of the lot area on lots
having 225,000 square feet or more.
3.4 EXISTING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
This Bylaw shall not apply to buildings or structures, nor to the existing use of any
buildings or structures, or of land, lawfully in existence or lawfully begun prior to the
adoption of this Bylaw, or to a building or special permit issued before the first
publication of notice of the public hearing on such ordinance or Bylaw required by
Section Five of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, but shall apply to any
change or substantial extension of such use, to a building or special permit issued after
the first notice of said public hearing, to any reconstruction, extension or structural
change of such structure and to any alteration of a structure begun after the first notice
of said public hearing to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose or for the
same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent
except where alteration, reconstruction, extension or structural change to a single or twofamily
residential structure does not increase the non-conforming nature of said
structure.
3-30


3.5 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
A building, structure or land which at the time of enactment of this Zoning Bylaw revision
is being put to a legal non-conforming use may be:
3.51 Continued in that use, except as provided in Section 3.4.
3.52 Altered or enlarged in that use, but only after the granting of a special permit
therefore by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) upon the determination
of said Special Permit Granting Authority that such change, alteration or
enlargement shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the
existing non-conforming use.
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any
subsequent amendment of the Zoning Bylaw unless the use or construction is
commenced within a period of six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and in
cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to
completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
3.53 Changed to a use deemed less detrimental by the SPGA, provided that when so
changed, it shall not be returned to its former use.
3.54 When a building in which there is a non-conforming use is damaged or destroyed by
fire, collapse, explosion, or other casualty, it may be reconstructed, repaired, or
rebuilt only to its previous floor area and cubical content provided such
reconstruction or rebuilding is commenced within six months of such damage or
destruction and provided the non-conforming use is continued.
3.55 When a non-conforming use is discontinued, as evidenced by lack of use or vacancy
for a continuous period of twenty-four (24) months, or by the substitution of a less
detrimental use, or changed to a conforming use, such non-conforming use shall not
thereafter be re-established, and all future uses shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Bylaw.
3.56 Non-Conforming Lots in Residence Districts
a. Where an adequate potable water supply and safe permanent sewage disposal can
be assured, a lot having less than the required lot area and/or lot frontage in the
applicable district may be used for a permitted use, provided:
1. said lot has been shown or described separately on a duly recorded plan or
deed or was so assessed by the Town Assessors prior to the date of the
adoption of the 1962 Zoning Bylaw;
3-31
2. any structure built thereon shall conform to the setback, side yard, minimum
and maximum lot coverage, and secondary setback requirements of the 1962
Zoning Bylaw;
b. Any lot upon which more than one dwelling house was legally in existence at the time
of the enactment of The Zoning Bylaw of 1962, may be divided so that said structures
are upon separate lots, and sold to separate owners; and in such event, the setback, side
yard, and rear-yard requirements of the zoning Bylaw shall not apply.
c. No lot upon which is located any building used for residence purposes in any district
shall be reduced in area so as not to conform with the provisions of this Bylaw
(except in the above paragraph and in the case of such reduction in area resulting
from eminent domain proceedings).
d. No yard, lot area, or other open space required under the Zoning Bylaw for any
building shall, while said building exists, be occupied by or considered as such open
space required for another principal building.
3.57 Non-Conforming Lots in the Industrial Garden Park District
The lot area, frontage, setback, side yard, rear yard and coverage requirements of this
Section of the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply, and requirements as set forth below shall
apply on any lot having less than the required areas and/or frontage for this District, shown
or described separately, on any duly recorded plan or deed, or assessed as a separate lot by
the East Longmeadow Assessors prior to the date of the adoption of The 1962 Zoning
Bylaw, and if such lot were held and has continued to be held in ownership separate from
adjacent lots, from date of adoption of The 1962 Zoning Bylaw.
a. Frontage and area of such lots shall be not less than that shown or described
separately on any duly recorded plan or deed, or as assessed by the East
Longmeadow Assessors at date of the adoption of The 1962 Zoning Bylaw.
b. On any lot having less than 200 feet of depth as measured from front lot line to rear lot
line, setback for any building shall be not less than 50 feet. On any lot having a depth
of 200 feet or more, setback for any building shall be 25 percent of such depth, or 75
feet, whichever is less.
c. On any lot having less than 125 feet of width as measured from side lot line to side
lot line at the building setback line, the side yard for any building shall not be less than
20 feet. On any lot having a width of 125 feet or more, side yard for any building shall
be 16% of such width, or 40 feet, whichever is less.
d. On any lot having less than 200 feet of depth from front lot line to rear lot line, the
rear yard for any building shall be not less than 40 feet. On any lot having a depth of
200 feet or more, rear yard for any building shall be 20 percent of such depth, or 50
feet, whichever is less.
3-32
e. On any lot having 75,000 square feet of area or less, the building area shall not exceed 50
percent of lot area or 30,000 square feet, whichever is less. On any lot having an area of
more than 75,000 square feet, the building area shall not exceed 40 percent of lot area.
f. In the case of a corner lot fronting on two public ways, setback requirements of this
paragraph shall apply to the frontage on one of the public ways (with rear yard
requirements applying to the opposite side of the lot), and side yard requirements of
this paragraph shall apply along the remaining boundaries of the lot.
3.58 Non-Conforming Lots in the Commercial District
The lot area and lot frontage requirements of the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to a lot
having less than the required area and/or frontage in a Commercial District, if said lot has
been shown or described separately on any duly recorded plan or deed or assessed as a
separate lot by the East Longmeadow Assessors prior to the date of the adoption of The
1962 Zoning Bylaw except that in case of such lot any structure erected thereon must be in
compliance with the setback, side yard, rear yard, minimum lot coverage, and secondary
setback requirements of The 1962 Zoning Bylaw.
3-33
SECTION IV - FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
REGULATIONS 4.0 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
4.1 The purpose of the Floodplain District is to:
a. Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and
personal injury;
b. Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;
c. Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water
quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding;
d. Avoid the loss of utility services which, if damaged by flooding,
would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of
the community beyond the site of flooding;
e. Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of
flooding conditions; and,
f. Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from
flooding waters.
4.2 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The District
includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of East Longmeadow
designated as Zone A or AE on the Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the
Hampden County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of East
Longmeadow are panel numbers 25013C0408E, 25013C0409E, 25013C0416E,
25013C0417E, 25013C0430E and 25013C0440E dated July 16, 2013. The exact
boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations
shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Hampden County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2013. Between May 20, 2013 and July 16, 2013, the
September 15, 1978 maps are to be used, after that date, the July 16, 2013 version
shall apply (if completed). The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by
reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Building
Inspector.
4.3 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND FLOODWAY DATA
a. Floodway Data. In Zone A, and AE, along watercourses that have not had
a regulatory floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local,
or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in
floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5
4-1
acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
4.4 DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
The following requirements apply in the Floodplain District:
4.41 Any construction, development or grading of any nature or description within the
Floodplain District shall not be commenced until an application for a Special
Permit has been approved by the Special Permit Granting Authority.
4.42 Application to the Special Permit Granting Authority for a Special Permit
shall be accompanied by a plan which shall show the following:
a. Boundaries and dimensions of the area involved.
b. The location, dimensions and mean sea level of the lowest floor, including
basement of existing and proposed buildings and structure thereon, and the
elevation to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
c. All plans shall show the two (2) foot contour intervals and contours shall
be delineated within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed construction.
d. Whenever there is any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, abutters,
neighboring communities and the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation shall be notified prior to the commencement of such activity. Submit
copies of said notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
e. Notifications of the events as listed in d. above, must be sent to all adjacent
communities at the addresses listed below which are accurate at the time of the
writing of this by-law;
? NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation & Recreation
251 Causeway Street Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
? NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
f. Proof that all permits required by Federal or State Law, including Section 404 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334,
have been or are in the process of being obtained.
g. Any other information as is deemed necessary by the Special Permit Granting
Authority to indicate the complete physical characteristics of the area and the
proposed construction and/or grading thereof.
4-2
4.43 Plans shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and shall show and make adequate provisions for the
following:
a. The protection, preservation and maintenance of the water table and water recharge
areas.
b. The preservation and maintenance of the natural stream channel plus sufficient width
of over bank areas for the passage of 100 year flood flows so as not to increase the 100
year flood water surface elevation at any point within the community.
c. The retention of existing floodwater storage capacity.
d. Prevention of flotation, collapse and movement of structures.
e. Prevention of flood damage to public utilities including sewer, water, gas and electric.
f. Located within the Floodplain District are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which
carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
i. Encroachment, including fill, new construction, any alteration or addition and other
development shall be prohibited within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge as specified in 44 CFR 60.3, d, (3).;
ii. If Section 4.3.3.6.1 above is satisfied, all new construction and any alteration or
addition shall comply with all provisions of Section 4.3; and,
iii. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the application by the Special Permit
Granting Authority, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall transmit copies
thereof, together with copies of the accompanying plan to the Board of Health,
Engineering Department and the Conservation Commission or any other agency.
Such agencies shall investigate the application and report in writing their
recommendation to the Special Permit Granting Authority. The Special Permit
Granting Authority shall not take final action on such application until it has
received a written report from the above agencies or until forty-five (45) days have
elapsed without receipt of said reports.
4.44 All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to ensure that:
a. Such proposals minimize flood damage;
b. All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and,
4-3
c. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4.5 REFERENCE TO EXISTING REGULATIONS
4.51 The Floodplain District is established as an overly district to all other districts.
All development in the district, including structural and nonstructural activities,
whether permitted by right or by Special Permit must be in compliance with
Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the
following:
a. Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which
address floodplain and coastal high hazard areas;
b. Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);
c. Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
d. Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced state
regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of
these state regulations.
4.6 PERMITTED USES
The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood
flows are encouraged provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they
do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment:
a. Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which address
floodplain and coastal high hazard areas;
b. Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);
c. Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
d. Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage,
DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
e. Temporary non-residential structures used in connection with fishing, growing,
harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises; and,
f. Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
4-4
4.7 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES
Nothing contained in this section shall excuse compliance with the Wetlands Protection
Statutes, General Laws, Chapter 131, Sections 40 and 40A, or any other laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
4-5
SECTION V - SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS 5.0
INDUSTRIAL GARDEN PARK DISTRICT
5.00 General Provisions
In addition to restrictions appearing elsewhere in the Zoning Bylaw, no use of the
Industrial Garden Park District land is permitted which is objectionable by reason of
noise, odor, vibration, smoke, hazardous nature of the operation, or any other reason
which may render the use or occupancy of the land and buildings objectionable.
5.01 Industrial Garden Park District Sub development
Subdivision within the Industrial Garden Park District shall conform to the subdivision
control law as adopted by the Town of East Longmeadow, and shall further conform
to the rules and regulations of the Planning Board for the submission of subdivisions.
5.02 Exterior Construction
The exterior facing of the front elevation and side walls of any building in the Industrial
Garden Park District shall be finished with brick, glass brick, aluminum or stainless steel,
or any architectural siding or other materials of equal attractiveness and durability.
5.03 Rubbish and Trash
All rubbish and/or trash, scrap, or other waste material incident to the uses of the principal
building shall be stored within a structure compatible with Section 5.02, unless such
material is stored behind the rear line of the building, and provided such material is not
placed closer to the side lot lines of the principal building; and further provided such
material shall not be stored within 50 feet of the rear lot line.
5.04 Outside Storage
Outside storage shall be in an area enclosed by an opaque fence, or site-obscuring
landscaping, either of which shall be not less than 6 feet nor more than 10 feet high.
5.05 Fuel Storage
All fuel storage tanks shall be below ground and below the mean grade level of the lot on
which the storage is required, or totally enclosed within the principal building.
5-1
5.06 Landscaping
Except for land utilized for reasonable access driveways, a strip of lawn or other
natural landscaping shall be provided along the full frontage of all streets. Such
landscaped strip shall extend a depth of not less than 50 feet from the street line,
except that such strip shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet if a loading or
unloading door or platform is constructed facing said street. Trees spaced not more than
50 feet apart shall be provided on said landscaped strip so as to screen a loading or
unloading door or platform if such is constructed facing said street in accordance with
setbacks and yard regulations for this district.
5.07 Fences
No fence shall be more than one-quarter solid, except when used for Outside
Storage, Section 5.04.
5.08 Additional Dimensional and Density Requirements
An industrial building shall have a setback of 75 feet from any street line, a 40-foot side
yard and a 50-foot rear yard. When abutting a Residence District, the rear and/or side yard
shall be 50 feet. The 25 feet of such rear or side yard nearest to the Residence District
shall be left as a natural wooded buffer, or if none exists, shall be landscaped by providing
trees, shrubs or fencing to provide a practical buffer between the two districts. The
establishment of this buffer strip shall be an integral part of any required parking plan.
Facilities must be provided for loading and unloading all equipment and merchandise on
the premises, entirely off the traveled way. No loading or unloading door or platform may
face a street unless said door or platform shall be back from said street 300 feet or more,
and this requirement shall also apply to non-conforming lots under Section 5.01.
5.1 ELDERLY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
5.10 Dwellings for the aged, including multiple dwelling units and including accessory meeting
rooms, dining and garage facilities shall be permitted in the Elderly Residential District
only upon approval of a Plan of Development from the Board of Selectmen, and in
accordance with additional requirements specified herein.
5.11 Application Procedure
A Plan of Development shall be submitted to the Selectmen for review, and such Plan
must be approved by said Board before a building permit shall be issued. The Board of
Selectmen, in reviewing such Plan, shall obtain and consider the recommendations of the
Planning Board. In review of such Plan, the following standards shall be met:
a. The proposed uses should complement and be in harmony with the existing and
probable future character of the neighborhood.
5-2
b. Main and accessory buildings shall be located in relation to one another and in
relation to other structures in the vicinity to provide efficient pedestrian and
vehicular access and circulation, and to create harmonious appearance.
c. The Plan shall provide, within the site, efficient traffic circulation, and adequate
parking (amount, location and access). The Plan of Development shall not create
excessive traffic load or circulation problems on existing adjacent or nearby streets.
d. Sufficient domestic water and sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be
available.
e. The site shall be lighted and landscaped.
f. The development shall be designed so as to protect adjacent property and the
neighborhood in general from detrimental effect.
The Selectmen may require any additional information needed to permit a thorough
review.
5.12 Additional Requirements
The following standards shall be used as additional requirements in the Elderly
Residential District:
5.121 Permitted Uses
a. Within the Elderly Residential District, no building or other structure shall be
erected, altered or used and no land shall be used or occupied for any purpose
except for dwellings for the aged.
b. No unit shall be leased unless the tenant or tenants is/are 62 years of age or
more.
5.122 Additional Dimensional and Density Requirements
a. Lots must have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on one street and an area of
not less than five acres.
b. No radio, television antenna or other aerial devices which are mounted on an
existing manmade structure other than an antenna structure, shall increase the
overall height of such manmade structure by more than 20 feet and in all
cases shall be stayed in such a manner as to assure stability.
c. Buildings other than accessory garages or carports shall not be erected or
altered so as to cover more than 25% of the lot area.
5-3
d. Not more than 25 living units per acre may be erected or created by alteration
on any lot. There shall be a maximum of 200 units on any one lot. There shall
be a minimum of 8 units for each principal building.
e. That portion of front yards and that portion of side and rear yards (if abutting
Residence Districts) within 25 feet of any lot line, shall be landscaped, and
parking shall be prohibited within such landscaped area.
5.123 Vehicular Access
Vehicular access to a public way or ways must be provided at a minimum of two
locations not less than 100 feet apart.
5.2 PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
5.20 Planned Business Development by Special Permit with Site Plan Review
Planned Business Development shall be permitted in the Business (BUS) and Industrial
(I) districts only upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Review by the Planning
Board.
5.21 Definition
Planned Business Development - A development constructed on a lot or lots under joint
development or in contiguous ownership at the time of application, planned, developed,
operated and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to
accommodate retail, personal service or business with common parking areas. Commercial
building with more than one use per structure are Planned Business Developments.
5.22 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted by special permit with site plan review in a Planned Business
Development shall be limited to the following uses:
a. retail uses, especially shopping centers;
b. personal service uses; and
c. business uses
5.23 Dimensional and Density Regulations
5.231 All uses in a planned business development shall be in conformity with the
dimensional and density regulations set as follows:
Minimum lot area per planned business development under joint
development or contiguous ownership: 2.5 acres.
Minimum frontage: 120 feet
5-4
Minimum front yard: 50 feet
Front yard buffer strip: A 12 foot wide landscaped buffer strip is required in the
front yard and shall include a sidewalk constructed not less than 3 feet from the
property line. Sidewalks shall be 4 feet wide and constructed of bituminous
concrete or cement concrete.
Minimum side and rear yards: 5 feet
Side and rear yard landscaping: A minimum of 5 feet of any side and rear yard
must be landscaped.
Maximum building height: 40 feet
Maximum lot coverage for building: 35 percent
5.232 Uses shall be contained in one continuous building except that groupings of
buildings may be allowed by the Planning Board where such groupings are
consistent with the safety of the users and of the overall intent of this section; the
development shall be served by one common parking area and one exit and
entrance along the frontage. Any additional structures added to the development
after construction of the initial planned business development plan shall require a
Special Permit from the Planning Board to ensure that adequate landscaping,
parking, internal circulation systems and pedestrian access are maintained.
5.233 High-volume traffic generating uses, uses that have a trip generation rate of 700
vehicles per day or more, are restricted to a total of only twenty percent (20%) of
the total gross floor area of all structures in the development. These uses include,
but are not limited to, convenience markets and automatic teller bank machines.
Unless the applicant provides data from existing uses, the Institute for
Transportation Engineers' publication Trip Generation, shall be used to calculate
the number of vehicle trips per day for proposed uses. Building permits for
additional high-volume traffic generators will not be issued once the twenty
percent (20%) threshold has been reached.
5.234 Where a Planned Business Development consists of continuous parcels in joint
ownership, it may be developed under a similar site plan with setbacks and yard
requirements governing the boundaries of the entire parcel so developed.
5-5
5.24 Additional Planned Business Development Requirements
In addition to the special permit and site plan review requirements (in Sections 7.2 and
7.4) in this Bylaw, any Planned Business Development must conform to the following:
5.241 The proposed uses should complement and be in harmony with the existing and
probable future character of the neighborhood.
5.242 Main and accessory buildings shall be located in relation to one another and in
relation to other structures in the vicinity to provide efficient pedestrian and
vehicular access and circulation, and to create harmonious appearance.
5.243 The site plan shall provide, within the site, efficient traffic circulation and
adequate parking (amount, location and access). The Planned Business
Development shall not create excessive traffic load or circulation problems on
existing adjacent or nearby streets.
5.244 The Planning Board shall require a detailed traffic study for high-volume traffic
generating uses with a trip generation rate over 700 vehicles/day (based on
Institute of Transportation Engineers rates found in Trip Generation); for the
construction of new Planned Business Development (PBD) structure of more than
25,000 square feet in gross floor area; and for any external enlargement that
brings the PBD total to 25,000 sq. ft. gross floor area for all structures. The
Planning Board may waive any or all requirements for a traffic study for external
enlargements of less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of the
25,000 gross floor area threshold. The traffic impact statement shall contain:
a. The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site,
estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels.
b. The proposed traffic flow pattern for both vehicular and pedestrian access shall
be described and related to the site plan, including vehicular movements at all
major intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site.
c. Traffic flow patterns at the site including entrances and egresses, loading and
unloading areas, and curb cuts on site and within one hundred (100) feet of the
site.
d. A detailed assessment of the traffic safety impacts of the proposed project or
use on the carrying capacity of any adjacent highway or road,
including the projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or depart from
the site estimated for daily hour and peak hour traffic levels, road capacities,
and impacts on intersection. Existing daily and peak hour traffic levels and
road capacities shall also be given.
5-6
e. An internal traffic and pedestrian circulation plan designed to minimize
conflicts and safety problems.
5.245 Access Standards
Applicants must demonstrate that the project will minimize traffic and safety
impacts on the highway or the street providing the property its principal frontage
by meeting the following standards:
a. The number of curb cuts on state and local roads shall be minimized. To the
extent feasible, access to a business property shall be provided via a common
driveway serving adjacent lots or premises.
b. One driveway per parcel shall be permitted as matter of right. Where deemed
necessary by the Planning Board, two driveways may be permitted as part of
the Site Plan Review process, which shall be clearly marked "entrance" and
"exit".
c. All driveways shall be designed to afford motorists exiting to highways or
roads with safe sight distance.
d. Driveway entrance must be able to accommodate all vehicle types having
occasion to enter the site, including delivery vehicles.
e. Driveway design must be such that an entering vehicle will not encroach upon
the exit lane of a two-way driveway. Also, a right turning exiting vehicle will
be able to utilize only the first through traffic lane available without
encroachment into the adjacent through lane.
5.246 Parking Standards
The Planned Business Development shall comply with the Off-street Parking
regulations in Section 5.6 with the following exceptions:
The minimum parking spaces for a Planned Business Development shall be 4.5
parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
restaurants. The minimum parking space requirement for restaurants is 1 parking
space per person for one-third maximum capacity. The total
minimum number of parking spaces required for a Planned Business
Development with a restaurant use shall be calculated by determining the
minimum number of parking spaces for the Planned Business Development
excluding the restaurant use plus the minimum number of parking spaces required
for the restaurant based on the above requirements.
5-7
5.247 Landscaping
a. Notwithstanding other screening and landscape requirements set forth
elsewhere in the Bylaw, all yards shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the planting of grass, ground cover,
flowerbeds, shrubs, hedge or trees. All landscaping shall be maintained in a
healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance and free of refuse
and debris. All plantings shall be arranged and maintained so as not to obscure
the vision of traffic.
b. For interior parking lot areas at least twelve percent (12%) of the gross area of
the vehicular use shall be landscaped. Landscaped areas shall be a minimum
of nine (9) feet in width. One shade tree of a minimum 2 inch caliper for every
twenty (20) parking spaces is required in parking lots with over fifty (50)
parking spaces. The landscaped front, side and rear yard requirement can be
included in this calculation.
c. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy, thriving and attractive
condition. Shrubs or trees that die shall be replaced within one growing season.
5.248 Shared Parking Lots
a. When one parking area of a Planned Business Development abuts
another, the two parking areas can be shared by an adequate access road. The
area of the shared parking area shall not be less than the sum of the
requirements of the individual Planned Business Developments computed in
accordance with the specifications of this section.
b. As an incentive to develop shared parking areas, the Planning Board shall
reduce the interior parking lot landscaping requirements from 12 percent to 10
percent.
5.249 Lighting
a. Any outdoor lighting fixture newly installed or replaced shall be shielded so
that it does not produce a strong, direct light beyond the property boundaries.
b. No light standard shall be taller than fifteen (15) feet.
5.250 Sufficient domestic water and sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be
available.
5.251 Display signs shall conform to Section 5.8 of this Bylaw.
5-8
5.3 PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Planned Unit Residential Developments shall be permitted in the Planned Unit Residential
District only upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Review from the Planning Board
as specified in Sections 7.2 and 7.4 of the East Longmeadow Zoning Bylaws - 1991 Revision.
5.30 General Description
“Planned Unit Residential Development” shall mean a development containing a
mixture of residential uses and building types, including single family dwellings,
townhouses, or multi-family dwellings, and open space. A planned unit residential
development may be allowed by special permit to exceed the normal density
requirements for the district to the extent authorized by this bylaw provided that
standards for the permanent protection of open space and other standards specified
herein are met.
5.31 Purposes
The purposes of this Planned Unit Residential Development bylaw are to allow a
number of uses as outlined in Table 3-1, including Planned Unit Residential
Development and to:
5.311 allow for greater variety and flexibility in the development housing types;
5.312 promote the permanent preservation of open space;
5.313 facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public
services in a more economical and efficient manner;
5.314 maintain and replicate the traditional New England rural character and land use
pattern in which small villages are adjacent to common open space.
5.32 Uses Allowed by Special Permit
In a Planned Unit Residential Development, the following uses are permitted:
5.321 single family dwellings.
5.322 Town houses - a single family dwelling connected by one or more common walls,
however, there shall be no more than six and no less than two townhouses per
structure.
5.323 Multi-family dwellings (including garden units) not exceeding six units per
building.
5.324 Recreational uses and open space including Community Building.
5-9
5.33 Density and Dimensional Regulations
See Table 3-2
5.34 Utility Requirements
All structures which require plumbing shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer and
public water system.
5.35 Parking and Circulation Requirements:
5.351 A minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be required, which may
include garages.
5.352 There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian
circulation, facilities, roadways, driveways and parking.
5.36 Landscaping and Buffer Area Requirements
5.361 A coordinated landscape design for the entire project area, including landscaping
of structures, parking areas, driveways and walkways, shall be submitted for
approval by the Planning Board.
5.362 Whenever possible, existing trees and vegetative cover shall be conserved and
integrated into the landscape design.
5.363 All residential structures and accessory uses within the development shall be set
back from the boundaries of the zoning district by a buffer strip of at least fifty
(50) feet in width which shall include trees and shrubbery.
5.37 Common Open Space Requirements
5.371 All land not devoted to dwellings, accessory uses, roads or other
development shall be set aside as common land for recreation, conservation, or
agricultural uses which preserve the land in essentially its natural
condition. At least 2000 square feet per dwelling unit must be usable open space
for active and passive recreation. Such space shall not include parking space,
roadway, sidewalk area, building footprints or Wetlands as determined by the
Conservation Commission. Usable open space shall be defined to include such
facilities as open space available for gardens, hiking/jogging trails, tennis courts, or
similar facilities.
5.372 Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than recreation,
conservation, or agricultural, except for easements for underground utilities, shall
be prohibited.
5-10
5.373 Structures or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses
may be erected but shall not exceed 5% coverage of such common open land.
5.374 Open space subject to a restriction recorded and enforceable by the Town. 5.38
Community Association
5.381 An owners’ association shall be established, requiring membership of each lot or
unit owner in the planned unit development. The association shall be responsible
for the permanent maintenance of all communal water and sewerage systems,
common open space, recreational and thoroughfare facilities. An association
agreement or covenant shall be submitted with the Special Permit/Site Plan
Review application guaranteeing continuing maintenance of such common
utilities, land and facilities and assessing each unit a share of maintenance
expenses. Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town
Counsel and the Planning Board, as part of the Site Plan Review.
5.382 Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association
fails to maintain the common facilities in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and
public hearing, enter upon such land and maintain it in order to preserve the
taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the
common land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also provide
that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the
properties within the development.
5.39 Procedures and Pre-Application Review
5.391 Applicants for Planned Unit Residential Development shall follow the Special
Permit procedures specified in Section 7.2 and the Site Plan Review procedures
specified in Section 7.4.
5.392 To promote better communication and to avoid misunderstanding, applicants are
encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review by the Planning Board prior to
the application for a special permit. Such Preliminary Plans shall comply with the
Town’s Subdivision Control Regulations.
5.393 The Planning Board approval of a special permit hereunder shall not substitute
for compliance with the Subdivision Control Act nor oblige the Planning Board
to approve a related Definitive Plan for subdivision, nor reduce any time
periods for Board consideration under that law.
5.394 A Special Permit Application and Subdivision Review Site Plan shall be submitted
to the Planning Board. Following approval of the special permit, a Definitive plan
shall be submitted to the Planning Board consistent with their Subdivision
Regulations and in substantial conformity with the approved
5-11
5.3-A PLANNED ADULT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Planned Adult Residential Developments shall be permitted in the Planned Adult Residential
District only upon Site Plan Review from the Planning Board as specified in Sections 7.2 and 7.4
of the East Longmeadow Zoning Bylaws - 1991 Revision.
5.30-A Definitions
"Planned Adult Residential District" shall mean shall mean the district where Planned Adult
Residential Developments are permitted.
"Planned Adult Residential Development" shall mean a development containing
residential uses and building types, including single family dwellings, townhouses, or multifamily
dwellings, and open space, which may be owned in the condominium form of
ownership, for persons aged fifty-five (55) and older, as hereinafter described.
5.31-A Purposes
The purposes of this Planned Adult Residential District bylaw are to allow a
number of uses as outlined in Table 3-1, and to:
5.311-A allow for greater variety and flexibility in the development of
housing types; and
5.312-A promote the development of specialized housing to accommodate
the needs of those aged fifty-five (55) and over.
5.32-A Uses Allowed
Table 3-1 establishes the uses permitted in a Planned Adult Residential
Development, which shall specifically include the following uses:
5.321-A single family dwellings.
5.322-A town houses - a single family dwelling connected by one or more
common walls, however, there shall be no more than five (5) and no less than two (2)
townhouses per structure.
5.323-A multi-family dwellings (including garden units) not exceeding five (5) units
per building.
5.324-A parking, recreation and accessory structures limited to the use of the
residents of the Planned Adult Residential Development.
5.33-A Density and Dimensional Regulations See Table 3-2
5-12
5.34-A Utility Requirements
All structures which require plumbing shall be connected to a public sanitary
sewer and public water system.
5.35-A Parking and Circulation Requirements
5.351-A A minimum of two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
required, which may include garages.
5.352-A There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways and parking areas.
5.36-A Landscaping and Perimeter Buffer Area Requirements
5.361-A A coordinated landscape design for the entire project area, including
landscaping for structures, parking areas, driveways and walkways shall be
submitted for approval by the Planning Board.
5.362-A Whenever possible, existing trees and vegetative cover shall be
conserved and integrated into the landscape design.
5.363–A All residential structures and accessory structures within the development
shall be set back from the boundaries of the Zoning district by a buffer strip of at least
fifty (50) feet in width in the front yard, side yards and rear yards. Existing trees and
vegetation shall be preserved as much as possible. New landscape plantings, earth
mounds and such shall be required if little existing vegetation exists in order to visually
buffer the development from adjacent uses.
5.37-A Coverage and Common Open Space Requirements
5.371-A All land not devoted to dwellings, accessory uses, roads or other development
shall be common land for recreation, conservation, agricultural, or aesthetic purposes.
Within the Planned Adult Residential Development, open space shall be integrated
within and around the development.
5.372-A Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than
recreation, conservation or agricultural, except for easements for underground
utilities, shall be prohibited.
5.373-A Structures or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation, storage or
agricultural uses may be erected but shall not exceed 5% coverage of such
common open land.
5-13
5.374-A Open space subject to a restriction recorded and enforceable by the
Town.
5.38-A Community Association
5.381-A An owners' association shall be established, requiring membership of each lot
or unit owner in the Planned Adult Residential Development. The association shall be
responsible for the permanent maintenance of all common open space, recreational
facilities, roads and parking areas, communal water and sewerage systems. An
association agreement or covenant shall be submitted with the Site Plan Review
application guaranteeing continuing maintenance of such common utilities, land and
facilities, assessing each unit a share of maintenance expenses and enforcing the age
requirements specified herein. Such agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of Town Counsel and the Planning Board, as part of the Site Plan Review.
5.382-A Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the
association fails to maintain the common facilities in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and
public hearing, enter upon such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable
values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common land from
becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also provide that the cost of such
maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the
development.
5.39-A Procedure and Pre-Application Review
5.391-A Applicants for Planned Adult Residential Development shall follow the Site
Plan Review procedures specified in Section 7.4.
5.392-A To promote better communication and to avoid misunderstanding,
applicants are encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review by the
Planning Board. Such Preliminary Plans shall comply with the Town's
Subdivision Control Regulations.
5.393-A A Subdivision Review Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Board. Following approval of the Site Plan, a Definitive plan shall be submitted to
the Planning Board consistent with their Subdivision Regulations and in
substantial conformity with the Subdivision Review Site Plan.
5.40-A Additional Provisions
No Planned Adult Residential Development shall be permitted unless it is in
compliance with the following provisions:
5.401-A Each dwelling unit in a Planned Adult Residential Development shall be
occupied by:
(1) At least one person who is fifty-five (55) years of age or older;
5-14
(2) A spouse of an occupant pursuant to (1) above;
(3) An occupant pursuant to (2) above who survives his or her spouse;
(4) An occupant pursuant to (2) above whose spouse has entered into a longterm
continuing care facility; or,
(5) A paid care giver providing care to an owner/occupant who is at
least fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
5.402-A In no event may a dwelling unit be occupied by more than three (3) residents;
provided, however, that if any unit is occupied three (3) residents one of
said three (3) residents may be a person twenty one or older; provided, further,
said person's primary responsibility is providing care to an owner/occupant of
said unit.
5.4 GOLF RECREATIONAL DISTRICT 5.40
Uses
In any Golf Recreational District, as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no building
or other structure shall be erected, altered, or used, and no land shall be used or
occupied for any purpose, except one or more of the following:
5.401 Any use permitted in a Residence District
5.402 Grounds for a golf course and only in conjunction therewith as accessory uses
any of the following, together with the right to charge for the use thereof:
a. Area and facilities for practice golf, basketball or tennis.
b. A swimming pool.
c. A golf clubhouse with accessory buildings for caddies, golf professional shop,
and storage for the golf course maintenance equipment.
d. The conduct of a restaurant in golf clubhouse, together with the right to act as
a common victualer.
5.41 Swimming Pools
Any swimming pool permitted as an accessory use shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 5.9 of these Bylaws entitled "Swimming Pools".
5-15
5.42 Lighting
For a use permitted by Section 5.402, exterior artificial lighting shall be restricted
to the lighting of signs in accordance with Section 5.8 of this Zoning Bylaw, and
to the lighting of walks, driveways, parking areas and garden areas necessary for
the operation thereof and public safety. Any such lighting shall be shaded and
directed in such a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. For a use permitted
by Section 5.402, artificial lighting of a golf course, practice golf area, basketball
or tennis area or swimming pool are specifically prohibited.
5.5 WIRELESS/TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE FACILITIES AND
TOWERS 5.50 Purpose and Intent
It is the express purpose of this By-law to establish regulations for the
placement of Wireless Telecommunication Towers, antennas and
ancillary facilities. It is the intent of this article to minimize the visual
and environmental impacts of said facilities on the community; to
encourage the location of towers on municipally owned properties not to
include parks or schools; to preserve the character and appearance of the
community while simultaneously allowing adequate Wireless Services
to be developed; to protect the residential, scenic, historic,
environmental and natural or man-made resources of the community; to
encourage joint use of new and existing tower sites, buildings, and
utility poles as a primary option rather than new construction of towers;
and to preserve property values and regulate the location of towers so
that they minimize negative impacts on the general safety, health,
welfare and quality of life of the community.
This By-law is intended to be used in conjunction with other regulations
that may be adopted by the Town, including historic district regulations,
Site Plan Review, Special Permit and other local By-laws designed to
encourage appropriate land use, environmental protection, and the
provision of adequate infrastructure development in East Longmeadow.
The By-law enables the review and approval of Wireless Service
Facilities by the Town’s Special Permit Granting Authority (hereinafter
referred to as SPGA), in keeping with the Town’s existing By-laws and
historic development patterns.
5.51 Consistency with Federal Law
This Article is intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, as amended, and applicable FCC regulations in that it does
not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provisions of Wireless
Services and is not intended to be used to unreasonably discriminate
among providers of functionally equivalent Wireless Services.
5-16
5.52 Definitions-The following definitions pertain to this by-law as described below:
Act: The Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
Alternative Tower Structure: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with
the natural setting and surrounding structures, and camouflages or conceals, the
presence of antennae and/or towers. This term shall also include any antenna or
antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure.
Ancillary facilities: The buildings, cabinets, vaults, closures and equipment
required for operation of telecommunication systems including but not limited to
repeaters, equipment housing and ventilation and other mechanical equipment.
Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
Buffer Area: The area surrounding a telecommunications tower and ancillary
facilities which lies between the tower and adjacent lot lines and/or lot uses.
Carrier: A company that provides wireless services.
Cease To Operate: Not performing the normal functions associated with the
Wireless Service Facility and its equipment on a continuous and ongoing basis for a
period of one (1) year.
Co-Location: The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier
(vertical co-location) and/or several mounts on an existing building or structure by
more than one carrier.
Equipment Shelter: An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box located at a Base
Station within which are housed batteries and electrical equipment.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
Facility Site: The location leased by one or more Wireless Service Provider and
upon which one or more Wireless Service Facilities and required landscaping are
located.
Fall Zone: The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a
Wireless Service Facility. The fall zone is the area within which there is a
potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or collapsing material.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
Fire Tower: A tower in which a lookout for fires may be posted.
Guyed Tower: A monopole or lattice tower that is supported or braced through the
use of cables which are permanently anchored.
Lattice Tower: A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple legs and
cross-bracing of structural steel.
5-17
Licensed Carrier: A company authorized by the FCC to construct and operate
a wireless services system.
Modifications of an Existing Facility: Any change or proposed change in size,
number and height of facilities and antennae other than approved under an
existing Special Permit. Also any increase, or proposed increase in dimensions of
an existing and permitted tower or other structure designed to support Wireless
Service transmissions, receiving and/or relaying antennae and/or equipment.
Monitoring: The measurement of the radiation from a site as a whole or from
individual Wireless Service Facilities, Towers or antennae, by the use of
instruments in the field.
Monopole: The type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood,
steel or concrete and a platform or racks for panel antennae arrayed at the top.
Mount: The structure or surface upon which antennae are mounted, including the
following four (4) types of mounts:
1. roof-mounted: mounted on a roof of a building
2. side-mounted: mounted on the side of a building
3. ground-mounted: mounted on the ground
4. structure-mounted: mounted on a structure other than a building
Pre-existing Towers and Antennas: Any tower or antenna and ancillary facility
which has been lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this by-law, including
permitted towers or antennas and ancillary facilities that have been approved but
have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
Radio Frequency Engineer: (RFE) An engineer specializing in electrical or
microwave engineering, especially in the study of radio frequencies.
Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA): The Planning Board of the Town
of East Longmeadow shall be the SPGA for this Article.
Stealth Design: A wireless telecommunication facility that is designed or located
in such a way that the facility is not readily recognizable as a wireless
telecommunications facility.
Telecommunication: Technology permitting the passage of information from
the sender to one or more receivers in a useable form by means of any
electromagnetic system.
Telecommunications Antenna: An antenna designed to transmit or receive
communications as authorized by the Federal Communications Commission
excluding amateur radio operators antennae.
Telecommunications Support Facilities: Support buildings, structures and
equipment cabinets containing electrical and mechanical equipment and devices
used for the programming information between or among points by wire, cable,
fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities.
Tower: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennae, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy
5-18
towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers,
monopoles and other similar structures. This term also includes any antenna or
antenna array attached to the tower structure.
Tower Height: When referring to a tower or other alternative tower structure,
the distance measured from the ground level at the base pad of the structure to the
highest point. on the tower or other alternative tower structure.
Water Tower: A standpipe or elevated tank used as a reservoir or for
maintaining equal pressure in a water system.
Wireless Services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed and licensed FCC
wireless commercial services, and common carrier wireless exchange access
services. These services include but are not limited to: cellular services, personal
communications services (PCS), enhanced mobile radio services (EMRS) and
paging services, and similar services that may in the future be developed.
Wireless Service Facility and Towers: All equipment (excluding any repeaters)
with which a Wireless Service Provider broadcasts and receives the radio
frequency waves which carry their services and all locations of said equipment and
any part thereof. This facility may be sited on one or more towers or structures
owned and permitted by another owner or entity.
Wireless Service Provider: An entity, licensed by the FCC to provide Wireless
Services to individuals or institutions.
5.53 District Regulations
a. Use Regulations
1. No newly constructed Wireless Services Facility shall locate in any
Residential District or town-owned residential property.
2. Wireless Services Facilities shall comply with Massachusetts Building
Code (780 C.M.R), as amended and shall require a Building Permit in all
cases.
3. A Wireless Services Facility may locate on any existing monopole,
electric utility transmission tower, fire tower or water tower, provided
that the installation of the new facility does not increase the height of the
existing structure. Such installations shall not require a Special Permit
and Site Plan approval by the Planning Board.
4. A Wireless Services Facility involving construction of one or more ground or
building (roof or side) mounts shall require a Special Permit. Such facilities
may locate by Special Permit in designated districts within the Town, provided
that the proposed use does not project more than ten (10) feet above the height
of an existing building.
5-19
b. Location
If possible, Wireless Service Facilities shall be located on existing structures,
including but not limited to buildings, water towers, existing
telecommunications facilities, utility poles and towers, and related facilities,
provided that such installation preserves the character and integrity of those
structures and to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with clustering of
towers, provided that: (1) a tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower
type as the existing tower, unless reconstruction as a monopole is proposed; (2)
an existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed the
maximum tower height established by this by-law, with approval from the
SPGA; and (3) all antenna mounts installed on existing towers shall, to the
extent technically feasible, match both type and type of the existing antenna
mounts.
1. An Applicant proposing a wireless communications facility shall have
the burden to prove all avenues have been exhausted and that there are
no feasible pre-existing structures, building or towers upon which to
locate due to technical, topographical or other unique circumstances.
Further, the applicant shall submit documentation of the legal right to
install and use the proposed facility mount and shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the SPGA that the Applicant has endeavored to
minimize the visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed facility on the
community.
2. Wireless Services Facilities shall not be located in wetlands.
3. No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any Wireless
Services Facility.
c. Co-Location
1. Licensed carriers shall share Wireless Service facilities and sites
where possible and appropriate, thereby reducing the number of
Wireless Service facilities that are stand-alone facilities.
2. All applicants shall demonstrate a good faith effort to co-locate with other
carriers, including; (1) a survey of all existing structures that may be feasible
sites for co-locating wireless telecommunication facilities; (2) notification by
certified mail of intent to seek a Special Permit to all the other licensed carriers
for commercial mobile radio services operating within five (5) miles of the site;
(3) sharing information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under
the design configuration most accommodating to co-location; (4) a copy of the
lease and an affidavit stating compliance with this section; (5) in the event that
co-location is claimed to be not technically feasible, a written statement of the
reasons must be submitted to the SPGA. The SPGA has the right to retain a
technical expert in the field of RF engineering to determine if co-location is
feasible. The cost for the technical expert will be at the expense of the
5-20
applicant. The SPGA has the right to deny approval to any applicant that has
not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for co-location on an existing
wireless telecommunication tower; (6) if the applicant does intend to co-locate
or to permit co-location, plans and elevations, which show the ultimate
appearance and operation of the facility at full build out must be submitted to
the SPGA. Location Priorities: Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be
located and approved in accordance with the following prioritized locations:
(1) an existing building; (2) an existing tower.
5.54 Dimensional Requirements:
a. Height
1. The maximum height of the equipment/service building shall be
fifteen (15) feet and limited to one floor with the maximum gross
floor area not to exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
The total percentage of services buildings not to exceed 25%
lot coverage.
2. No wireless communications facility shall exceed one hundred
ninety (190) feet in height as measured from ground level at the
base of the tower. Side and roof mounted Wireless Services
Facilities shall not project more than ten (10) feet above the
height of an existing building nor project more than ten (10) feet
above the height limit of the zoning district within which the
facility is located. The facility shall be stepped back from the
front façade in order to limit its impact on the building’s
silhouette.
3. Wireless Services Facilities may be located on a building
that is legally non-conforming, with respect to height,
provided that the facilities do not project above the
existing building height.
4. New antennae located on any of the following existing structures
on the effective date of this Article shall be exempt from the
height restrictions of this Article provided there is no increase in
height of the existing structure as a result of the installation of a
Wireless Services Facility:
(1) water towers
(2) fire towers
(3) monopoles
b. Setbacks
Ground mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall be set back
two hundred (200%) percent of the tower height from the property
boundaries of a school, place of worship, public library, public park
public conservation area, residential zoning district, or a building
5-21
containing one or more residences within a non-residential zoning
district.
1. All towers shall be pre-engineered to fall at a pre-determined
height in the event of catastrophic failure and shall have a “fall
zone” of said pre-determined height.
2. In no case shall a ground-mounted facility be built as an
accessory use or use be allowed on any portion of the lot
between the primary structure and the street.
3. In the event that an existing structure is proposed as a mount
for a wireless service facility, a fall zone shall not be required,
but the setback provisions of the zoning district shall apply. In
the case of pre-existing, non-conforming structures, Wireless
Service Facilities and their equipment shelters shall not
increase any non-conformities, except:
In reviewing a Special Permit application for a Wireless Service Facility,
the SPGA may reduce the required fall zone and/or setback distance of
the zoning district by as much as fifty percent (50%) of the required
distance, if it finds that a substantially better design will result from such
reduction. In making such a finding, the SPGA shall consider both the
visual and safety impacts of the proposed use.
5.55 Special Permit Criteria
a. The SPGA shall consider the following factors when determining
whether to grant a Special Permit:
1. Proximity of the facility to residential structures, residential
district boundaries, school boundaries, churches, libraries,
public parks and conservation areas.
2. Nature of the uses on the adjacent and nearby properties.
3. Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage.
5. Design of the tower with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness, including stealth designs which are
encouraged.
6. Availability of suitable existing towers, alternative tower
structures, other structures or alternative technologies not
requiring the use of towers or structures.
5-22
7. Availability of proposed tower to other potential carriers.
8. Adequacy of the setback or design of the facility to ensure the safety
of persons or property in the event of collapse.
9. No Special Permit will be granted for a Tower to be built on
speculation. If the Applicant is not simultaneously installing a Wireless
Services Facilities on the Tower, it shall provide a copy of its existing
lease/contract with a Wireless Services Facilities Provider. Said
Provider shall provide all necessary data to comply with the terms of
this by-law, as part of the application for a Wireless Services Facility
and/or Tower before a Special Permit will be considered.
b. Design Standards
1. All towers shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind gusts
and substantial winds of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour at
the maximum height necessary (determined by the independent
consultants) to accommodate the anticipated and future use.
2. Only free-standing monopoles, with associated antenna and/or panels,
shall be allowed as specified in this by-law. Lattice style towers and
facilities requiring guy wires and/or three or more legs for support are
prohibited.
3. The area around the Tower and Communication Equipment Shelter(s)
shall be completely fenced and gated to control access to the facility and
for security and shall be compatible with the scenic character of the
Town and of abutting properties. The fence shall be at least eight (8)
feet in height. Use of barbed or razor wire is prohibited.
c. Camouflage by Existing Buildings, Structures or Vegetation
1. Tower(s) shall minimize, to the greatest extent possible adverse visual
impacts on the neighborhood. The SPGA has the authority to impose
reasonable conditions to ensure this result.
2. If there are no feasible pre-existing structures, buildings or towers, the
Wireless Services Facilities and Towers shall be so designed as to be
camouflaged to the greatest extent possible, including but not limited to
use of compatible building materials and colors, screening, landscaping
and placement within trees.
3. An Applicant proposing a Wireless Communications Facility shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the SPGA that the Applicant has
5-23
endeavored to minimize the visual and aesthetic impacts of the
proposed facility on residential abutters; and, that the facility must be
located at the proposed site due to technical, topographical or other
unique circumstances.
4. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. Clearing of land shall be performed in a manner which will
maximize preservation of natural beauty and conservation of natural
resources and which will minimize marring and scarring of the
landscape or silting of streams or wetlands.
5. A landscape buffer at least ten (10) feet wide of evergreen shrubs shall be
provided on the outside of the fenced area. The shrubs shall mature to a
height equivalent to the fence height and be planted at a height of at least
six (6) feet and planted in staggered double rows five (5) feet on center .
All landscape plantings must be continually maintained by the Applicant
or its successor.
d. Lighting and Signage
1. No Wireless Services Facility and/or Tower(s) installed shall exceed
the maximum height limitation established by the Federal Aviation
Administration for required night lighting. Night lighting of Towers
shall be prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Lighting of buildings and the ground may be provided
to ensure a safe and secure facility. All lighting shall be designed,
shielded and installed to prevent undue impact on surrounding
properties.
2. There shall be no signs except for the following:
a. a sign identifying the facility, the owner and operator and an
emergency telephone number where the owner can be reached on a
(24) twenty-four hour basis;
b. a no-trespassing sign;
c. a sign displaying the FCC registration number;
d. any signs necessary to warn of danger; and,
e. no sign shall exceed four (4) square feet.
All signs shall comply with the requirements of the East Longmeadow
Zoning By-law. Advertising of any kind is strictly prohibited at the site.
5-24
e. Modifications
1. A modification of a Wireless Service Facility may be considered equivalent
to an application for a new Wireless Service Facility and will require a
Special Permit when one or more of the following events occur:
a. The Applicant and/or co-applicant wants to change the number of
facilities permitted on the site;
b. There is a change in technology used for the Wireless Service
Facility that requires a change in types or sizes of antennae; or,
c. The Applicant wishes to add any equipment or additional height not
specified in the original design filing.
5.56 Monitoring and Maintenance
a. The facility owner/operator shall present a maintenance and monitoring
plan to the SPGA demonstrating responsibility to the site.
b. There shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space for each carrier, to be
used in connection with the maintenance of the site, and not to be used for the
permanent storage of vehicles or other equipment.
c. Traffic associated with the Tower and accessory facilities and structures
shall not adversely affect abutting ways.
d. The Wireless Service Facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for periodic maintenance.
5.57 Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use
a. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation
of a Wireless Service Facility, such carrier will notify the Town by certified
mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to
abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
b. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall, at its’
expense, physically remove the Wireless Service Facility within ninety (90)
days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This removal
includes, but is not limited to removal of antennae, mount, equipment
shelters, and security barriers from the subject property. An extension to this
time period may be granted by the Planning Board upon written request from
the applicant.
c. Also, the owner shall properly dispose of the waste materials from the site in
5-25
accordance with local and state solid waste disposal regulations and
restore the location of the Wireless Service Facility to its natural
condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the
after-condition.
d. As a condition of the Special Permit, the Applicant shall post a bond in a
reasonable amount determined and approved by the SPGA. This bond shall be
in force to cover the costs of the remediation of any damage to the landscape
which occurs during the clearing of the site; and to cover the cost of the
removal of the Tower or Facility from the site, and remediation of the
landscape, should the facility cease to operate and the Town have to remedy
the situation.
5.58 Site Plan Review
a. Antennae
1. The design of antennae, and telecommunications support facilities shall use
materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that create
compatibility with the natural setting and surrounding structures;
2. The mass of antennae or an antenna on a tower shall not exceed four
hundred fifty (450) cubic feet per user, with no one (1) dimension
exceeding fourteen (14) feet per user.
b. Tower Color
Towers shall be finished in a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA.
5.59 Provisions of Independent Consultants
a. Upon submission of an Application for any Special Permit under this Article, the
Applicant shall pay a review fee for the employment of independent consultants.
These consultants shall each be qualified professionals with a record of service to
municipalities in one or more of the following:
1. telecommunications engineering;
2. structural engineering; monitoring of electromagnetic fields other relevant
fields of experience as determined by the SPGA.
b. The SPGA shall select an Independent Consultant from a main list of qualified
candidates based on recommendations from the Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works and Pioneer Valley
Planning Commission. Said list shall be reviewed and updated from time to
time.
5-26
5.59.1 Exempted Wireless Telecommunication Uses
a. The following are exempt from the restrictions and requirements of this bylaw:
1. Police;
2. Fire;
3. Ambulance and other emergency dispatch;
4. Citizen’s band radio; and,
5. Amateur radio equipment and towers used in accordance with the terms of
any amateur radio service license issued by the FCC, provided that :
(1) The tower is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose; and,
(2) The tower shall be removed upon loss or termination of said FCC
license.
5.59.2 Insurance
Towers and Wireless Service Facilities shall be insured by the owner against
damage to persons and property. The owner shall provide a Certificate of
Insurance to the SPGA on an annual basis. For Towers and Facilities located
on property owned by the Town of East Longmeadow, the Town of East
Longmeadow shall be an additional named insured.
5.59.3 Non-Compliance, Violations, Enforcement and Attorney Fees
Upon determination that the Applicant and/or owner has failed to comply with
this By-law, or is in violation of any portion of this By-law, and the Town of
East Longmeadow takes any action to enforce this By-law, the
owner/applicant shall be liable for and responsible to pay to the Town of East
Longmeadow all costs, expenses, and reasonable Attorney’s fees for such
action taken by the SPGA. Failure to pay said costs and Attorney’s fees
within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice to pay same shall be grounds for
the revocation of any Special Permit issued in accordance with this By-law.
5.6 OFF-STREET PARKING
5.60 Parking Plan
a. Uses Requiring a Parking Plan
A parking plan shall be submitted at the time of any application for a building
permit for the erection, alteration, or enlargement of any building other than a
single family dwelling. No building permit for the erection, alteration or
enlargement of any building may be issued without approval of said parking
plan by East Longmeadow Planning Board. In the case of alteration or
enlargement, these standards shall apply only to the altered or enlarged area.
5-27
b. A parking plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board at the time of any
application for the occupancy permit required in Section 7.1 of the Zoning
Bylaw.
No such occupancy permit may be issued without approval of said parking
plan by East Longmeadow Planning Board.
c. Parking plans shall show means of vehicular access and interior circulation.
The proposed property use and proposed building square footage shall be
indicated on the plan. Any required landscaping shall be indicated on the
plan.
d. Prior to submission of a parking plan to the Planning Board, egress, access,
and drainage for the site must be approved by the Town Engineer.
e. In granting a Special Permit for any use, the Special Permit Granting
Authority may require off-street parking spaces, standards, or conditions in
addition to those set forth in the Bylaw, if it deems necessary for the use.
5.61 Parking Specifications
5.611 In all districts, any and all parking spaces located on any lot shall be restricted
to the use of the business allowed on the site by its employees, customers and
other persons normally visiting the premises at any one time. There shall be
no commuter parking nor shall any business enter into any type of agreement
for commuter and/or satellite parking for businesses or activities not located on
the site.
All new structures and alterations or enlargements on existing structures shall be
provided with off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following
specifications:
5.612 Specifications for parking layout shall be in accordance with Town of East
Longmeadow Planning Board Parking Standards. The standards shall include,
and are not limited, to the following:
a. All parking areas must meet the minimum parking dimensions in Diagram
5.6-1, except the handicapped parking requirements in Section 5.67 shall
supersede where appropriate.
Each off-street parking space shall contain, exclusive of approved access
lanes, not less than 180 square feet when located in a parking lot and not
less than 160 square feet when located in a garage or other building. For
Planned Business Developments, retail outlets and other similar uses,
there shall be a minimum of 300 square feet of total paved area, for each
car parking space required.
5-28
b. Parking spaces at a 90 degree angle are encouraged. Extra width at the end
of parking stalls is desirable. Additional driveway width is necessary for
main or through circulation aisles. (See Diagram 5.6-2, for a dimensional
illustration.)
c. Any required landscaping shall be indicated on the parking plan for
approval. (See Diagram 5.6-2, for a dimensional illustration.)
d. Parking aisles must be adjusted as necessary to accommodate the size of
the trucks serving the facility. (See Diagram 5.6-2, for a dimensional
illustration.)
e. Parking stall markings, directional arrows and other traffic signs shall be
delineated by at least four (4) inch painted lines or by other suitable means
and shall be permanently maintained.
f. One driveway per parcel shall be permitted as matter of right. Two
driveways for business, commercial and industrial uses are generally
desirable and shall be clearly marked as an entrance and as an exit.
5.613 Drainage
Drainage facilities for each parking area should be designed and constructed to
contain storm water run-off on the premises and should not be distributed on a
public way.
5.614 Surfacing
All off-street parking facilities shall be surfaced in accordance with the Town of
East Longmeadow Department of Public Works (DPW) standards and
specifications. The area and access driveways and parking areas for all
business, commercial and industrial uses shall be surfaced with bituminous
or cement material, according to established DPW standards and specifications.
5.62 Joint Use Parking
Joint use of off-street parking facilities is permitted provided that the parking area is
contiguous or within the same parcel of land to be occupied by a joint user's principal
building and its accessory building(s). The area of such facilities shall not be less than
the sum of the requirements of the various users computed in accordance with the
specifications of this Section.
5.63 Off-Premises Parking
The use of off-premises parking facilities to meet the requirements of this Section
may be permitted in the Industrial District if access, egress and travel to and from
the same, consistent with Section I are provided.
5-29
A proposal to use such facilities must be approved in writing by the Planning Board
and Town Engineer.
Any termination or reduction of use of such off-premises parking facilities so that
minimum required parking spaces are not available in accordance with Section 5.66 (j.
and n.) hereof will constitute further use of the principal premises and buildings and
constitute a violation of the Zoning Bylaw.
5.64 Multi-Purpose Building
In the case of a building or structure to be devoted to more than one kind of use, the
off-street parking spaces provided shall equal the total number which would be
required in Section 5.66, as if the uses were to be conducted in separate buildings.
5.65 Additional Parking Specifications for Business, Commercial and Industrial Uses
a. Landscaping
There shall be 12 percent of the total parking and circulation area devoted to
landscaping within the boundaries of the parking lot. In addition, there shall be at
least a 10 foot landscaped buffer along the street lines, except to provide
openings for reasonable access to the site. Such landscaping shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the planting of grass, ground cover, flowerbeds, shrubs,
hedges or trees. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition,
neat and orderly in appearance and free of refuse and debris. All plantings shall be
arranged and maintained so as not to obscure the vision of traffic.
b. Lighting
Any outdoor lighting fixture newly installed or replaced shall be shielded so that it
does not produce a strong, direct light beyond the property boundaries.
5.66 Minimum Required Parking Spaces
a. Each single family dwelling: 1 parking space or garage.
b. A project for the aged permitted under Section 3.032: parking spaces for 75
percent of the number of units.
c. Fraternity, sorority house or dormitory: 1 parking space for each 4 persons
residing on the premises.
d. Hospital or sanitarium: 1 parking space for every 2 beds, plus 1 parking space for
every 2 employees on any one shift.
e. Nursing Home: 1 parking space for every 3 beds, plus 1 parking space for every 2
employees on any one shift.
f. Retail outlets and other similar uses: 6 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of floor area. For upper floor or basement area used for office or sales purposes,
additional parking shall be provided amounting to 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
such space.
g. Restaurants, clubs, or similar facilities serving food or beverages (even when in
conjunction with retail stores and the like): 1 parking space per person for each 3
seats.
h. Theaters: 1 parking space for each 3 seats.
i. Professional and commercial offices: 5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area on all floors but in no case less than 10 spaces.
j. Manufacturing or Industrial establishment: 1 parking space for every 2
employees on combined employment of the two largest shifts, plus space for
visitor parking, company vehicles based at the facility and off-street parking.
k. Churches: 1 parking space for each 6 seats.
l. Elderly Residential permitted under Section 5.1: parking spaces for 75 percent of
the number of units plus one parking space per person for one-quarter of the
maximum total capacity of dining rooms, banquet rooms and meeting rooms
available for non-tenants.
m. Gas/Service Station: 3 spaces per service bay, but not less than 1 space per 100
square feet of gross floor area.
n. Warehouse or wholesale storage facility: 1 space for 3,000 square feet of gross
floor area and/or lot area in such use.
5.67 Handicapped Parking
5.671 All parking areas shall provide handicapped accessible parking spaces, as
required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and as
specified in Diagram 5.6-3, except for the following uses which are
specifically exempted in ADA requirements:
a. owner-occupied residential dwellings with no more than 4 units;
b. single-family homes sold or rented without the use of a broker;
c. housing operated by religious organizations and private clubs that limit
occupancy to members.
5.672 Accessible spaces shall be 8'0" wide, with an adjacent access aisle 5'0" wide,
and shall be marked with signs and pavement paint. One in every eight
5-30
5-31
accessible spaces shall have an access aisle 8'0" (rather than 5'0"), and shall be
signed "van accessible".
5.68 Planning Board Decision
5.681 The concurring vote of a majority (3/5) of the membership of the Board shall be
required for any decision on a parking plan. The Board's decision shall consist
of either:
a. Approval of the parking plan based on the determination that the
proposed parking plan meets all of the requirements of Section 5.6.
b. Denial of the parking plan based on a determination that either: i)
insufficient information was submitted with the parking plan in order for
the board to adequately review the proposal, or; ii) determination that the
project does not meet the requirements of Section 5.6.
c. Approval of the parking plan subject to conditions, modifications and
reasonable restrictions necessary to ensure compliance with the
requirements of Section 5.6.
5.682 The Planning Board shall render a decision within sixty (60) days from the
date the parking plan was submitted to the Planning Board and shall file its
written decision with the Department of Public Works and the Town Clerk.
5-32
5-35
5-33
5-34
5-35
5.7 CAR SERVICE ACTIVITIES
5.71 Public garages, automobile repair shops, storage battery service stations, gasoline filling
stations, greasing stations, or any of their appurtenances or accessory uses shall
hereafter be erected not less than 100 feet from any Residence District. Such building
shall have no entrances or exits for motor vehicles within a radius of 300 feet measured
from the nearest point of such entrances or exits in any direction to the property of any
school, library, church, playground, public building, park, recreation center, social or
community center, or any institution for the sick, handicapped or feeble. No public
garages, automobile repair shops, greasing stations, storage battery service stations,
gasoline filling stations, or any of their appurtenances or accessory uses shall be placed
so that their entrances or exits constitute a potential traffic hazard, and such entrances
or exits to public ways of the Town of East Longmeadow shall be approved by the
Board of Public Works as to locations and construction, and approved by the Planning
Board as to their conformity with the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. A plot plan for
any such use as described herein shall require the approval signatures of the Board of
Selectmen, the Board of Public Works and the Planning Board prior to the issuance of
a building permit or the occupancy or use of land for any of the purposes described in
this paragraph.
5.72 Gasoline Filling Station
5.721 Gasoline filling stations shall be permitted by right in the Business (BUS)
and Industrial (I) Districts.
5.722 Additional General Requirements
The following standards shall be used as additional standards for all gasoline
filling stations:
a. Not more than 30,000 gallons of gasoline may be stored on the premises
with an additional allowable maximum storage of not more than 30,000
gallons of other types of motor fuel.
b. Other types of motor fuel may be stored on the premises with a maximum
storage of 15,000 gallons each of two types of fuel.
c. All fuel must be stored underground, and only non-pressurized (working
pressure less than 1 pound per square inch gauge at the vent) storage will
be allowed.
d. An enclosed greasing station for not more than three (3) motor vehicles
shall be permitted.
5-36
5.73 Car Washing Facilities
5.731 Car washing facilities shall be permitted by right in the Business (BUS) and
Industrial (I) Districts in accordance with the additional requirements specified
herein.
5.732 Additional General Requirements
The following standards shall be used as additional standards for all car
washing facilities:
a. Car washing facilities shall consist of no more than four (4) open-ended
bays, which shall be covered by a common roof. Each bay shall be
separated from the others by a solid floor-to-ceiling, common interior
wall.
b. There shall be a private water supply system located on the premises.
Such system shall function independently of the Town water system.
c. The provisions of Section 5.7 relating to public garages and other
enumerated car service activities shall be applicable to car washing
facilities.
5-37
5.8 SIGNS
A. No exterior or ground sign shall be created, placed, erected, altered or enlarged until a
building permit has been issued by the Building Inspector, subject only to the exceptions in
Section 5.81 B, D and E. below.
B. All signs requiring building permits in all districts must be approved in writing by the
Planning Board before a building permit may be issued by the Building Inspector.
C. No sign shall incorporate or be lighted by flashing or blinking lights, Light Emitting
Diode (LED) displays or be designed to attract attention by a change in light intensity or
direction, or by repeated mechanical, electrical or computerized motion. All illumination
shall have either a source of light from within or exterior to the sign and such exterior
lighting shall be limited to white in color. No changeable and/or graphic display is
allowed on any sign. These restrictions do not apply to digital clocks and thermometers.
D. See Definitions, Section VIII, including but not limited to the following: (1) Ground
sign; (2) sign; (3) sign, area of.
5.81 Residential District
No sign shall be permitted in a Residential District except:
A. A professional nameplate having an area of not more than 144 square inches, in connection
with permitted uses.
B. A real estate sign having an area of not more than 10 square feet, advertising the sale, rental
or lease of the premises on which they are placed.
C. A church and/or school sign, 20 square feet maximum area.
D. A contractor’s lawn sign as outlined in section 5.89.
E. Temporary lawn signs for tag sales, elections or other non-profit social events as outlined in
sections 5.89 and 5.90 below.
5.82 Commercial District
Signs shall only be permitted in a Commercial (COM) District subject to the following
conditions:
A. Location and Size:
All permitted signs shall be attached to a primary building. Attached signs may not exceed 5
feet in height nor 30 square feet in area, shall not project toward the street more than 2 feet. and
shall not extend vertically above the parapet or ridge line, subject only to the following
exceptions;
1. One ground sign not to exceed 15 square feet in area nor exceeding 10 feet above
ground, which sign shall comply with the setback and side yard requirements for a
primary building;
5-38
Approved by Town meeting October 27,
2014
or
2. A sign for a building directory of occupants or tenants not to exceed 40 square feet;
B. Number:
1. There shall not be more than one attached building sign per building occupant/commercial
use.
2. A commercial building housing more than one occupant/commercial use is entitled to only
one ground sign or one tenant directory sign.
C. Construction:
No sign shall be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface of any wall, including
windows and doors. All signs must be painted, posted or otherwise securely affixed to a
substantial intermediary removable surface and such surface shall be securely affixed to a wall
of the building. The foregoing, however, shall not prevent installation of a sign by individual
letters or devices cut into or securely affixed to the exterior wall of a building, provided that
such letters or devices have a minimum depth or projection of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch. The
material of the sign and intermediary surface and the manner of affixation of the sign to the
intermediary surface and of the intermediary surface to the wall of the building shall be subject
to the approval of the Building Inspector for the purpose of protecting safety of the public.
D. Illumination:
Signs may be illuminated, but shall be non-flashing, non-moving, and non-animated. If lighting
is provided, the source of light shall be either from within or exterior to the sign and shielded so
as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public street or onto any adjacent
property; restrictions that pertain to movement do not apply to digital clocks and thermometers.
E. Signs must identify or otherwise relate to the primary building or tenants in such building,
and may not be used for other purposes except that on vacant lots, non-illuminated real estate
signs having an area of not more than 20 square feet advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which such signs are located, are permitted;
F. Plans for all signs shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
5.83 Business District
Signs shall only be permitted in the Business (BUS) District subject to the following conditions.
A. Location:
All permitted signs shall be attached to a primary building and shall not extend vertically above
the parapet or ridgeline, subject to the following conditions.
1. A sign attached to a building shall be securely affixed to one of the walls or a roof of the
building. If affixed to a wall, it shall be parallel with and not project more than twelve (12)
inches from the face of such wall and shall not project beyond the face of any other wall of the
building. If affixed to the roof, it shall be parallel with the front wall of the store and shall not
project beyond the face of
5-39
Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
any wall of the building. No sign, whether affixed to a wall or roof of a building, shall project
above the highest line of the main roof of the building.
B. Size:
A sign attached to a building shall not be more in area than three (3) square feet per linear foot
of building front. A sign on the exterior wall of the first floor of a building may extend across
the full width of the store wall, unless the store occupies the entire first floor of a detached
building, in which event the sign may extend across not more than three-fourths (3/4) of the
width of the wall. The width of signs of stores occupying other than the first floor of a building
shall not exceed three (3) feet. No sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area.
C. Number:
1. Exterior wall signs: There shall not be more than one exterior wall sign for each business
except that if the business has a direct customer entrance in a wall other than the business front,
there may be a second sign affixed to such wall, and if the store has a wall other than the store
front with outside wall fronting on a street, there may be a second sign affixed to such wall,
whether or not such wall contains an entrance to the store, provided however, that no store shall
have more than two secondary signs, in any event. The area of the secondary sign or signs shall
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the maximum permissible area of the sign on the storefront. In
addition to the foregoing sign or signs, there may be one directory of the occupants or tenants of
the building affixed to the exterior wall of the building at each entrance to the building. Such
directory shall not exceed an area determined on the basis of one-half (1/2) square foot for each
occupant or tenant of the building.
2. Ground Signs: Only one ground sign is allowed subject to the following conditions;
a. This sign shall be placed so as to comply with the setback and side yard requirements for a
primary building. The top of the sign shall not be more than 20 feet above the mean grade level
of the building on the lot on which the sign is placed. Such sign shall not contain more than 50
square feet.
b. During the construction of a building, a ground sign may be erected on the premises
identifying the building, the owner, the contractors, the architects or the engineers, but such sign
shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square feet in surface area. Such sign shall be removed promptly
after the completion of the building.
c. A building housing more than one business is entitled to only one ground sign per the
requirements set forth in section 5.83 (2) (a) above. Businesses sharing a common wall are
considered to be housed in the same building.
The total area, in aggregate, of all signs, including ground sign, shall not exceed 100 square feet
per business use.
D. Construction:
No sign shall be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface of any wall, including
windows and doors. All signs must be painted, posted or otherwise securely affixed to a
substantial intermediary removable surface and such surface shall be securely affixed to a wall
of the building. The foregoing, however, shall not prevent installation of a sign by individual
letters or devices cut into or securely affixed to the exterior wall of a building, provided that
such letters or devices have a minimum depth or projection of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch. The
material of the sign and
5-40
Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
intermediary surface and the manner of affixation of the sign to the intermediary surface and
of the intermediary surface to the wall of the building shall be subject to the approval of the
Building Inspector for the purpose of protecting safety of the public.
E. Illumination:
Moving and flashing signs are prohibited. No /red or green/ lights shall be used on any sign if, in
the opinion of the Building Inspector, such lights would create a driving hazard. No sign may be
illuminated between 12 a.m. and 6 a.m. except signs identifying police or fire stations and such
other signs as the Planning Board may specifically authorize to be illuminated at other hours, if
the Board finds that the nature of the use of the premises is such that such illumination should be
permitted in the public interest. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply not only to exterior
signs but also to interior signs that are designed or placed so as to shine through windows or
doors of the building. If lighting is provided, the source of light shall be either from within or
exterior to the sign and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any
public street or onto any adjacent property. These restrictions do not apply to digital clocks and
thermometers.
F. Signs must identify or otherwise relate to the primary building or tenants in such building,
and may not be used for other purposes except that on vacant lots, non-illuminated real estate
signs having an area of not more than 20 square feet advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which such signs are located, are permitted;
G. Gasoline and/or Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) filling and/or electric charging stations and
garages:
1. Gasoline and/or CNG filling and/or electric charging stations and garages are limited to the
following signs.
a. They may, if they elect to do so, divide the one exterior sign affixed to the front wall of the
building, to which they are entitled as hereinabove provided, into separate signs affixed to and
parallel to such wall and indicating the separate operations or departments of the business,
provided however, that the total of the area of the separate signs shall not exceed the maximum
area permitted under this Bylaw for a single exterior sign on such wall. In addition, one sign
conforming with the terms of section 5.83 C. 2., standing, indicating the company whose
gasoline is being sold, may be erected of such type, in such location, and in such manner as the
Planning Board may permit. The standard type of gasoline pump bearing thereon in usual size
and form, the name or type of gasoline and the price thereof shall not be deemed to be in
violation of this Bylaw. Temporary or movable signs of any and every type are specifically
prohibited.
H. Window Signs:
Signs painted or placed on the inside of the glass of a window shall be permitted, provided that
the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed 30 percent of the area of the window glass.
5.84 Industrial District
Signs shall only be permitted in an Industrial (IND) District subject to the following conditions:
5-41
Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
A. Signs must identify or otherwise relate to the primary use of the building or tenants in such
building and may not be used for other purposes (except that on vacant lots, non-illuminated real
estate signs having an area not more than 35 square feet on which such signs are located is
permitted).
B. Signs shall conform to the setback, side yards and rear yard requirements for the Industrial (I)
District.
C. Signs may be illuminated, but shall be non-flashing, non-moving and non-animated. If
lighting is provided, the source of light shall be either from within or exterior to the sign and
shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public street or onto any
adjacent property.
D. No sign shall have a square footage in excess of five percent (5%) of the square footage of
the front elevation of the primary building, but in no case shall the square footage of the sign be
required to be less than 100 square feet.
E. No sign shall project more than five (5) feet above the roof level of the primary building.
F. Construction: No sign shall be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface of any wall,
including windows and doors. All signs must be painted, posted or otherwise securely affixed to
a substantial intermediary removable surface and such surface shall be securely affixed to a wall
of the building. The foregoing, however, shall not prevent installation of a sign by individual
letters or devices cut into or securely affixed to the exterior wall of a building, provided that
such letters or devices have a minimum depth or projection of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch. The
material of the sign and intermediary surface and the manner of affixation of the sign to the
intermediary surface and of the intermediary surface to the wall of the building shall be subject
to the approval of the Building Inspector for the purpose of protecting safety of the public.
5.85 Industrial Garden Park District
Signs shall only be permitted in an Industrial Garden Park (IGP) District subject to the
following conditions:
A. Signs must identify or otherwise relate to the primary use of the building or tenants in such
building and may not be used for other purposes (except that on vacant lots, non-illuminated real
estate signs advertising the sale of the lot on which it is located, and having an area of not more
than 20 square feet is permitted).
B. One ground sign shall be allowed to be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from the front
property line. The top of the sign shall not be more than 20 feet above the mean grade level of
the building on the lot on which the sign is placed. Such sign shall not contain more than 50
square feet and shall be used only to identify or otherwise relate to the primary use of the
building or tenants in such a building and no other purpose. One (1) freestanding sign, not
exceeding an area of four (4) square feet, located no nearer than ten (10) feet to any street or
entrance drive curb, shall be permitted at each entrance drive into a site. Such signs shall not
exceed an area of four (4) square feet on any one side and a height of ten (10) feet to the top of
the sign measured from the pavement grade of the adjacent entrance drive.
C. Signs may be illuminated, but shall be non-flashing, non-moving and non-animated. If
lighting is provided, the source of light shall be either from within or exterior to the sign and
shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public street or onto any
adjacent property.
5-42 Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
D. No sign shall have a square footage in excess of five percent (5%) of the square footage of
the front elevation of the primary building, but in no case shall the square footage of the sign be
more than 100 square feet.
E. No sign shall project more than five (5) feet above the roof level of the primary building.
F. Construction: No sign shall be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface of any wall,
including windows and doors. All signs must be painted, posted or otherwise securely affixed to
a substantial intermediary removable surface and such surface shall be securely affixed to a wall
of the building. The foregoing, however, shall not prevent installation of a sign by individual
letters or devices cut into or securely affixed to the exterior wall of a building, provided that
such letters or devices have a minimum depth or projection of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch. The
material of the sign and intermediary surface and the manner of affixation of the sign to the
intermediary surface and of the intermediary surface to the wall of the building shall be subject
to the approval of the Building Inspector for the purpose of protecting safety of the public.
5.86 Golf Recreation District
Signs shall only be permitted in a Golf Recreational District (GRD) District subject to the
following conditions;
A. For a Residential use, the provision of Section 5.81 shall apply.
B. For other Golf Recreational uses, the following provisions shall apply:
1. Only one ground sign is allowed subject to the following conditions;
a. This sign shall be placed so as to provide a setback and side yard of not less than 50 feet. The
top of the sign shall not be more than 15 feet above the grade level below the sign. Such sign
shall not be more than 5 feet from the base of the actual sign to the top of the actual sign, and
shall not contain more than 50 square feet.
b. Signs attached to the primary building may not project toward the street more than 2 feet, may
not exceed 5 feet in height from base of the sign to the top of the sign, and may not exceed 50
square feet. The top of such sign shall not extend above the parapet or ridgeline.
c. Signs may be illuminated, but shall be non-flashing, non-moving and non-animated. If
lighting is provided, the source of light shall be either from within or exterior to the sign and
shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public street or onto any
adjacent property.
d. Signs must identify or otherwise relate to the primary building or tenants of such building or
the use to which such building is placed, and shall not be used for other purposes.
e. Plans for all signs shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
5-43
Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
5.87 Non-Conforming Signs
Any non-conforming sign, legally erected prior to the adoption of this Bylaw, may continue to
be maintained and repaired. Such a sign shall not be enlarged, reinstated, altered, or the copy
and wording thereon may not be changed in any way other than the normal maintenance and
repair, unless it is brought into conformity with this Bylaw.
The exemption herein granted is terminated with respect to any sign which:
A. Shall have been abandoned;
B. Advertises or calls attention to any products, business or activities which are no longer
carried or sold at the premises;
C. Shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 60 days after notice to that effect
has been given by the Building Inspector.
5.88 Maintenance
All signs, whether erected before or after the effective date of this Bylaw, shall be maintained in
a safe condition and in substantially the same condition when created all to the satisfaction of
the Building Inspector.
5.89 Contractor’s Lawn Signs
A contractor’s lawn sign shall be one sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, maintained
on the premises while services of a contractor are in process, and containing information
identifying the contractor. Such sign shall be removed upon completion of contractor’s services.
Only one contractor’s sign is allowed on the premises at one time.
5.90 Political, Message and/or Non-Profit Event Lawn Signs
A. Election Signs
Election signs shall be those signs pertaining to a candidate for election or ballot question. Such
signs shall be removed within two (2) days after the election or vote. Each sign shall not exceed
six (6) square feet in size.
B. Message Signs shall be those signs displaying a political, religious or other non-commercial
free speech message other than that allowed under Section 5.81. Each sign shall not exceed six
(6) square feet in size.
C. No political sign of any sort shall be placed on town property.
D. Other non-profit message signs, including Tag Sales, shall not exceed 6 sq. ft. in area and
must contain a date of the event. Such signs shall be displayed not more than two weeks prior to
the event and must be removed within two days after the event.
E. Temporary banners of any size are not permitted unless approved by the Planning Board.
5-44
Approved by Town meeting October 27, 2014
5.9 SWIMMING POOLS
5.91 Definition
Swimming Pool: Swimming pool is a body of water eighteen (18) or more
inches in depth at any point in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle
or container, permanent or temporary, whether located indoors or outdoors,
used or intended to be used for public, semi-public, or private swimming by
other facilities appurtenant to or intended for the operation and maintenance of a
swimming pool, and also all pools operated and maintained in conjunction with
adults or children or both, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed for such
use, and includes all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances, and all or
by clubs, community associations, and hotels.
Family Pool: Family pool is a swimming pool used or intended to be used by the
owner or lessee thereof and his family and by his friends invited or permitted to use it
without payment of any fee.
Neighborhood Pool: Exception: The following special exception may be granted by
the Board of Appeals after a public hearing and subject to the approval of the abutting
landowners:
a. A neighborhood pool: A swimming pool not to exceed 24 feet x 52 feet, to be
used by a non-profit organization of not more than 25 families living in the
immediate vicinity of the pool.
b. A neighborhood pool shall be operated under a set of Bylaws which include safety
rules, limited guest privileges, as well as regulations to keep the use of said pool
from becoming objectionable to the abutters and neighbors or a general nuisance.
c. The fence surrounding the pool shall be not less than 6 feet in height and in all other
respects shall conform to the regulations set down under Safety Devices. Such fence
shall conform to the setback, side yard, and rear yard requirements for a primary
building for the district in which the pool is located.
d. Sufficient provisions shall be made on the property in which the pool is located
for off-street parking for all members or their guests.
e. It shall also be required that neighborhood pools, whose organizations decide at
any time to disband, shall be completely filled in before such organization is
disbanded. Any of the membership in such organization can be or will be held
responsible personally for the fulfillment of this requirement should the
organization disband without satisfactory completion of this requirement.
5.92 Restriction
The family pool and neighborhood pool, in accordance with Section 3.094 and
3.095, are the only pools permitted in Residence districts. All swimming pools shall
5-45
conform to the accessory building setback, side yard, and rear yard requirements of the
district in which located, except that fencing around neighborhood pools shall con- form
to principal buildings set back, side yard and rear yard requirements of the district in
which it is located.
5.93 Board of Health Construction Permit and Approval
Before work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool, neighborhood
pool, or family pool or on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to
a swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool, an application for a permit to
construct or erect, and the plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data for
same shall be submitted to the Board of Health for its approval; and no part of the
work shall be commenced until the Board of Health has granted such approval by a
written permit to construct and has further evidenced its approval by a suitable
endorsement upon such plans and specifications. Such plans and specifications shall
conform to the provisions of Article VI of the State Sanitary Code.
5.94 Lighting
Artificial lighting of the pool shall be shaded and directed in such a manner as to
limit the lighting to the actual area of the pool, and shall in no way constitute a
nuisance.
5.95 Safety Devices
All swimming pools, neighborhood pools, family pools, wading pools, fish ponds or
other bodies of water which constitute an obvious hazard and which are artificial or
semi-artificial in their nature and which contain more than 18 inches of water in-depth
at any point, shall be enclosed in a fence sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates, must not be less
than 4 feet above the underlying ground. All gates must be self-closing and selflatching
with latches placed 4 feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made
inaccessible from the outside to small children. Such fence shall be constructed in
such a manner that no holes or gaps exist larger than 4 inches in any dimension, except
through the doors or gates. If a picket fence is used, the minor dimension shall not be
more than 4 inches. No fence shall be built in such a manner so as to render it easy to
climb. A dwelling or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. In
addition, the wall of the container or receptacle or other structure, may be
considered to be part of the enclosure if it is completely above the underlying
ground adjacent to the swimming pool, family pool or wading pool. If it is not
completely above the underlying ground, fencing or other additional obstruction shall
be provided that will give protection equal to the wall of the container. In cases where
access to the pool is through ladders, stairs, steps or other such structures, provision
must be made to obstruct or otherwise prohibit entry into the pool by use of such
structures, when pool is not in use. These requirements shall be applicable to all
swimming pools, neighborhood pools, or family pools hereafter constructed, other than
indoor pools, and shall apply to all outdoor pools. No person in possession of land
within the Town having a swimming pool, neighborhood pool or family pool having a
depth in excess of 18 inches shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or wall as
5-46
herein provided. The Board of Health shall allow a reasonable period within which to
comply with the requirements of this section.
5.96 Permit
No person shall operate or maintain a swimming pool, neighborhood pool or family
pool until a permit therefore shall have been issued by the Board of Health, which
permit shall be valid unless revoked. All permits shall be in writing and shall state
the conditions thereof. The Board of Health is hereby authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations for the construction, operation and maintenance of swimming
pools, neighborhood pools, and family pools for the protection and promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and public welfare. Any permit granted by the Board of
Health hereunder may be revoked by it for failure to comply with its Rules and
Regulations promulgated hereunder or whenever, in the determination of the Board of
Health, further operation under such permit creates a menace to the health, safety, or
morals of the users of the swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool. No
appeal under this section shall entitle the permit holder to continue the operation of
the swimming pool, neighborhood pool or family pool pending action under an
appeal.
5.97 Inspection
The Board of Health may inspect or cause to be inspected all swimming pools,
neighborhood pools, or family pools within the Town at such times as it may deem
necessary to carry out the intent of this Bylaw. The Board of Health is hereby
authorized to enter upon any premises, private or public, to take such samples of water
from such pools at such times as it may deem necessary and to require the owner,
proprietor or operator to comply with the rules and regulations pertaining to swimming
pools, neighborhood pools, or family pools promulgated by the Board of Health in
accordance with this Bylaw. In the event of failure of compliance after due notice by
the Board of Health, the Board of Health shall have the power to abate or cause a
suspension of such swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool permit until
such time as the same is, in the opinion of the Board of Health, no longer a menace or a
hazard to health, safety or morals.
5.98 Protection of Property Rights
No swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool shall be so located, designed,
operated or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of their property
rights by owners of property adjoining the swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or
family pool or located in the neighborhood of such swimming pool, neighborhood
pool, or family pool. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to
be made or continued at any swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool any
loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others. In the operation of a
swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool, the use or permitting the use of
operation of any radio, television, receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of such in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time
5-47
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person
or persons who are in the swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or family pool shall be
unlawful. Any commercial undertaking at any swimming pool, neighborhood pool, or
family pool is expressly prohibited.
5.99 Swimming Pools, Public or Semi-Public
In addition to compliance with the above Bylaw, any swimming pools for public or
semi-public use, or any neighborhood pools, shall be required to conform with any
special requirements of the Board of Health, these special requirements to be
determined by the nature and proposed use and utilization of said pool.
5-48
VI. MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS/ REGISTERED
MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
6.0 PURPOSE
(1) To provide for the establishment of Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers
known as Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (hereinafter RMDs) in
appropriate places and under strict conditions in accordance with The Acts of
2012 Chapter 369 entitled “An Act for the humanitarian Use of Marijuana”.
(2) To minimize the adverse impacts of RMDs on adjacent properties, residential
neighborhoods, schools and other places where children congregate and other
land uses potentially incompatible with said RMDs.
(3) To regulate the siting, design, placement, safety, monitoring, modification and
removal of RMDs.
6.01 APPLICABILITY
(1) The cultivation (unless it meets the requirements for an agricultural exemption
under Chapter 40A § 3) production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or
wholesale sale trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use is
prohibited unless permitted as a RMD under this Section.
(2) No RMD shall be established except in compliance with the provisions of this
Section.
(3) Nothing in this By-law shall be construed to supersede federal and state laws
governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
(4) If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any
person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Section, to
the extent it can be given effect, or the application of those provisions to
persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not
be affected thereby, and to this end the provisions of this Section are
severable.
6.02 ELIGIBLE LOCATIONS FOR RMDs
(1) RMDs other than agricultural operations meeting exemption standards under
Chapter 40A, §3, may be allowed by Special Permit of the Planning Board in
the Industrial Garden District provided the facility otherwise meets the
requirements of this Section. Operations under Chapter 40A §3 must meet all
of the general requirements for a site plan review.
6-1
6.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS FOR ALL RMDs
(1) All RMDs shall be contained within a building or structure of which there will
be no windows.
(2) No RMD shall have a gross floor area of less than 2,500 square feet or in
excess of 20,000 square feet.
(3) A RMD may not be located in buildings that contain any medical doctor’s
offices or the offices of any other professional practitioner authorized to
prescribe the use of medical marijuana.
(4) The hours of operation of RMDs shall be set by the Special Permit Granting
Authority, but in no event shall said RMDs be open and/or operating between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(5) No RMD shall be located within 300 feet of any existing residence or
residential zoning district.
(6) No RMD shall be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following preexisting
structures or uses:
a. Any school attended by children under the age of 18;
b. Any licensed child care facility;
c. Any drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility;
d. Any half-way house or similar facility; or
e. Any other RMD.
(7) No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of the following pre-existing
structures or uses:
a. Any church;
b. Any school;
c. Any park, not to include the rail trail/bicycle path;
d. Any playground;
e. Any athletic playing field; or,
f. Any youth center.
(8) No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing marijuana or
marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises of a RMD.
(9) Signage for the RMD shall include the following language: “Registration card
issued by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health Required” The
required text shall be a minimum of two inches in height.
(10) RMDs shall provide the East Longmeadow Police Department and
Building Commissioner with the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses
6-2
of all management staff and key holders to whom one can provide notice if
there are operating problems associated with the establishment.
(11) RMDs shall provide the East Longmeadow Police Department and the
East Longmeadow Fire Department with a detailed security report as to how
the security for the site will be provided.
6.04 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS FOR ALL RMDs
See additional requirements under §7.38 Additional Requirements for RMDs.
6-3
6-2
SECTION VII - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7.0 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
7.01 Membership
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members. The Board of Selectmen shall
appoint members of the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 12 of Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws. The Board of Selectmen shall also appoint two or more
associate members of the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 12 of Chapter 40A
of the Massachusetts General Laws.
The Board of Appeals shall have the powers provided by Section 14 of Chapter 40A of
the Massachusetts General Laws.
7.02 Appeals
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by reason of
his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administration office
under the provisions of said Chapter 40A, or by any person, including an officer or
board of the Town or of an abutting town aggrieved by an order or decision of the
Building Inspector, or other administrative official, in violation of any provision of
said Chapter or the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of East Longmeadow.
Such appeal shall be taken by the Board within thirty (30) days from the date of the
order or decision which is being appealed, by filing a notice of appeal with the Town
Clerk in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A.
7.03 Variances
Petitions of variances from the terms of the applicable zoning provisions shall be dealt
with by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Chapter 40A of the General Laws, as
amended. The Board shall grant no variances which would amount to an amendment
of this Bylaw. A variance may be granted only if the Board finds that owing to
circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of land or structures
and especially affecting such land or structures but not generally affecting the zoning
district in which they are located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Bylaw
would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the Petitioner and that
desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of the Bylaw.
A variance is permission to depart from the literal enforcement of the Zoning Bylaw
with respect to setback, side yard, frontage and lot size, but not involving use or
structures.
7-1
7.04 Quorum Requirement
Four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals must be present in order to hold a
Public Hearing. Only members who attend the Public Hearing may vote on a
variance decision.
7.05 Restrictions
In carrying out the provisions above, the Board may impose, as a condition of its
decision, such restriction as to manner and duration of use as will in its opinion
safeguard the legitimate use of the property in the neighborhood and the health and
safety of the public, and conform to the intent and purpose of this By-law. Such
restrictions shall be stated in writing by the Board and made a part of the permit or
variance. No variance shall be conditioned on the continued ownership of the land or
structures by the petitioner to whom the variance was issued.
7.06 Two Years Before Next Appeal
No petition considered under the Bylaw that has been unfavorably acted upon by the
Board of Appeals shall be again considered on its merits by said Board within two
years after the date of such unfavorable action unless the Board of Appeals and
Planning Board consent thereto under the provisions of Section 16 of Chapter 40A as
amended.
7.07 Procedures
Appeals, applications, and petitions authorized by this Bylaw and/or by Chapter 40A of
the Massachusetts General Laws shall be taken and/or filed as provided in
Sections 15 through 17 of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws. All
hearings, meetings, and other proceedings conducted by the Board of Appeals shall
comply in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
7.1 ENFORCEMENT OF THE ZONING BYLAW
7.10 Building Inspector Duties
The Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of the Bylaw and amendments as
hereinafter provided. No building shall be constructed, altered, moved, or changed in
use in the Town without a permit from the Building Inspector. Such permit shall be
withheld unless such construction, alteration or proposed use is in conformity with all
the provisions of this Bylaw. Where a special permit is required pursuant to the
provisions of the Bylaw, or where an appeal or petition involving a variance is pending,
the Building Inspector shall issue no such permit except in accordance with written
decision of appropriate Board.
a. The general duties and responsibilities of the Building Inspector shall be in
accordance with any or all action necessary to enforce full compliance with any
7-2
or all provisions of this Bylaw and the conditions and stipulations of permits and
variances issued hereunder, including notification of non-compliance together with
requests for legal action through the Board of Selectmen to the Town Counsel.
If the Building Inspector shall be informed or have any reason to believe that any
provision of this Bylaw or any permit or decision hereunder has been, is being, or is
about to be violated, he shall make an investigation of the facts, including the
inspection of the premises where the violations may exist.
b. In the opinion of the Building Inspector if a violation exists, he shall issue an
order to cease and desist or to correct the violation.
c. If after such order, such violation continues and no appeal to the Board of Appeals
is taken within 30 days, the Selectmen shall, upon notice from the Building
Inspector forthwith make applications to the Superior Court for an injunction or
order restraining the violation and shall take such other action as is necessary to
enforce the provision of the Bylaw.
If after action by the Building Inspector appeal is taken to the Board of Appeals, and
after a public hearing, the Board of Appeals finds that there has been a violation or
prospective violation, the Building Inspector shall issue an order to cease and desist
and refrain from such violation unless such order has been previously issued. If
such then continues, the Selectmen shall upon written notice from the Building
Inspector forthwith make application to the Superior Court or Land Court for an
injunction or order restraining the violation and shall take such other action as may
be necessary to enforce this Bylaw.
d. Where written complaint is made to the Building Inspector he shall take action upon
such complaint within 14 days of receipt thereof and shall report such action in
writing to the complainant and Planning Board.
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds no violation or prospective violation, any
person aggrieved by his decision, or any officer or Board of the Town may within
30 days appeal to the Board of Appeals.
7.11 Penalties
Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw, or any of the conditions of a permit
or special permit, may be penalized by a complaint brought in the District Court Trial
Department, by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
violation or offense, and each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
In addition to the procedures described above, the provisions of this Bylaw may also be
enforced by the Building Inspector by non-criminal complaint pursuant to the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each day on
7-3
which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. The penalty for
violation of any provision of this Bylaw shall be $100.00 for the first offense;
$200.00 for the second offense; and $300.00 for the third and each subsequent
offense.
7.12 Filing Plot Plan
Unless otherwise ordered by the Building Inspector, all applications for building
permits under the provisions of the Building Code of the Town of East Longmeadow
shall be accompanied by the plans in duplicate. Such plans shall be drawn to scale,
shall show the actual dimensions, radii, and angles of the lot to be built on, the exact
size and location on the lot of the main building and accessory buildings to be erected,
and such other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this Bylaw, and amendments thereto. One copy of the plans filed by
the applicant shall be returned to him when approved by the Building Inspector.
7.13 Certificate of Occupancy
a. No land shall be occupied or used, and no building or structure hereafter erected or
altered, shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose until a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector stating that the
building, structure or use complies with the provisions of this Bylaw.
b. No such certificate shall be issued unless the building or structure and its uses, as
well as the uses of all the premises, are in conformity with the provisions of this
Bylaw.
c. Certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or altered.
(2) Change in use of an existing building or structure or premises to a different
use.
(3) Any change in use of a non-conforming use.
d. Upon completion of any building or structure, and prior to the use of any such
building, structure or premises, a certificate of occupancy shall be applied for on a
form furnished by the Building Inspector. Such application shall be acted upon
within ten (10) days after the filing thereof.
7-4
7.2 SPECIAL PERMITS
7.20 Special permits are requested for certain uses, structures or conditions as specified in
Section III, Schedule of Use Regulations.
7.21 Purpose
Special permits are intended to provide detailed review of certain uses and structures
which may have substantial impact upon traffic, utility systems, and the character of
the town, among other things. The Special Permit review process is intended to
ensure a harmonious relationship between proposed development and its
surroundings, and ensure the proposals are consistent with the purpose and intent of
this Bylaw.
7.22 Special Permit Granting Authorities (SPGA)
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority.
7.23 Special Permit Procedures
Special Permits may be issued by Special Permit Granting Authorities in accordance
with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 9 and with the following
regulations:
7.231 Public Hearing
a. Special permits shall only be issued following a public hearing held within
sixty-five (65) days after filing an application with the Special Permit
Granting Authority, a copy of which shall forthwith be given to the Town
Clerk by the applicant. The SPGA shall take final action on an application
for special permit within ninety 90 days following the public hearing.
Failure to do so shall constitute approval. A unanimous vote of a threemember
board and a vote of at least four members of a five-member board
is required.
b. Projects requiring both Site Plan Review and Special Permit - The period
of review for Site Plan Review and Special Permit shall be the same as any
other Special Permit and shall conform to the requirements of Chapter
40A Section 9. Specifically, a joint public hearing to address the Special
Permit application and the Site Plan Review application shall be held
within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of a Special Permit application
with the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA). The SPGA shall then
have ninety (90) days following the public hearing in which to act.
7-5
7.232 Application Procedures
a. All applications for special permits shall be made in writing on forms
furnished by the Planning Board and located in the Planning Board office
and shall be accompanied by a site plan when required in accordance with
Section III, Schedule of Use Regulations.
b. Misrepresentation of any of the required plan items shall be cause to
revoke a special permit.
7.233 Quorum Requirement
Four members of a five-member board must be present in order to hold a
public hearing. Only members who have attended the Public Hearing may
vote on whether or not to grant a Special Permit.
7.24 Expiration
Construction or operations under a special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of this Bylaw unless the use or construction is commenced within a period
of six (6) months after issuance of the permit; additionally, in cases involving
construction begun within such six (6) month period, such construction shall be
continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
A special permit granted under this section shall lapse after a period of nine (9) months
has passed, if substantial use has not sooner commenced except for good cause or, in
the case of permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date except
for good cause. This period shall not include such time required to pursue or await the
determination of an appeal referred to in Chapter 40A, Section 17, Massachusetts
General Laws.
7.25 Application and Review Procedures
The size, form, contents, and style of plans and specifications required as part of an
application for a special permit are available in the Planning Board office.
Upon receipt of an Application, the SPGA shall submit one copy of said application
and plan to the Board of Appeals, the Planning Board, the Board of Health, and the
Conservation Commission for their review. Said Boards and Commission shall within
thirty (30) days make recommendations as they deem appropriate and shall send
copies thereof to the SPGA and to the applicant in accordance with Chapter 40A,
Section 11 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
The SPGA may also, at its discretion, transmit copies to the Superintendent of Public
Works for review within 30 days in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 11 of the
Massachusetts General Laws. Special Permit requests for used motor vehicle
storage or sales must be transmitted to the Department of Public Works for review and
comment under these provisions. The decision of the SPGA shall be made only
7-6
after obtaining and considering the recommendations of other appropriate town
boards, commissions, departments and agencies.
7.26 Modification, Amendment , Renewal or Revocation
The SPGA shall have the authority to modify, amend or review its approval of a
Special Permit upon written application of the owner, lessee or mortgagee of the
premises; provided, however, that such action is consistent with the purpose and
intent of this Bylaw, and a public hearing has been held.
The SPGA, subsequent to the granting of a special permit, or any extension,
modification or renewal thereof, shall retain the right to revoke said Special Permit, or
the extension, modification or renewal thereof, upon its determination that the use or
construction authorized by the granting, extension, modification or renewal of the
special permit does not conform to the general or specific provisions set forth in this
Bylaw pertinent to the particular special permit under consideration. The SPGA shall
conduct a meeting for the purpose of deciding whether or not to revoke a Special
Permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, and shall notify the holder of
any such permit of the time and place of such a meeting and shall afford the holder of
the Special Permit the opportunity to present his position to the SPGA. Not later than
20 day after the completion of any such meeting the SPGA shall send written notice to
the holder of the special permit of its decision.
7.27 Transfer
Where a Special Permit involving the construction of buildings has not been
implemented by substantial construction, said permit shall not pass to future owners of
the property without a public hearing and approval of the SPGA.
7.28 Document Distribution
When a Special Permit has been granted, one copy each of the decision, conditions and
approved plans shall be filed with the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals,
the Town Clerk and the Building Inspector, and one copy shall be returned to the
applicant. The set of documents on file with the Town Clerk shall bear the
endorsement of the SPGA and certification that copies of the decision and related
plans have been filed in accordance with this section.
7.29 Time Schedule
A Special Permit shall only be issued following a public hearing held within sixty-five
(65) days after the SPGA receives the application from the Town Clerk. The SPGA
shall act within ninety (90) days following the public hearing. Failure of the SPGA to
make final action upon an application for a Special Permit within said ninety (90) day
period shall be deemed to be a granting of the Special Permit applied for.
7-7
7.30 Criteria
The following general standards and conditions in addition to the specific standards
and conditions set forth in the dimensional and density regulations shall be met before
a Special Permit can be granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority:
a. The specific site must be an appropriate location for the use, structure or
condition.
b. The use as developed will not adversely affect the neighborhood.
c. There will be no nuisances, such as noise etc., or safety hazards created.
d. Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of
the proposed use.
e. Appropriate screening by walls, fences, planting or other devices shall be
provided for parking areas.
f. Exterior features or appearance will not be detrimental to the surrounding
neighborhood.
g. Number and design of access drives and traffic features shall be adequate for
intended use.
h. Uses must be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning
Bylaws.
7.31 Earth Removal Operations Criteria
In all Zoning Districts, the following uses may be allowed only under a Special
Permit, which may be issued under specified terms and conditions granted by the
SPGA after a Public Hearing:
7.311 The removal, from any site, for profit or benefit or for any other purpose, of
gravel, sand, loam or any other earthly material, provided:
a. That no material is removed below the average grade of the nearest
public or private way.
b. That no adverse effect is caused within abutting private or public
property.
c. At the conclusion of the operation or of any substantial portion thereof, the
whole area where removal takes place shall be covered with not less than
four (4) inches of loam and seeded with suitable cover crop.
7-8
d. The applicant for such Special Permit shall submit a plan to the SPGA
indicating:
(1) Existing grades in the area from which the above material is to be
removed together with finished grades at the conclusion of the operation
with grade contour intervals shown at no more than two (2) feet.
(2) The provision for proper drainage of the area of the operation, both
during the operation and after its completion.
(3) That no bank or cut shall exceed a slope of one (1) foot of vertical
rise in two (2) feet of horizontal distance.
(4) The grades of the nearest public or private way.
(5) The grades within any abutting private or public property.
Such plan shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer in
conformity with applicable laws of the Commonwealth.
e. In any district, gravel, sand, loam or other earthly material may be removed
from the area covered by a building or other construction operation, as
evidenced by a current and valid building permit, provided that if such
material is removed from the site in consideration of profit or benefit or for
any other purpose, a Special Permit is required. In the area affected by such
operation no less than four (4) inches of loam shall remain, or be brought in
and spread, and provided that the entire open area disturbed is seeded with
a suitable cover crop. Filled areas shall be properly drained and covered in
the same manner.
f. Removal of gravel, sand, loam or other earthly material from any portion of
any premises which is not part of a building or construction operation as
evidenced by a current and valid building permit shall be prohibited unless
allowed by the issuance of a Special Permit in accordance with the
foregoing procedure.
7.312 The following earth removal operations are exempt from the requirements of
Section 7.311:
a. Residential driveway construction.
b. Single house lot development which involves the removal of earthly
materials.
c. Earth removal operations conducted by the Town of East Longmeadow.
7.313 Portable wood working mills and machinery, while operating exclusively
upon timber being removed from the property upon which said mills and
7-9
machinery are located and operated for commercial gain, provided that the
disposal and disposition of the debris left after such operation is conducted in
accordance with applicable Massachusetts General Laws.
7.32 Family Home Daycare Criteria
In Residence Districts, Family Home Daycare, the SPGA shall not grant or renew a
special permit for the use, construction, extension or modification of a Family Home
Daycare unless:
a. The general standards and conditions enumerated in Section 7.30 of this Bylaw
are met.
b. Condition upon the permanent compliance with the Acts and Resolves of the
Commonwealth, and
c. A plan is submitted to the SPGA which provides a safe vehicle circulation and
safe off-street vehicle loading and unloading areas.
7.33 Additional Criteria for Hospitals, Sanitariums, Medical Clinics,
Convalescent Homes, Assisted Living and Nursing Homes, Congregate
Elderly and Handicapped Housing
In Residence Districts: the SPGA shall not grant or renew a special permit for the use,
construction, extension or modification of a hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic,
convalescent home, assisted living facility, congregate elderly and handicapped
housing or nursing home unless the standard conditions enumerated in Section 7.30 of
this Bylaw are met and unless the following specific standards and conditions are also
met:
7.331 A Plan of Development shall be submitted to the SPGA for review, and such
Plan must be approved by said SPGA before a building permit shall be
issued. The SPGA, in reviewing such Plan, shall obtain and consider the
recommendations of the various Town Boards and Commissions. In review of
such Plan the following standards shall be met:
a. The proposed uses should complement and be in harmony with the
existing and probable future character of the neighborhood.
b. Main and accessory buildings shall be located in relation to one another
and in relation to other structures in the vicinity to provide efficient
pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation, and to create harmonious
appearance. No building shall be built within 50 feet of any property
line.
c. The Plan of Development shall show a 20-foot landscaped buffer zone
between buildings, roads, parking areas and any other adjacent property.
7-10
d. The Plan shall provide, within the site, efficient traffic circulation, and
adequate parking (amount, location and access). The Plan of
Development shall not create excessive traffic load or circulation
problems on existing adjacent or nearby street.
e. Sufficient domestic water and sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be
available.
f. The development shall be designed so as to protect adjacent property and
the neighborhood in general from detrimental effect.
g. The proposed use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or
welfare.
h. Compliance with local, state and federal laws and regulations or agencies
thereof.
i. The Special Permit Granting Authority may require any additional
information needed to permit a thorough review.
7.34 Additional Criteria for Churches and Buildings for Educational Purposes
In Residence Districts, Churches and Buildings for Educational Purposes: Any use of
land for religious purposes or for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the
Commonwealth or any of its agencies, or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a
nonprofit educational corporation, or any public library or museum, is exempt from
Special Permit but is subject to the general standards and conditions enumerated in
Section 7.30 and the following specific standards and conditions:
a. Lot coverage by buildings, structures, parking and driveways, shall not exceed
60% of the lot area.
b. Dimensions of the following shall be increased over those of the highest abutting
Residence AA, A, B or C District by the percentages given below:
(1) Lot area and lot width ..................................................by 100% greater
(2) Setback, side, and rear lot width ....................................by 40% greater
(3) Building height........................................... by 10 feet or 1 story greater
c. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.6 of the
Zoning Bylaws, and there shall be no parking or access driveways closer than 25
feet to a Residence District boundary.
d. The entire length of side and rear yards abutting a Residence District shall be
landscaped for a depth of 20 feet from the lot line.
7-11
7.35 Additional Criteria for Used Car Lots
In the Business District, Used Car Lots: The SPGA may issue a Special Permit
allowing buildings, structures, or land to be used for the sale of, and storage for sale
of, used motor vehicles. Issuance of said Special Permit shall be subject to the
general standards and conditions enumerated in Section 7.30 and the following
provisions:
a. This use will only be allowed in a Business District, as indicated on the Building
Zone Map.
b. The lot shall have a minimum of 20,000 sq. ft. with a minimum of 150 ft. frontage
on an accepted way.
c. Not more than 75% of the lot shall be occupied by buildings, parking area, or
other facilities. At least 25% of the lot area shall be left as green open space.
d.Buildings, structures, or any of their appurtenances or accessory uses shall hereafter
be erected not less than 100 feet from any Residence District. Such buildings shall
have no entrances or exits for motor vehicles within a radius of 300 feet measured
from the nearest point of such entrances or exits in any direction to the property of
any school, library, church, playground, public building, park, recreation center,
social or community center, or any institution for the sick, handicapped, or feeble.
No building, structure, or any of their appurtenances or accessory uses shall be
placed so that their entrances or exits constitute a potential traffic hazard, and such
entrances and exits to public ways of the Town of East Longmeadow shall be
approved by the Board of Public Works as to locations and construction, and
approved by the Planning Board as to their conformity with the intent and purpose
of this Bylaw. A plot plan for any such use as described herein shall be reviewed by
the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Public Works prior to the issuance of a
building permit or the occupancy or use of land for the purpose described in this
paragraph.
e. No part of any building or structure shall be erected or altered so as to be less than
25 feet from the street line. Side yards and a rear yard shall not be required for a
business building or structure, except as required in Section 7.35d above. The 15
feet of such rear or side year nearest to the Residence District shall be left as a
natural wooded buffer, or if none exists, shall be landscaped by providing trees,
shrubs or fencing to provide a practical buffer between the two districts. The
establishment of this buffer strip shall be an integral part of any required parking
plan.
f. Building area shall not exceed 25% of the lot area. Plot plans must be submitted to
the Planning Board for approval of Parking provisions in all cases, and to the Board
of Public Works in accordance with the General Bylaw of the Town of East
Longmeadow, Section 64-A, where applicable.
7-12
g. Off-street Parking shall be provided and shall meet the requirements of Section
5.6 of the Zoning Bylaw. Minimum parking spaces shall be as follows:
1 Parking space for each employee
1 Space for each company vehicle
1 Customer space for every 8 spaces devoted to sale or storage of cars
7.36 Additional Criteria for Home Based Trade
In residential districts: The Special Permit Granting Authority (hereinafter referred to
as the SPGA) may issue a Special Permit allowing a Home Based Trade operation (see
Section VIII - Definitions for Home Based Trade). The availability of this Special
Permit will be limited to those residential zone Home Based Trade operations
in existence in a residential district as of the date of the first publication of notice for
the public hearing to amend section 7.36 which is January 28, 2008. Issuance of the
Special Permit shall be subject to the general standards and conditions enumerated in
Section 7.2 of this bylaw and the following provisions:
a. This use will only be allowed in residential districts AA, A, B & C.
b. Any person wishing to obtain a Special Permit for this limited use must present
satisfactory documentation, as determined by the SPGA, which validates the
applicant’s ownership of and residence at the property and business existence and
operation in the residential district as of the date of the first public notice for the
public hearing for this section which is January 28, 2008. Documentation may
include, but is not limited to, paid excise tax bills on the business vehicles
validating existence at the residential site.
c. These specific uses will terminate upon the termination of the existing operation as
approved and permitted or upon the sale of the property to a non-family member.
Said business is not transferable to anyone other than an immediate family
member as defined in Section VIII of this by-law.
d. All eligible applications for Special Permit for this limited use must be filed with
the Planning Board office on or before December 31, 2008.
e. The Special Permit application shall include a site plan designating lot size,
existing structures, vehicle/parking footprint, storage area, vehicle access and
egress from the rear property and placement of required screening. Vehicle
reference throughout this section refers to Home Based Trade vehicles, unless
otherwise specified. All dimensional regulations (Table 3-2) for residential
districts remain in effect for residential parcels acquiring a Home Based Trade. All
vehicles and trailers are to be listed as to type and size, as well as any outside
storage of equipment and wheeled accessories (see Section VIII – Definitions for
trailer and wheeled accessory). All materials and chemicals as well as all
hazardous materials are to be listed and in compliance with the East
7-13
Longmeadow Zoning By-laws and the East Longmeadow Fire Department
regulations.
f. Outside storage of materials or equipment required by the Home Based Trade
shall not exceed 6% of the lot size, excluding wetland resource areas as defined
by the Wetland Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40). Said storage shall be
garaged or properly screened from sight of abutting properties and ways (as
determined by the SPGA) to the rear of the principal building. Storage containers
and trailer beds and/or trailer bodies shall not be permitted.
g. Not more than 20% of the habitable floor area within the principal building shall be
dedicated for the business use. Said area is to be designated on a site plan
approved by the SPGA and made a part of said Special Permit.
h. The number of employees’ vehicles allowed at the residential Home Based Trade
business location shall be limited to the number of trade vehicles permitted on the
site, as conditioned by the Special Permit.
i. No retail or wholesale activities shall be allowed on the premises.
j. No fabrication of subassemblies or manufacturing of any type shall be allowed
on the lot.
k. No signage (other than logos on company vehicles) shall be allowed.
l. Presence of the business shall not be apparent from the street.
m. The hours of operation shall be permitted from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday to get crews and material off site in the morning and return in the
evening, with all work being performed off site, with no operation on site on
Sunday. Emergencies and/or weather responses involving the health and welfare
of the citizens are exempt from the conditions of this section. Said emergencies
shall be determined by the SPGA.
n. Noise regulations enumerated in the East Longmeadow General By-Laws
Section 8.090 shall be applicable to any Special Permit issued under this section.
Vehicles with back-up signal alarms shall be placed so as not to activate during the
early morning or late night hours in the case of emergency and/or weather
responses.
o. Idling of vehicles shall not exceed the 5 minute maximum limit as regulated by
M.G.L. c. 90 §16A.
p. Vehicle and equipment repairs are limited to those that are related to the home
based trade and approved for the site as conditioned through the Special Permit.
All repairs are to be done only within a garage or accessory structure, not to
7-14
cause any disturbing noise or air pollution to the neighborhood. As required by
section 8.090 of the East Longmeadow General By-Laws, repairs shall take place
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday with no
activity on Sunday.
q. The number of trade vehicles and/or trailers shall be limited as follows:
Lot size Minimum Maximum Number of Vehicles/Trailers
Allowed
10,000 square feet One trade vehicle and one trailer
20,000 square feet Two trade vehicles and two trailers
30,000 square feet Three trade vehicles and three trailers
40,000 square feet Four trade vehicles and four trailers
60,000 square feet and above Five trade vehicles and five trailers
r. Size of trade vehicles shall be limited to six-wheels/2 axles maximum. The
maximum wheel base length shall be 210 inches and the maximum trailer bed
and/or body length shall not exceed 22 feet in length, nor exceed 13 feet 6 inches in
height, as regulated by the Department of Transportation. Ten (10) wheeled
vehicles, dry van/box trucks, or any tractor trailer vehicles are not permitted.
s. The vehicle footprint for trade vehicles and/or trailers is as follows: all vehicles
and/or trailers shall be located to the rear of the principal building and said location
shall adhere to the established setbacks of the principal building, as required for the
appropriate residential district in which the home based trade is located. In the case
of a corner lot, the side yard facing a public way shall adhere to the front-yard
setback. (See Section VIII Definitions for corner lot.)
t. All vehicles must be garaged and/or screened to the rear of the principal building.
No on-street parking, as it relates to Home Based Trade, shall be allowed. The
parking of employee vehicles is limited to the number of trade vehicles, exclusive
of trailers, approved for the site. When trade vehicles are in use, the trade vehicle
footprint may be occupied with employee vehicles. The footprint for employee
parking shall not exceed the footprint for trade vehicles, as approved through the
Special Permit and shown on the plan.
u. All vehicles, equipment and storage materials must be screened to prevent being
seen from street view and that of the abutting properties. All storage, which
includes vehicles and equipment, is to be properly screened to the rear of the
principal building. Screening is subject to existing features of the parcel and may
include plantings at 4-5 feet minimum, fence material, or some
combination. Should fencing be required, it must be installed at the time of the
Special Permit approval.
v. A pre-existing, legal and non-conforming use in existence prior to the East
Longmeadow Zoning By-law, 1962, is protected in that use and not subject to
7-15
Section 7.36. Any change in this use is subject to the conditions of Section 3.5 of the East
Longmeadow Zoning By-Law.
7.37 Additional Criteria for Massage Therapists Facility
Any person or entity seeking to open a new or to maintain an existing massage therapist
facility must:
a) Submit a floor plan for the premises or portions thereof to be used in connections with the
massage therapist facility.
b) Every massage therapist facility shall file with the Special Permit Application:
1. A copy of its state license as a massage therapy salon and the state massage therapist
license for each massage therapist employed at the facility.
2. Photo identification, either a driver’s license, or a state issued alternative for nondrivers,
for each massage therapist and any other employee, the current residential
address and telephone number of each massage therapist. This information shall be
updated annually in December. If a massage therapist or a non-therapist employee is
hired during the calendar year said information shall be filed with the Special Permit
Granting Authority before the therapist or employee begins work.
c) Violations of the provision of this section or performance of any criminal activity by
massage therapist or other employee while on the premises shall be sufficient cause to
revoke the special permit.
d) Every massage therapist facility currently operating in East Longmeadow shall apply for
and obtain a Special Permit for the facility by December 31, 2012.
e) Any new massage therapist facility before opening for business must obtain a Special
Permit under this section.
§7.38 Additional Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (RMD).
A. Any person or entity seeking to open a new or to maintain an existing RMD facility
must:
(1) Complete an application for Special Permit and submit it to the Planning Board
which is the Special Permit Granting Authority.
(2) The Special Permit for a RMD shall be limited to one or more of the following uses
that shall be prescribed by the Special Permit Granting Authority:
a. Cultivation of marijuana for medical use (horticulture)(Special Permit not
required for sites meeting agricultural exemption standards pursuant to Chapter
40A, §3);
b. Processing and packaging of marijuana for medical use, including
marijuana that is in the form of smoking materials, food products, oils, aerosols,
oi
7-16
ntments and other products;
c. Retail sale or distribution of marijuana for medical use to qualifying
patients; or,
d. Wholesale sales of marijuana for medical use to other RMDs in
Massachusetts.
(3) In addition to the application requirements set forth in this by-law, a Special Permit
for a RMD shall include the following:
a. The name and address of each owner of the facility;
b. Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the facility;
c. Evidence of the applicant’s right to use the site or structure such as a deed
or lease;
d. If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath disclosing
all of its owners shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers or
other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the
above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must disclose the identity of the
owners of such entities until the disclosure contains the names of individuals;
e. Proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting, fencing, gates
and alarms, etc. to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from
theft; and,
f. A full site plan showing all the requirements listed in section §7.4.
(4) Mandatory Findings: The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not issue a
Special Permit for a RMD unless it finds that:
a. The facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impact
on abutters and other parties in interest (as defined in Chapter 40A, §11);
b. The facility is fully permitted by all applicable agencies within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and is in compliance with all applicable state
laws and regulations;
c. The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of Section
6.03 of this By-law; and,
d. The applicant has satisfied all of the Special Permit requirements as
outlined in §7.2.
7-17
(5) Annual Reporting: Each RMD permitted under this by-law shall, as a condition of
its Special Permit, file an annual report to and appear before the Special Permit
Granting Authority no later than January 1st of each year providing a copy of all
current applicable state licenses for the facility and/or its owners.
(6) A Special Permit granted under this section shall have a term limited to the
duration of the applicant’s ownership of the premises as a RMD.
(7) Any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a Special Permit
issued under this section.
B. Waiver
a. The Special Permit Granting Authority, when granting a Special Permit
under this section may waive setback requirements, provided the applicant submits
its request in writing and can demonstrate the proposed site will not have an
adverse effect upon the surrounding neighborhood. The Special Permit Granting
Authority reserves the authority to require the applicant to produce necessary
documentation to support its position. Further a waiver of setback requirements
shall require both the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members of the
Special Permit Granting Authority and shall require a separate vote apart from the
main vote on the proposed site.
C. Abandonment or Discontinuance of Use
a. A Special Permit granted under this section shall lapse if not exercised
within one year of issuance.
b. A RMD shall be required to remove all materials, plants, equipment and
other paraphernalia;
i. Prior to surrendering its state issued licenses or permits; and,
ii. Within six months of ceasing operations.
§7.39 Additional Criteria for Retail Sales in Industrial Garden District
a. Retail sales as a primary use are prohibited in the Industrial Garden District.
b. Inside incidental sales shall be allowed provided that they are related to the
merchandise manufactured and that they are ancillary and secondary to the primary use
and meet the following specifications:
(1) The allowed items are to be sold at a counter only. No one from the public is
allowed in the main part of the building.
(2) No more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of a business establishment
shall be utilized for retail sales activities. In no event shall the area of the
retails exceed 1,000 square feet.
7-18
(3) In the event a building is occupied by two or more business establishments, not
more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the individual business
establishment shall be devoted to retail sales. In no event shall the area of the
retails exceed 1,000 square feet.
(4) An interior floor plan to scale must be submitted with the Special Permit
application with the area to be devoted to sales clearly defined.
(5) A list of retail items to be sold shall be provided to and approved by the
Planning Board along with the Special Permit application.
7.40 All Districts, Non-Conforming Structures or Uses:
A Special Permit for non-conforming uses is required as set forth under Section 3.5 of the
Zoning Bylaw.
7.41 Flood Plain District
In the Flood Plain District a Special permit is required for any construction development
or grading of any nature or description within the Flood Plain as set forth under Section
IV of the Zoning Bylaw.
7.42 Scientific Research and/or Development
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, accessory
to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with
scientific research or scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon the
issuance of a special permit provided the SPGA finds that the proposed accessory use does
not substantially derogate from the public good.
7.4 SITE PLAN REVIEW
7.40 Purpose
This section is enacted under the authority of Chapter 40A of the General Laws to accomplish
the purposes set forth in Section 1 of the Bylaw. In considering a Site Plan, the Planning
Board shall assure that all structures and uses other than a single-family dwelling are
developed in a manner which considers community needs, including protection of abutting
properties and visual amenities, convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and in relation to adjacent areas, adequacy of methods of disposal
for wastes and surface water drainage and protection of environmental features on the site and
in adjacent area.
7-19
7.4.0 Design Review
7.4.1 Purpose
It is the intent of this section to provide design criteria and recommendations for external
development and/or modification of all non-residential development projects in an effort to
maintain and enhance the character of the Town. The goal is to enhance the natural and
aesthetic qualities of the Town; to preserve the value of land and buildings and to protect and
preserve the cultural aspects and heritage of the Town. In addition, specific purposes of
design review are intended to:
? Maintain and enhance existing buildings which have historical and architectural
significance.
? Protect existing historical buildings from deterioration and demolition.
? Foster new development that is aesthetically compatible with existing buildings
and infrastructure.
? Encourage and assist building owners to restore and rehabilitate existing buildings.
? Encourage originality and creativity in the design and remodeling of existing
buildings.
? Maintain and enhance the appearance and size of signage, new and existing.
All submitted plans are subject to the requirements of the East Longmeadow Zoning
By-laws.
7.4.2 Design Review Committee
The Design Review committee is established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
40A of the Massachusetts General Laws. The Design Review committee shall be appointed
by the Planning Board, to serve for a period of three (3) years, with member rotation every
three years after the initial two year period, and consist of five (5) members with the
following credentials, if possible:
? Planning Board Administrator (to serve as committee chair);
? One person qualified by training and experience in architecture or landscape design;
? One person owning and/or operating a business located in East Longmeadow
governed by this by-law;
? One “at-large” resident of the Town; and,
? One member of the Board of Directors of the East Longmeadow Chamber of
Commerce.
The Planning Board may also appoint up to two (2) voting alternate members, at least one (1)of
7-20
whom shall be a business owner representing the business district. In the event that a quorum
is not obtained, a member of the Planning Board may participate as a voting member.
The Design Review committee shall review applications for all actions that are subject to the
provisions of this section and shall make recommendation to the Planning Board, prior to the
public hearing for site plan review, as to the conformance with the design standards established
within this section. The Planning Board shall retain overall responsibility and authority for
design review approval.
7.4.3 Applicability and Reviewable Actions
Design review shall apply to all non-residential proposals to construct new, or change,
alter, modify, remodel, move or demolish any and all existing structures or signs, excluding
interior modifications. The Industrial Garden Park District is exempt from this review.
For external enlargements of less than two thousand square feet (2,000 sq. ft.), the Planning
Board may request a determination from the Design Review committee prior to waiving any or
all of the Site Plan Review requirements.
7.4.4 Initiating Design Review
The Planning Board Administrator shall meet with the owner and/or representative of the
project to discuss the project, the Design Review process and the items needed for Design
Review, prior to the submittal of an application. Depending on the complexity of the proposed
project, it may be necessary to submit the following:
1. Color photographs showing buildings and site conditions adjacent to the proposed project.
2. Building elevations at 1/8 ” =1’ scale showing configuration, details and adjacent
site/building conditions. All elevations are to be titled and dated. Eight (8) copies are to be
provided.
3. Samples of finish materials
4. Study model of the proposed project (three dimensional for major projects only as
requested by the Design Review committee).
5. Site line study indicating concealment of rooftop mechanical equipment from the street, if
applicable.
6. Site Development plan and architectural drawings specifying:
a. The building footprint and dimensions, including all points of access and egress;
b. Plans of interior spaces where applicable in order to determine dual
formulas for parking requirements when affected by use;
c. Architectural rendering specifying exterior elevations showing finish materials,
windows, doors, light fixtures, stairways, balconies, decks and architectural
details. The elevations shall be provided for all affected exterior surfaces;
d. Exterior lighting on the proposed building including the location, size;
7-21
e. Method of illumination of all exterior signs;
f. Location of areas to be landscaped; and,
g. Location of garbage disposal area and utility appurtenances, if visible.
The Design Review committee shall review the proposed plan according to the criteria
established herein. The committee shall complete its review within twenty-one (21) days of the
date of receipt of a completed application and shall make its recommendation within fourteen
(14) days thereafter. Should the Design Review committee not provide comments within thirty
five (35) days, the Planning Board shall assume responsibility for design review determination.
The committee’s recommendations shall be in writing and state the reasons relied upon in
reaching its decision.
7.4.5 Design Standards:
The Design Review Committee shall review the project for conformance with the
following Design Review Standards:
a. Any proposed landscape development or alteration should be compatible with the
character and appearance of the surrounding area and the proposed project. Landscape and
streetscape elements should provide continuity and definition to the street, pedestrian
areas and surrounding landscape.
b. The design should give attention to the placement of storage, waste or mechanical
equipment so as to screen it from view.
c. The proposed materials and colors must be compatible with the character of the Town
and the intent of the design standards.
d. Where feasible, fire escapes, window mounted air conditioners or other mechanical
features should not be located on facades which front major streets, or face residential
districts.
e. Architectural details including additions, signage, awnings, lighting, pedestrian furniture,
planting and paving, shall be compatible with the architecture of the principal building
and site landscaping with regards to scale, materials, color, and texture.
f. Buildings and structures shall be designed and arranged so as to relate to open space
in a manner compatible with adjacent lots.
g. Relation of buildings to the environment
New development shall be compatible with existing natural and developed environment within
the surrounding visual area. New buildings, additions or alterations shall be related to their
surroundings with respect to:
(1) Street façade
All buildings should present high quality and architecturally related front facades
to streets.
7-22
(2) Buildings on corner lots
If one street is more heavily used, then the façade of a new or renovated building
facing that street may be more highly articulated and/or detailed than the façade
which faces the side street.
(3) Renovations to historic buildings
Historic buildings should be renovated so as to retain historic features with
original storefront elements and façade detailing.
(4) Roof Slopes
Heights of new buildings erected on sites without an existing building
shall approximate those of adjacent buildings where feasible. Diverse roof heights
are encouraged, however, should be complimentary to the surrounding developed
environment.
7.41 Projects Requiring Site Plan Review
Notwithstanding anything contained in the by-law to the contrary, no building permit for the
construction, exterior alteration, or relocation, occupancy or change in use of any building,
structure or premises shall be issued, nor shall an occupancy certificate for any new occupant,
or any change of use of a building, structure, or premise be issued, without Site Plan Review
and approval by the Planning Board; provided however, that a single family dwelling
not within a residential development shall be exempt from these provisions. It is the
intent of this section that no individual, corporation or any business entity, regardless of the
form chosen, shall occupy any building structure or premises or change the use thereof or the
construction or alteration to the exterior of any structure without first complying with the
provisions of Site Plan Review.
For the purposes of this Section of the Bylaw, a Residential Development is any residential
use of land made possible by the provision of adequate frontage through the subdivision of
land. No permit for the construction of a single-family dwelling located within a Residential
Development shall be granted until the Planning Board has reviewed and approved a Site
Plan for the Residential Development as required by this Section. A Residential
Development shall be considered to be a single project for the purposes of Site Plan Review.
Further, if the Planning Board determines that there is no substantive change in use and the
proposed use is less detrimental than its present or immediate prior use and that the external
enlargement, if applicable, is less than 2,000 (two thousand) square feet, the Board may
waive any or all of the requirements of Site Plan Review.
7.42 Content of Site Plan
A site plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and/or a Registered Land
Surveyor at a scale of 1" = 20' or such scale as may be approved by the Planning Board on
standard 24" x 36" sheets and continuation on 8 1/2" x 11" sheets as necessary for narrative.
7-23
The site plan shall include:
7.420 Name of the project, locus, boundaries, date and scale of the plan.
7.421 Name and address of the record owner, developer, and seal of the engineer or surveyor.
7.422 Name and addresses of all record owners within three hundred (300) feet of the
property lines.
7.423 All existing lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, size in acres or square feet, abutting
land uses and location and use of structures within three hundred (300) feet of the
site.
7.424 The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the site
plan, including dimensions and height, and showing exterior entrances, exits and all
anticipated future additions or alterations, and a rendering of buildings to be constructed.
The requirements of this Section do not apply to residential developments.
7.425 Location of all present and proposed public and private ways, parking areas, driveways,
sidewalks, ramps, curbs, fences, buffers for screening purposes, paths, landscaping,
lighting fixtures, planting areas, walls, signs, service areas, refuse and other waste
disposal containers.
7.426 Location of all present and proposed utility systems including sewage or septic systems,
water supply system, existing and proposed surface and subsurface drainage systems,
telephone, cable and electric lines. Storm drainage system will include existing and
proposed drain lines, culverts, drainage swells, catch basins, headwalls, end walls,
hydrants, manholes, channels, and sub-drainage along with soil logs, percolation tests
when necessary, and drainage calculations.
The applicant shall submit plans to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater,
erosion of soil, excessive run-off of precipitation, excessive raising or lowering of the
water table and flooding of other properties.
7.427 Existing and proposed topography at a two (2) foot contour level. Sufficient information to
indicate areas in the site and within 50 feet of the site where gravel removal or filling is
proposed and the approximate volume in cubic yards. All elevations shall refer to the
nearest United States Coastal and Geodetic Bench Mark.
7.428 A landscape plan showing all existing natural land features, forest coverage and water
sources, and all proposed changes to these features. Water sources will include ponds,
lakes, brooks, streams, wetlands, floodplains and drainage retention areas.
7.429 Zoning District boundaries within five hundred (500) feet of the site's perimeter shall be
drawn and identified on the plan. Floodplain boundaries and the square feet within this
district shall be shown.
7.430 Existing and proposed business signs and traffic signs located on the site and within one
hundred feet of the site, and the size, dimension, height, color and illumination of all signs.
7-24
7.431 A traffic study to include:
a. Traffic flow patterns within the site, egresses and entrances, loading and unloading
areas, and curb cuts on site and within one hundred feet of the site.
b. Traffic impact - the projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or depart
from the site shall be estimated for daily hour and peak hour traffic levels.
c. A projected traffic flow pattern for both vehicular and pedestrian access shall be
described and related to the site plan, including vehicular movements at all major
intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site.
d. The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and private ways in
relation to road capacities. Existing and proposed daily hour and peak hour
traffic levels will be given and road capacity levels.
e. As a result of subparagraph items a-d above, the Planning Board may request a
plan to implement the improvements needed to provide for the free flow of
traffic in areas surrounding the site and identified by the Planning Board as
impacted by the proposed uses.
7.432 A plan for the control of erosion, dust and silt, both during and after
construction. Such plan shall include all existing and proposed slopes,
construction sequencing, temporary and permanent erosion control, and
protection of water bodies.
7.433 For alterations to any existing or new business/commercial/industrial uses a table
containing the following information:
a. Maximum area of building to be used for selling, offices, business,
industrial or other uses.
b. Maximum number of employees where applicable.
c. Maximum seating capacity where applicable.
d. Number of parking spaces existing or required for the intended use, based on
Section 5.6 of the Bylaw.
The Planning Board shall have the right to waive any of the above items under unique site
conditions or request any additional data it should need to render its decision. A majority
vote of the Planning Board would be required to waive any of the site plan items.
7.44 Procedure
7.440 An applicant for Site Plan Review under this section shall file with the Planning
Board at a regularly scheduled meeting seven (7) copies each of an application and
site plan. A copy of the application shall be given to the Town Clerk by the
applicant.
7-25
7.441 The Planning Board shall transmit to the Town Engineer, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health and Building Inspector or other boards as deemed
necessary copies of the application and site plan. The boards shall have up to fortyfive
(45) days to make recommendations to the Planning Board.
7.442 The applicant shall submit a filling fee to cover any expenses connected with the
public hearing and review of the plan.
7.443 Any person proposing a Residential Development may, at such person's election,
combine the process of the Site Plan Review under this Section of the Bylaw with
any review by the Planning Board required under the Subdivision Control Law. The
Applicant shall make such request in writing upon the submission of a proposed
Definitive Plan of subdivision to the Planning Board. Such written request shall
include a request to extend the Definitive Plan review process for an additional
ninety-five (95) days. Upon such request, the Planning Board shall, for the purposes
of review, treat the Residential Development and the Definitive Plan of subdivision
as a unified submission under the Site Plan Review Bylaw and the Subdivision
Control Law. The Planning Board shall hold a hearing for such submission pursuant
to Section 7.45 (Administration) of this Bylaw.
Persons proposing a Residential Development who do not elect to make a unified
submission must satisfy individually this Section's requirements and the
requirements under the Subdivision Control Law.
7.45 Administration
7.450 The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days of receipt
of an application and shall take final action within ninety (90) days from the time of
hearing, as provided in M.G.L., Chapter 40A, Sections 9 and 11, and in
Section 7.2 of this Bylaw relating to special permit procedures. Such final
action shall consist of either (1) a finding that the proposed project will constitute a
suitable development and will not result in detriment to the neighborhood or the
environment; or (2) a written denial of the application stating the reasons for such
denial. Approval may be made subject to conditions, modifications and restrictions
as the Planning Board may deem necessary; and any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or addition shall be carried out only in conformity with such conditions,
modifications or restrictions and in conformity with the application and site plan. A
denied applicant may resubmit his application to comply with the requirements of
this Site Plan Review Bylaw and resubmit the plan for review. In no event may the
Planning Board deny an application that meets all the standards set forth in this
Section of the Bylaw.
7.451 The Planning Board may require the posting of a security to assure compliance
with the plan and conditions and may suspend any permit or license when work
is not performed as required.
7.452 The Planning Board may, after a public hearing, adopt and periodically amend
or add rules and regulations relating to the procedures and administration of this
7-26
section and shall file a copy of said rules with the Town Clerk.
7.46 Standards for Review
In reviewing site plans, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
7.460 Protection of the abutting properties and community to minimize any
detrimental use of the site.
7.461 Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and the
relationship to adjoining ways and properties.
7.462 Adequacy of the methods of disposal of sewage and refuse and the drainage of
surface and subsurface water.
7.463 Adequate means of protecting wetlands, watersheds, aquifers, and well areas.
7.464 Provisions for off-street loading and unloading of vehicles incidental to the normal
operation of the establishment, parking, lighting and internal traffic control.
7.465 Provision of open space consistent with Town Master Plan Concepts.
7.466 Protection of agricultural land with the proposed development and
minimization and development impact on abutting agricultural land.
7.467 The layout of design features, such as vegetative buffers, within
developments which will integrate into the existing landscape.
7.468 Consistency of the proposed development with the Town Master Plan
Concepts.
7.469 Compliance with the provision of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A and
41A, the rules and regulations of state and federal agencies and the Bylaw of the
Town of East Longmeadow.
7.47 Sewer and Water Capacity
Each development proposal shall demonstrate that it will not adversely affect the existing
loads on the public water and public sewer systems of the Town. The Board of Public
Works or the Board of Public Works agent shall serve to determine what is the existing load
on the public water and public sewer systems of the Town. In the event that the Applicant is
unable to demonstrate that there will be no adverse effect or if the Board should find there
will be an adverse impact, the Board may require the Applicant to redesign the development
proposal to minimize such impact and may require the Applicant to proceed with
development in phases as specified by the Board. The Board may specifically require a
development density less than that otherwise permitted under this Bylaw. In the alternative,
the Applicant may offer to fund any required capital improvements deemed necessary by the
Board to handle the increased water and sewer demands of the proposed development and
the Board may require bonding in an amount sufficient to provide adequate security to the
7-27
Town for the completion of said capital improvements. Any such capital improvements will
be subject to the approval and continuing review of the Board of Public Works.
7.5 Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Installations
7.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the creation of new ground-mounted photovoltaic
installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation,
monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety,
minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate
financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
The provisions set forth in this section shall specifically apply to the location, removal and
modifications of all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations. In the event that conflicts
may appear in other sections of the zoning by-laws for the Town of East Longmeadow,
the criteria set forth in this Section 7.5 take precedence.
7.5.2 Applicability
This section applies to all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to physical
modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or
related equipment. All development projects for Photovoltaic Arrays will be subject to
Site Plan Review to determine conformance with the specific criteria set forth herein.
Projects cannot be prohibited, but can be reasonably regulated by the Planning Board for
the purpose of zoning conformity and the health and safety of the public.
7.5.3 Definitions
As-of-Right Siting: As-of-Right Siting shall mean that ground mounted photovoltaic
installations may proceed without the need for a Special Permit or Variance in the areas so
designated by Table 3-1 of the Schedule of Use Regulations.
Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Installation: A photovoltaic system that is
structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted.
On-Site Photovoltaic Installation: A photovoltaic installation that is constructed at a
location where other uses of the underlying property occur.
Photovoltaic (PV) is a method of generating electrical power by converting solar
radiation into direct current electricity using semiconductors that exhibit the photovoltaic
effect. Photovoltaic power generation employs solar panels composed of a number of solar
cells containing a photovoltaic material. Materials presently used for photovoltaics include
mono-crystalline silicon, polycrystalline silicon, amorphous silicon, cadmium telluride,
and copper indium gallium selenite/sulfide.
Site Plan Approval Authority: The Planning Board.
7-28
Photovoltaic Array: see Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Installations
Zoning Enforcement Authority: The Building Commissioner is charged with enforcing
all zoning bylaws of East Longmeadow.
7.5.4 General Requirements for all Power Generation Installations
The following requirements relate to all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations:
7.5.5 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all ground mounted photovoltaic installations shall
be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not
limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications
requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a photovoltaic installation
shall be constructed in accordance with the specific criteria set forth herein .
7.5.6 Building Permit and Building Inspection
No ground mounted photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or
modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit, after
approval of the Planning Board.
7.5.7 Fees
The application for a Site Plan Review for a ground mounted solar photovoltaic
installation must be accompanied by the fee required for said Site Plan Review.
7.5.8 Site Plan Review and Approval
All ground-mounted photovoltaic installations shall undergo Site Plan Review and
approval by the Planning Board, as specially stated in the Zoning By-laws, prior to
construction, installation or modification as provided in this section.
7.5.9 Plans and Maps
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Registered Professional
Engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
Required Documents
Pursuant to the site plan review process as set forth in section 7.4 of the Zoning Bylaws,
the project proponent shall provide the following documents:
(a) A site plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and/or a
Registered Land Surveyor at a scale of 1” = 20’ or such scale as may be approved
by the Planning Board on a standard 24” x 36” sheets and continuation on 8 ½” x
11” sheets necessary for narrative. The site plan shall include:
7-29
1. Name and address of project, locus, boundaries, date and scale of plan;
2. Name and address of the record owner, developer, and seal of the
engineer or surveyor;
3. Names and addresses of all record owners within three hundred (300)
feet of property lines;
4. All existing lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, size in acres or square
feet, abutting land uses and location and use of structures within three
hundred (300) feet of the site;
5. Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project site;
6. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation
clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or
structures;
7. Location and details of all security measures for the site;
8. Location of all existing and proposed roads, both public and private on
the site;
9. Location of existing structures on the site;
10. Location of the ground mounted photovoltaic installation, type of
mounting devices, access roads, lighting, ground equipment, fencing,
electrical infrastructure, and associated equipment;
11. Plans for accessory buildings or other structures, and location and
details of all planned security measures;
12. All existing overhead utility lines, if applicable;
13. Blueprints or drawings of the photovoltaic installation signed by a
Registered Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the
system and any potential shading from nearby structures;
14. One or three line electrical diagrams detailing the photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection
methods, with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and
overcurrent devices;
15. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including
the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
16. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
17. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as
well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any; and,
18. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing
the project proponent.
Documentation establishing legal access and control of the project site. The
project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective
ownership, access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for
construction and operation of the proposed photovoltaic installation to the
Planning Board and the Building Commissioner.
(b) Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent shall submit a plan to
the Planning Board for the operation and maintenance of the ground-mounted
photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe
7-30
access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
(c) Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project site
(submission of a copy of a zoning map with the parcel(s) identified is suitable for
this purpose).
(d) Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 7.5.19.3.
The Planning Board may hire, at the expense of the applicant, consultants to review the
plans submitted if it determines independent expert review is appropriate for the
interest of the neighborhood and/or the community. In such event, the Planning Board
shall select an expert to perform the review. The applicant shall pay the estimated cost
of said expert to the Town Treasurer prior to any review being undertaken. No site
plan shall be approved until the total cost of said review has been paid by the applicant.
The Planning Board may waive the submittal of various required documents for cause
established in the site plan review record and its written finding that the documents are
not necessary for the Board to perform the review set forth herein.
7.5.10 Utility Notification
No ground–mounted photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until written
evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates
the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the
photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator.
7.5.11 Area, Dimension and Density Requirements
Area:
A minimum of two (2) acres is required for any ground-mounted photovoltaic installation.
Setbacks:
For all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as
follows for the Industrial Garden Park District:
(a) Front yard: The front yard shall have a depth that is consistent with the existing
requirements of this district, that being 75 feet.
(b) Side yard: Each side yard shall have a depth that is consistent with the existing
requirements of this District, that being 40 feet, unless said site abuts a Residential
District or a Residence. Where such a lot abuts a Residential District or a
Residence, the side yard shall not be less than 50 feet. (See also section 7.5.13
Buffer Strips)
(c) Rear yard: Each rear yard shall have a depth that is consistent with the existing
requirements of this District which is 50 feet. Where such a lot abuts a Residential
7-31
District or a Residence, the rear yard shall not be less than 50 feet (See also Section
7.5.13 Buffer Strips).
For all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as
follows for the Industrial District:
(a) Front yard: The front yard shall have a depth of at least 35 feet.
(b) Side yard: Each side yard shall have a depth that is consistent with the existing
requirements of this District, that being 12 feet, unless said site abuts a Residential
District or a Residence. Where such a lot abuts a Residential District or a
Residence, the side yard shall not be less than 50 feet. (See also Section 7.5.13
Buffer Strips)
(c) Rear yard. Each rear yard shall have a depth that is consistent with the existing
requirements of this District which is 25 feet, unless said site abuts a Residential
District or a Residence. Where such a lot abuts a Residential District or a
Residence, the rear yard shall not be less than 50 feet. (See also Section 7.5.13
Buffer Strips)
(d) If a photovoltaic installation is constructed on a parcel that contains any type of
building, the beginning of the array must be at least fifty (50) feet behind the
existing building to allow safe access to said array.
Lot Coverage
Lot coverage shall be the same as allowed in the District in which it is to be located.
7.5.12 Buffer Strips
For all ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations abutting a Residential District or a
Residence, the fifty (50) foot setback for either side or rear yards shall consist of twenty-five
(25) feet of a landscaped buffer. Said buffer is to consist of plantings a minimum of six (6)
feet in height at planting and staggered so as to fill that twenty-five (25) foot buffer area and
keep the arrays from view year round.
7-32
Height
The height must be measured by the elevation of the landscape and no mounds will be
allowed to change that elevation other than those allowed for the planting of trees in the
buffer strip.
For all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations abutting a Residential District or a
Residence, the height will be limited to fifteen (15) feet.
For all other ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, the height will be limited to
twenty-five (25) feet.
7.5.13 Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to ground-mounted photovoltaic installations shall be subject
to the accessory regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area,
setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements for the District in
which it is to be located. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to,
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other. Structures should be shaded from view by
vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts and meet the zoning
setback requirements of the specific district in which said structure is to be located.
All appurtenant structures are to be located within the setback requirements of the district
in which the project is proposed.
7.5.14 Design and Performance Standards
7.5.14.1 Lighting
Lighting of photovoltaic installations shall comply with applicable laws. Lighting
of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to
that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be shielded from
abutting properties. Lighting of the photovoltaic installation shall be directed
downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution and
shall not shine on abutting property. Any lighting on the site will require submittal
of a lighting plan and written approval from the Planning Board with the
recommendations from the Fire and Police Departments.
7.5.14.2 Signage
Signs on all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations shall identify the owner
and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. Said signage shall not
exceed six (6) square feet and shall be visible at all times.
Photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
identification of the operator or responsible person of the solar photovoltaic
installation.
7-33
7.5.14.3 Utility Connections
All utility connections from the photovoltaic installations shall be placed
underground. However, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and
topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider, the applicant
may seek relief from this requirement from the Planning Board. Electrical
transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the
utility provider, however, placement on the site must be approved as part of its
existing standard procedures.
7.5.14.4 Roads
Access roads shall be constructed to minimize grading, removal of stone
walls or street trees and minimize impacts to environmental or historic resources.
7.5.18.5 Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials stored, used, or generated on site shall not exceed the amount
for a Very Small Quantity Generator of Hazardous Waste as defined by the DEP
pursuant to MassDEP regulations 310 CMR 30.000 or any amendment or
replacement and shall meet all requirements of the DEP including storage of
hazardous materials in a building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent to
any floor drains to prevent discharge to the outdoor environment. If hazardous
materials are utilized within the solar electric equipment then impervious
containment areas capable of controlling any release to the environment and to
prevent potential contamination of groundwater are required. A full inspection
report establishing compliance prepared by the Fire Department will be required
before the site plan can be approved.
7.5.18.6 Noise
Sound or noise levels may not exceed 50 DBA, at the boundary of the property.
7.5.15 Safety and Environmental Standards
7.5.15.1 Emergency Services
The photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project
summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the East Longmeadow Fire Chief.
Upon request from the East Longmeadow Fire Chief, the owner or operator shall
cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan
and provide a copy to the Fire Department. All means of shutting down the
photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall
identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the
installation.
7-34
7.5.15.2 Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the ground-mounted photovoltaic
installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws,
including any requirements of the Conservation Commission.
7.5.15.3 Fencing
A chain link fence no more than one-quarter solid shall be installed around the
installation at the setback line with a gate that is locked at all times, which lock is to be
approved by the Fire Department. The Fire and Police Departments shall have 24 hour
access to the site.
7.5.16 Monitoring and Maintenance
7.5.16.1 Photovoltaic Installation Conditions
The ground-mounted photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be
maintained as required by the Zoning By-law and applicable laws. The owner or
operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the photovoltaic
installation, any access road(s) and ground maintenance.
7.5.18.2 Modifications
No building permit for modifications to a ground-mounted photovoltaic installation
shall be issued after the issuance of the initial building permit unless an amended
site plan for said modification has been approved by the Planning Board.
7.5.16.2 Annual Reporting
The owner or operator of the installation shall submit an Annual Report which
certifies compliance with the requirements of this bylaw and their approved
site plan including control of vegetation, noise standards, and adequacy of
road access. The annual report shall also provide information on the
maintenance completed during the course of the year and the amount of
electricity generated by the facility. The report shall be submitted to the Planning
Board, Fire Chief, Emergency Management Director, Building Commissioner and
Conservation Commission (if Wetlands Permit was issued) no later than 45 days
after the end of the calendar year. Failure to provide such an annual report will
result in a fine of $100 per day until said report is received.
7-35
7.5.17 Abandonment or Decommissioning
7.5.17.1 Removal Requirements
Any ground-mounted photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its
useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 7.5.19.2 of this bylaw
shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation
no more than ninety (90) days after the date of discontinued operations or
determination of the Building Commissioner that the installation is not being
actively used for meaningful photovoltaic generation. The owner or operator shall
notify the Building Commissioner with a copy to the Planning Board by certified
mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
(a) Physical removal of all ground-mounted photovoltaic installations, structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(b) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
(c) Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Building Commissioner may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping
or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
7.5.17.2 Abandonment
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of
extenuating circumstances, the photovoltaic installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than six months without the written
consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the ground-mounted
photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within ninety (90) days of abandonment or the
proposed date of decommissioning, the town may seek an order from an
appropriate court to enter the property and physically remove the installation, at a
cost to the owner or operator of the installation and use the bond money being held
and/or place a municipal charges lien on the property for the costs of removal site
restoration and all other related costs, including attorney fees if not covered by the
cash bond being held by the town.
7.5.17.3 Financial Surety
Prior to any construction, petitioners of all ground-mounted photovoltaic projects
shall provide surety in a cash bond, to cover the cost of removal in the event the
town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount
determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event to exceed more
than 125 percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional
requirements set forth herein, as agreed upon by the project proponent and the
Planning Board or its agents. Such surety will not be required for municipally-or
state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate
7-36
of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer, which
estimate must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or its agent. The
amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to
inflation.
7.6 AMENDMENT
This Bylaw, and all the maps incorporated in it, may be amended as provided in Chapter
40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
7.7 VALIDITY
The invalidity or deletion of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision thereof.
7.8 PREVIOUS BYLAWS
Any existing Bylaws or any parts thereof inconsistent with this Bylaw are hereby repealed.
7.9 PREVIOUS PERMITS
Nothing in this Bylaw shall require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of
any structure on land for which a Special Permit is in effect at the time of adoption of this
bylaw, or on which a building permit has been issued; subject, however, to any expiration
term of such a Special Permit or to Chapter 40A, Section 5, of the General Laws. The Special
Permit Granting Authority may require any such Special Permit to conform with some or all
requirements of this Bylaw, if it is reviewed, amended, modified or transferred.
7-37
SECTION VIII - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Bylaw, the following words shall have the meanings given hereinafter.
Where appropriate, the plural shall include the singular, the words "used" or "occupied" include the
words "designed", "arranged", "intended", or "lot", "land" or "premises" shall be construed as
though followed by the words "or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory. Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Subdivision
Control Law shall have the meanings given therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
Words not defined in either place shall have the meaning given in Merriam Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
Definitions are provided strictly for clarification and are not to be interpreted as permissible
or allowed unless stated in the table of uses within this Zoning Bylaw.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A structure detached from a primary building on the
same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary building or use. An accessory
building or structure cannot exist without a primary building on a lot.
ACCESSORY USE: The use of a building or land or portion thereof for a purpose customarily
incidental and subordinate to the main or principal use permitted in the district. An accessory use
cannot exist without the existence of a principal use.
ADDITION: A structure added to the original structure or building at some time after the
completion of the original and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
AGRICULTURE: The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of plants
and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed
crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats or any mutations or hybrids hereof, including
the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals, trees
and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables, nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program.
ALTERATION: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors
or windows or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or
vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
APPROVED FRONTAGE: Frontage which meets the criteria of the Planning Board for access.
AREA and/or FACILITY FOR SPORTING ACTIVITY: An area that is designed to offer athletic
type events to be viewed by a significant number of spectators, with said spectators either seated or
standing, including but not limited to professional/commercial sports stadium and/or arena, a
professional/commercial ice hockey rink and/or ballpark or a hippodrome. Town sports are
addressed under school, park and recreation and do not apply to this section.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to
a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone
A, AO, AH, Al-30, AE, A99, V1-30, VE, or V.
8-1
ASSISTED LIVING: A special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized
assistance and healthcare designed to respond to individual needs of those who need help with one
or more of the five activities of daily living (eating, dressing, bathing, toileting, mobility).
Supportive services are available 24 hours a day to meet scheduled and unscheduled needs in a way
that promotes maximum dignity and independence for each resident.
ATTACHED: Connected to or united.
ATTIC: That part of a building or structure which is immediately below and wholly or partly within
the roof framing.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR STATION: An establishment in which or upon which a business service
or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or
rendered.
BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BED and BREAKFAST: see Lodging, short term
BOARDING HOME FOR THE AGED: Any institution, however named, which is advertised,
announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose of providing care incident to old age to
three or more persons over sixty years of age, who are not acutely ill or generally in need of medical
or nursing care.
BOARDING STABLE: A structure designed for the feeding, housing and exercising of horses not
owned by the owner of the premises.
BUFFER AREA: A strip or strips of land densely planted (or having equal natural growth as
approved by the Planning Board), with shrubs and/or trees at least four feet high at time of planting,
of a type that will form year-round dense screening. Such area must be without buildings,
structures, parking or other accessory uses, except that a public road right-of- way may pass through
a buffer as close to 90° as possible and that any fencing
for the purposes noise abatement, security and/or grading, as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of
any kind or nature. For the purpose of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar
covering whether or not permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed, where the
context required as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof". A porch is to be
considered as part of a building when considered setbacks.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of
the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. Porches and decks are excluded
from these calculations in single-family structures.
BUSINESS: The transacting or carrying on of a trade or commercial enterprise, not manufacturing,
with a view to profit, or for livelihood.
8-2
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT: An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by
service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready- to-eat foods
intended primarily to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor
vehicles on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged.
CEMETERY: A place or area of land, set apart for the burial of the dead, operated, managed and
controlled under the provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 114, or a burial place
under the care and supervision of the Town, or other public authority.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Centers operating on a regular basis that serve more than six children
under seven years of age or sixteen if the children have special needs, or school- age children (under
fourteen years of age or sixteen if the children have special needs) in programs with supervised
group care that are held before or after school hours or during vacation.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA means the area subject to high velocity waters, including but
not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V, V1-
30, VE.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE: See definition for Farm Business, Commercial Greenhouse and
Farm Stand.
COMMERCIAL USE: Activity carried out for pecuniary gain.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural
activities, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.
CONGREGATE ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED HOUSING: A building or buildings arranged
or used for the residence of persons aged sixty-two (62) or older or for handicapped persons, as
defined in Chapter 121B of the Mass. General Laws with some shared facilities and services. The
services may include meals, housekeeping and personal care assistance.
CONSERVATION LAND: The careful preservation and protection of land in a natural condition
owned and/or maintained by the Federal government, Commonwealth, the Town or a nonprofit
organization.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: A structure or structures containing
independent living units, health care facilities, and/or other related services and amenities provided
to three or more elderly persons.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A convalescent or nursing home is defined as any
institution, however named, whether conducted for charity or profit, which is advertised, announced
or maintained for the express or implied purpose of caring for three or more persons admitted
thereto for the purpose of nursing or convalescent care.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A small retail establishment no greater than 2,500 square feet in floor
area that sells principally convenience goods, including but not limited to food, drugs and
proprietary goods and is usually open 15 to 24 hours a day.
CORNER LOT: A lot bounded on two (2) or more sides by streets. In any corner lot, the street line
setback must be maintained from all street lines forming boundaries of a lot.
8-3
CREMATORY: A building containing a furnace designed and intended to be used for cremating the
dead, and owned and controlled by a cemetery corporation or crematory corporation duly organized
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
DETACHED: Separated from.
DEVELOPMENT means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations.
DISTRICT: For the purposes of this zoning bylaw, a district designates permitted uses of land based
on mapped zones which separate one set of land uses from another. (See Section 2.1, District
Locations and Boundaries).
In Section IV, Floodplain Overlay District, the word district applies only to the Floodplain District,
as defined on maps identified within this section.
DWELLING: A building occupied exclusively as a residence for one or more persons.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing at least two dwelling units with separate
sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A single-family residential unit that is joined on one side to
another single-family residential unit and having a party wall between said units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building containing one dwelling unit, also referred
to as a "single-family dwelling".
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate
living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for
exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
ERECTED: The word "erected" shall include the words attached, built, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged and moved.
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY: A long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or
approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit or a home for the aged or a governmental medical
institution.
FAMILY: A person or a group of persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit under one
head. This section, however, does not apply to non-related disabled persons as defined by any
applicable Federal and/or State law and/or regulations.
FAMILY HOME DAYCARE: Any private residence which on a regular basis, receives for
temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven years of age or
children under sixteen years of age if such children have special needs; provided that the total
number of children shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the residence.
Family home daycare shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative
arrangement among the neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without
compensation. (Also see definition, Large Family Home Daycare)
8-4
FARM BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE AND FARM STAND: A farm stand shall be
any structure regulated by the state building code used for the sale to the general public, of produce,
wine, dairy products, natural products and farm related specialty items, whether processed or in raw
state, provided however, that during primary months of harvest, the majority (51%) of such
products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner or
lessee of the land on which the farm stand is located or other land leased by either. Farm stands may
raise and grow any legal product related to agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
aquaculture. In addition to the products listed above, a farm stand may purchase from third parties
produce, wine, dairy products, natural products and farm related specialty items, distributed by
other so called, "Cottage Farm Industries" and sell those products at retail. The foregoing use shall
include any farm business or commercial greenhouse.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of preprepared
or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) administers the National Flood
Insurance Program. FEMA provides a nationwide flood hazard area mapping study program for
communities as well as regulatory standards for development in the flood hazard areas.
FENCE: A man-made barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP means an official map of a community issued by
FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analyses, the boundaries of the 100-year and 500 year floods
and the 100-year floodway. (For maps done in 1987 and later, the floodway designation is included
on the FIRM.)
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) means an official map of a community issued by
FEMA where the boundaries of the flood and related erosion areas having special hazards have
been designated as Zone A or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood
hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation
and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOODPLAIN: The channel and the relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or
river which has been or may be covered by floodwater. This includes the area adjoining a river or
stream which has been identified as being covered by 100 year flood as designated on Panel
2501380001B of the East Longmeadow Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODPLAIN, NEW CONSTRUCTION for floodplain management purposes, means structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community.
8-5
FLOODPLAIN, NEW CONSTRUCTION for the purpose of determining insurance rates, means
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation.
FLORICULTURE: The cultivation of ornamental flowering plants.
FORESTRY: Establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest
nurseries, the gathering of forest products, or in performing forest services.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS: A group of people formally organized for a common interest,
usually cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular meetings, rituals and formal written
membership requirements.
FRONTAGE: The common boundary between that portion of a "lot" in the Town of East
Longmeadow and a "street" as defined hereinafter in this section which provides adequate physical
access across said boundary to a potential building site. For zoning purposes, lot frontage is the
continuous distance between side lot lines measured at the street line, or in the case of a corner lot
the intersecting street line (or the midpoint of the corner radius) measured on each street. On the
turning radius of a cul-de-sac, lot frontage may be considered as the distance between side lot lines
measured at the setback line, provided that the distance measured on the street line shall be at least
75 percent of the minimum frontage required for the zone in which the lot is situated.
FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation.
GAMING ESTABLISHMENT: an establishment whose primary function is conducting
sweepstakes, lotteries, or other games with cash prizes other than games conducted by the state
lottery commission are not allowed in any district, with the exception of non-profit or religious
organizations.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, or portion thereof, other than a private customer and employee
garage or private residential garage, used primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles and
available to the general public.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION: Any building, land area or other premises or portion thereof
used, or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an
accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories.
GROUND SIGN: The term "ground sign" shall include any and every sign erected on or affixed to
the land and any and every exterior sign that is not attached to a building.
HABITABLE AREA: Shall be the area of that portion of the principal building exclusive of
porches, breezeways, garages, cellars, basements, and any other unfinished area, as measured by the
normal dimensions of the structure and commonly used by the occupants of the structure.
8-6
HALF STORY: The space between the ceiling of the top story of a structure and the roof, where the
area and height are sufficient for sleeping/living in quarters.
HEIGHT: In reference to a building, the vertical distance between the highest point of the roof and
the average grade of land on which the building is located.
HELIPORT: An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the
loading and takeoff of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, fueling and
maintenance equipment.
HIGHLY HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL: A substance possessing toxic, reactive, flammable, or
explosive properties and specified by paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
(a)(1) This section applies to:
(i) a process which involves a chemical at or above specified threshold quantities;
(ii) a process which involves a flammable liquid or gas on site in one location, in a quantity of
10,000 pounds or more except for:
1. Hydrocarbon fuels used solely for workplace consumption as a fuel (e.g., propane used for comfort
heating, gasoline for vehicle refueling), if such fuels are not a part of a process containing another
highly hazardous chemical covered by this standard;
2. Flammable liquids stored in atmospheric tanks or transferred which are kept below their normal
boiling point without benefit of chilling or refrigeration.
(a)(2) This section does not apply to:
(i) Retail facilities;
(ii) Oil or gas drilling or servicing operations; or,
(iii) Normally unoccupied remote facilities.
Process - any activity involving a highly hazardous chemical including any use, storage,
manufacturing, handling, or the on-site movement of such chemicals, or combination of these
activities. For purposes of this definition, any groups of vessels which are interconnected and
separate vessels which are located such that a highly hazardous chemical could be involved in a
potential release shall be considered a single process.
HOME BASED TRADE : The incidental and secondary use of a portion of the home or accessory
building thereto, as a place for limited storage in connection with an off-premises trade by a
homeowner and resident of the premises, as a builder, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber,
landscaper or similar person, whose business is conducted off-site. Said use is specifically limited
as set forth in Section 7.36 of the East Longmeadow Zoning By- Law.
HORTICULTURE: The cultivation of a garden or orchard.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: A hospital or sanitarium is defined as any institution, however
named, whether conducted for charity or for profit, which is advertised, conducted or maintained for
the express or implied purpose of caring for persons for the purpose of diagnosis or medical or
surgical treatment which is rendered within said institution.
8-7
HOTEL: A building operated by a duly licensed inn-holder where lodging is furnished or food is
served to transient or permanent guests, and which has a public dining room and general kitchen.
See also lodging, short term.
HOUSE TRAILER: See Mobile Home.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Immediate family shall mean for the purposes of this by-law (section
7.36): spouse, parent, step-parent, children, step-children, siblings and step- siblings that reside at
the permitted site.
IMPROVED TOWN STREET: A way which has been constructed in accordance with the
engineering specifications and standards promulgated by the Town of East Longmeadow
Department of Public Works.
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in
conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or
disposition.
JUNKYARD: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used for the storage,
collection, processing purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap, metal or other
scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor
vehicles (except those kept within a totally enclosed structure), or other type of junk.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any structure or premises in which dogs and/or cats are kept, boarded,
bred or trained for commercial gain.
LANDING STRIP: A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangers,
facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers.
LARGE FAMILY HOME DAYCARE: Any private residence which on a regular basis, receives for
temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven years of age or
children under sixteen years of age if such children have special needs; provided that the total
number shall not exceed ten, including participating children living in the residence and the proper
daycare licensing is up to date and available for viewing. As per the Massachusetts Department of
Early Education and Care regulations, a certified assistant will be present when deemed necessary.
Family home daycare shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative
arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without
compensation.
LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPY SALON: a place, office, clinic or establishment licensed by
the Board of Registration of Massage Therapy to offer massage services.
LODGE: A place where members of a local chapter of an association hold their meetings; and the
local chapter itself.
LODGING, SHORT TERM: An establishment providing lodging not to exceed thirty (30) days for
money or barter. This shall include online room-sharing services.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY: An institution or a distinct part of an institution which is licensed
or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to
8-8
two or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage,
blood or adoption.
LOT: A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a principal building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open yard areas or spaces as required under the provisions of this
Bylaw.
LOT, BUILDABLE: Land area available, under the Bylaw and other lawful restrictions, for the
location of a main building. A buildable lot does not include watercourses, water bodies, banks,
bordering vegetated wetland or other protected zones as defined by the Mass. Wetlands Protection
Act Regulations 310 CMR 10.00. Such lot must have frontage on a street or way as defined below,
excepting only a pre-existing lot exempted by the provisions of Section 6 of Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another or from a public or
private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of way. (See Diagram 8- 1)
LOT LINE, REAR: The line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise
irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the lot
line. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be the line opposite the street line of the street on which the
building is or would be numbered. See diagram 8-1
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (See Diagram 8-1)
LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or
cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
PROVIDED that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of NFIP Regulations 60.3.
MASSAGE: the systematic treatment of the soft tissues of the body by use of pressure, friction,
stroking, percussion, kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means, range of motion for
purposes of demonstrating muscle excursion or muscle flexibility and nonspecific stretching.
Massage therapy may include the use of oil, ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, steam, dry heat or
cabinet baths, in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being of the
client. Massage therapy shall not include diagnoses, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or
other joint manipulations or any services or procedures for which a license to practice medicine,
chiropractic, occupational therapy, physical therapy or podiatry is required by law.
MASSAGE THERAPIST or MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: a person licensed by the board of
Registration of Massage Therapy who instructs or administers massage or massage therapy for
compensation.
MASSAGE THERAPIST FACILITY: see Licensed Massage Therapy Salon
MEDICAL CLINIC: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other
services to individuals on an outpatient basis, including the offices of physicians, dentists, and other
health practitioners and other types of medical supplies and services.
8-9
MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION: An organization operating on a membership basis with preestablished
formal membership requirements and with the intent to promote the interests of its
members. Such an organization includes trade associations, professional organizations, unions, and
similar political and religious organizations.
MOBILE HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required facilities. For the purposes of this Bylaw, a mobile home shall not be
deemed a "single-family dwelling" and not permitted; however, when necessary as defined in
section 3.033, said use is temporary and not to exceed twelve (12) months.
MOTEL: An establishment providing transient accommodations containing six or more rooms with
at least 25 percent of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing
through the main lobby of the building. Also see Lodging, Short term
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES: A lot and/or structure where motor vehicles are on display for sale,
lease, rent and/or service.
NON-ACCESSORY SIGN: Any billboard, sign or other advertising device not an accessory sign.
NURSING HOME: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide fulltime
convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or
infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD see BASE FLOOD.
PARKING AREA: Any open space used for parking motor vehicles exclusively, and in which no
gasoline nor motor vehicle accessories are sold, or no other business conducted.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving
the care of a person, including but not limited to beauty shops, barber shops, nail salons and
massage therapy salons.
PET DAY CARE AND GROOMING: The caring for, maintaining, grooming, training and safe
keeping of pets of a domestic nature during normal daytime business hours. This does not include
overnight kennel services.
PRIMARY BUILDING: The main or most important building on a lot.
PRIMARY USE: The primary or predominant use of any lot.
PRIVATE USES: Uses belonging to or intended for a non-public or non-governmental group.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A person employed in a practice of Engineering as defined in
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 112, Section 81D and acts amendatory thereto.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of a member of a recognized profession, including but not
limited to accountant, lawyer or architect, maintained for the conduct of that profession.
PUBLIC USES: Uses owned or operated by a government entity or a nonprofit organization for the
general welfare of the community.
8-10
PUBLIC UTILITY: A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing
a public service.
RECREATION FACILITY: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities and other customary and usual recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL: A recreation facility operated as a business and
open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE: A recreation facility operated by a non-profit organization,
and open only to bona fide members and guests of such nonprofit organization.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation,
which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations
for recreational, camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck
campers and camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY see FLOODWAY
RESEARCH LABORATORY: An establishment for carrying on investigation in the natural,
physical or social sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of said investigation.
RESTAURANT: An establishment where food and drink is prepared, and/or served within the
primary building or for take out.
RIDING ACADEMY: An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for and where
instruction in riding, jumping and showing is offered and the general public may, for a fee, hire
horses for riding.
ROOMING HOUSE: A house where lodgings with furniture are rented to people to live in without public dining or
cooking facilities.
SANITARIUM: See Hospital.
SCHOOL: A building devoted to the instruction or education in primary, secondary, or postsecondary
schooling.
SECONDHAND PERSONAL PROPERTY: Materials, articles or machinery which have been
used or owned by some person other than the dealer, offering the same for sale and which may
again be used without alteration.
SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING: A single family residential unit that is joined on one side to
another single family residential unit, and having a common wall between the said units.
SERVICE: The performance of any act for the benefit of another with a view to profit, or for a
livelihood. The act of conducting a service enterprise. The performance of any act for the
convenience, service or benefit of an ultimate customer or patron.
SERVICE ENTERPRISE: Any enterprise intended to be conducted for profit which deals directly
with and is accessible to the ultimate customer or patron and which has for its principal purpose the
performance of any act for the convenience, service, or benefit of such customer or patron.
8-11
SETBACK: a) Minimum required setback: The minimum required unoccupied space or area
between the lot line and the part of the building nearest such lot line, such unoccupied space or area
extending the entire width or distance across the lot.
b) Building setback: The unoccupied space or area between the lot line and the part of the
building nearest such lot line, such unoccupied space or area extending the entire width or distance
across the lot.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed
as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery
separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.
SIGN: The word "sign" shall include any letter, word, symbol, drawing, picture, design, device,
article and object that advertises, calls attention to or indicates any premises, person or activity,
whatever the nature of the material and manner of composition or construction.
SIGN, ACCESSORY: Any billboard, sign or other advertising device that advertises, calls,
attention to, or indicates the person occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or the
business transacted thereon, or advertises the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or to let,
and which contains no other advertising matter.
SIGN, AREA OF:
(a) The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs and symbols together with the background on which they are displayed any frame around
the sign and any "cutouts" or extensions but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing.
1 (a) The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building wall
or painted on a window, shall be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle or triangle which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
2 (b) The area of a sign consisting of a three-dimensional object shall be considered to be the area of
the largest vertical cross-section of that object.
3 (c) In computing the area of signs, both sides of V-shaped signs, but only one side of back-to-back
signs, shall be counted.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: means an area having special flood and/or flood-related
erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99, AH, V, V130,
VE.
SPECIAL PERMIT: Special permit is a process which allows the Town to conduct a more detailed
review of certain uses and structures which may have a significant impact on their surroundings.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY: The Planning Board, unless otherwise specified,
shall be the body responsible for granting special permits.
STABLE/BARN: A structure that is used for the shelter or care of horses and other domesticated
animals and/or cattle.
8-12
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
land, wall, ceiling, or floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STORY: The horizontal portion through a building between floor and ceiling. The word "story"
shall not include the portion of the basement or cellar of a building above grade. The word "story"
shall not include "attic" unless it has a finished floor and seven (7) feet of clearance.
STREET: A public way, a private way shown on a plan approved under the Subdivision Control
Law and recorded at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds as required, or a way of existence
when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in East Longmeadow, having, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the
proposed use of the abutting land or land to be served thereby.
STREET LINE: The dividing line between a street and the deeded lot line.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter,
such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign,
flagpole, mast for radio antenna, or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the
context allows, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof".
STRUCTURE: for floodplain management purposes, means a walled and roofed building, including
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
STRUCTURE: for insurance coverage purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well
as a manufactured home on foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in
the course of construction, alteration, or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies
intended for use in such construction, alteration, or repair, unless such materials or supplies are
within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBASSEMBLY: An assembled unit forming a component to be incorporated into a larger
assembly.
SUBDIVISION: Shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall include
re--subdivision, and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process of subdivision or the
land or territory subdivided provided however that the division of a tract of land into two or more
lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control
Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public
way or a way which the Clerk of the Town certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a
way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Law or (c) a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the
Town of East Longmeadow, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the
proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal
services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be
of at least such distance as is then required by the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of East Longmeadow
for erection of a building on such lot, and if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be of at
least twenty (20) feet. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing
the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage
8-13
above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing
when the subdivision control law went into effect in the Town of East Longmeadow into separate
lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing shall not constitute a subdivision.
Subdivision, including re-subdivision, shall be defined in the Subdivision Control Law, M.G.L.,
Chapter 41.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL: The power of regulating the subdivision of land granted by the
subdivision control law and any acts amendatory thereto.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred, "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
SUPERMARKET: A retail establishment primarily selling food as well as other convenience and
household goods with customer and employee parking provided.
TAVERN: An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor to the general public and
where food may be served or sold only as an accessory to the primary use.
TRADE VEHICLE: A commercial vehicle used in the operation of a Home Based Trade.
TRAILER: That which attaches to the back of a trade vehicle for the purpose of transporting objects
or materials required by the Home Based Trade. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
90, trailers must be registered and have a 17 digit VIN number.
UNIT: a. In residential property, a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one
family.
b. In commercial property, a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one
business.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A departure from the provisions of a zoning ordinance relating to setbacks, side
yards, frontage requirements and lot size, but not involving the actual use or structure. A variance is
granted following three requirements that all relate to the land. A variance is requested because: 1.
Owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of the land especially
affects the land but not the surrounding lots in the district; 2. A literal enforcement of the bylaws
will involve substantial hardship; and, 3. That the granting of a variance would not be substantially
detrimental to the public good and will not nullify or substantially derogate from the intent or
purpose of the by-law.
VARIANCE, USE: A variance granted for a use or structure that is not permitted in the district.
There are no use variances allowed in East Longmeadow. The ZBA is only authorized to issue
dimensional variances.
8-14
VEHICLE: Vehicle for the purposes of this bylaw shall include cars, trucks, recreational vehicles,
vans and mobile construction equipment.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to hospital use.
WALL: An upright structure comprised of but not limited to stone, masonry or concrete material
serving to enclose, divide, or protect an area.
WAREHOUSE OPERATIONS: A facility consisting of one or more buildings used primarily for
the storage of goods and materials. Such a facility may also include terminal facilities for handling
freight with or without maintenance facilities.
WHEELED ACCESSORY: A single axle accessory not designed to transport equipment.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: A business engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional or other professional business users; or to other wholesalers.
WHOLESALE TRADE & DISTRIBUTION: Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional
business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for,
or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
YARD DEPTH: The shortest distance between a front lot line and a rear yard lot line.
YARD, FRONT: A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot
line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. Such front
yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere
in the Bylaw. (See Diagram 8-1)
YARD, REAR: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building
and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closes point of the rear lot
line. Such rear yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be
permitted elsewhere in the Bylaw. (See Diagram 8-1)
YARD, SIDE: The required unoccupied space or area within the lot between the side lot line and
the parts of the building nearest such side lot line. (See Diagram 8-1)
ZONE A means the 100-year floodplain area where the base flood elevation (BFE) has not been
determined. To determine the BFE, use the best available federal, state, local, or other data.
ZONE Al - A30 and ZONE AE (for new and revised maps) means the 100-year floodplain where
the base flood elevation has been determined.
ZONE AH and ZONE AO means the 100-year floodplain with flood depths of I to 3 feet.
ZONE A99 means areas to be protected from the 100-year flood by federal flood protection system
under construction. Base flood elevations have not been determined.
ZONES B, C, AND X are areas identified in the community Flood Insurance Study as areas of
moderate or minimal flood hazard. Zone X replaces Zones B and C on new and revised maps.
8-15
ZONE V means a special flood hazard area along a coast subject to inundation by the 100-year
flood with the additional hazards associated with storm waves. Base flood elevations have not been
determined.
ZONE Vl-30 and ZONE VE (for new and revised maps) means a special flood hazard area along a
coast subject to inundation by the 100-year flood with additional hazards due to velocity (wave
action). Base flood elevations have been determined.
ZONING: The dividing of a municipality into districts and the establishment of regulations
governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings.
Revised Special Town Meeting October, 2015
\\fs01\documents\planning\robyn.macdonald\my documents\administration\warrants and articles.docr\special town meeting october 2015\zoning
definitions section viii .doc
8-16
