Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Recodification of bylaws.1
The bylaws of the Town of Fairhaven are hereby recodified. This
recodification does not affect the continued application of the substantive
provisions of those bylaws previously in effect, except where those
substantive provisions have been expressly or clearly amended by this
recodification.
§ 1-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-2-1992 ATM by Art. 14]
The penalty for any violation of these bylaws, when not otherwise provided
for by Town bylaws, shall be the forfeiture and payment of a fine not
exceeding $100 to be paid into the Town treasury and credited to the
surplus account.
§ 1-3. Amendments.
These bylaws may be amended or repealed at any Town meeting if passed
by the members present and voting.
§ 1-4. When effective.
These bylaws shall take effect upon approval and publication in the manner
required by law.
§ 1-5. Prosecution for offenses.
Except when otherwise provided by law, prosecution for offenses under the
bylaws of the Town may be made by any constable or police officer of the
Town.
§ 1-6. Noncriminal disposition of violations. [Added 5-2-1992 ATM
by Art. 14 (Ch. XXXV of the 1934 Bylaws); amended 5-7-1994 STM
by Art. 18 (Ch. XXXVII of the 1934 Bylaws)]
Any person taking cognizance of a violation of any of the specific
bylaws, rules or regulations set forth in Subsection D which he or
she is empowered to enforce, as an alternative to initiating criminal
proceedings, may give to the offender a written notice to appear before
the Clerk of the District Court at any time during office hours, not later
than 21 days after the date of such notice, for noncriminal disposition
A.
1. Editor's Note: The bylaws as they appear in this Code were accepted by vote of the Special
Town Meeting on May 3, 1997, under Article 13. A copy of said Article 13 is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.
1:1
of the violation, pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D. The following infractions
may be subject to noncriminal disposition pursuant to the civil
infraction procedure:
Any violation of an order of the Board of Health relating to public
health which is authorized by the General Laws, any special law
applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Sanitary Code or
other state regulations or any bylaw, rule or regulation;
(1)
Any violation of an order of a Town building official relating to
public safety which is authorized by the General Laws, any special
law applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Building
Code or other state regulations or any bylaw, rule or regulation;
(2)
Any violation of an order of a Town fire official relating to public
safety which is authorized by the General Laws, any special law
applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Fire Prevention
Code or other state regulations or any bylaw, rule or regulation; or
(3)
Any violation of any other bylaw or any rule or regulation of any
Town officer, board or department.
(4)
The civil assessment for each infraction subjected to noncriminal
disposition shall be $300 unless a lesser amount is otherwise provided
for in these bylaws.
B.
Any assessment collected pursuant to noncriminal disposition shall be
paid into the Town treasury unless otherwise directed by these bylaws.
C.
In addition to police officers, who shall in all cases be considered
enforcing persons for the purpose of this section, the following officers
of the Town shall be enforcing persons with respect to the following
enumerated bylaws, rules and regulations. The penalties set forth shall
apply to a violation of each of the enumerated bylaws, rules and
regulations.
Board of Health rules and regulations, Chapters 401 through 491:
[Amended 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 17]
Enforcing person(s): Board of Health, Health Agent and
designated agents of the Board of Health.
(a)
Fine: $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense and
$300 for the third and subsequent offenses.
(b)
(1)
Shellfish Department regulations, mooring and anchorage
regulations, boat ramp parking regulations:
Enforcing person: Harbormaster, Assistant Harbormaster,
Shellfish Deputies.
(a)
First offense: $50 and/or suspension of license or permit for
30 days; second offense: $100 and/or suspension of license
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 1-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 1-6
1:2
or permit for 60 days; third offense: $150 and/or suspension
of license or permit for 30 days; persons caught fishing in a
posted area: $200. [Amended 5-3-2008 ATM by Art. 45]
Zoning bylaws, Articles I through IV of Chapter 198:
(a) Enforcing person: Building Commissioner.
(b) Fine: $50 per offense.
(3)
Recycling bylaw (Chapter 164, Part 2):
(a) Enforcing person: Health Agent.
(b) Fine: $25 per offense.
(4)
Driveway and Sidewalk Construction bylaw (Chapter 169, Part 4):
[Added 6-7-2003 ATM by Art. 12; amended 10-29-2008 STM
by Art. 11]
Enforcing person: Superintendent of Public Works, or his
designee.
(a)
Fine: $100 for each offense, except performing, or allowing
unlicensed contractors to perform, work shall be $300 for each
offense.
(b)
(5)
Water bylaw (Chapter 187): [Added 6-7-2003 ATM by Art. 11]
Enforcing person: Public Works Superintendent, or his
designated agents.
(a)
Fine: $50 first offense; $100 for second and subsequent
violations.
(b)
(6)
Alcoholic beverages (Chapter 83): [Added 2-11-2004 STM by
Art. 21]
Enforcing person: Police Officer, or his or her designated
agents.
(a)
(b) Fine: $100 per offense.
(7)
Fire prevention and protection (Chapter 122). [Added
10-18-2005 STM by Art. 10]
(a) Enforcing person(s): Fire Chief and his/her designee.
(b) Fines: $100 per offense.
(8)
Vehicles and traffic. [Added 5-3-2008 ATM by Art. 46]
Enforcing person(s): police officer, or his or her designated
agents.
(a)
(9)
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-7. Maintenance of bylaws. [Added 5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 7]
Fines: $20 for each offense. Each day that any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)
Section 145-16, waterway user fees. [Added 10-29-2008 STM by
Art. 12]
Enforcing person(s): any duly appointed Town of Fairhaven
Harbormaster, Assistant Harbormasters, or their appointees.
(a)
Fines: 120% of the water user fee due the Town of Fairhaven,
not to exceed $300.
(b)
(10)
Waterways, moorings, and boat usage (chapter 145). [Added
5-2-2009 STM by Art. 17]
Enforcing person(s): Harbormaster, his or her assistants,
harbor police, or other enforcing officers.
(a)
Fines: $100 for each offense. Each day that any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)
(11)
The Town Clerk shall maintain one volume of the Town bylaws as
recodified by Annual Town Meeting on May 3, 1997, and with it shall
keep all subsequent amendments and additions to the bylaw in the form
originally adopted by Town Meeting along with a record of the vote
taken and of approval by the Attorney General, if applicable.
A.
The Town Clerk shall acquire sufficient copies of the Town bylaws for
distribution to the various Town agencies and officers. Those copies
shall remain the property of the Town and shall be numbered and
a record kept by the Town Clerk of the agency or officer having
possession of each copy. The Town Clerk shall, from time to time, and
in any event at least annually, amend those copies in her possession to
reflect amendments and additions to the bylaw and shall provide copies
of those amendments and additions to each agency or officer having
possession of a copy of the bylaws. The copies of the bylaws shall not
otherwise be altered except with the express permission or direction
of the Town Clerk. Upon termination from his position, a public officer
having possession of a copy of the bylaw shall return it to the Town
Clerk.
B.
The Town Clerk may include in the codified bylaws policies, rules and
regulations enacted by the various Town agencies or officers, as well as
the text of special legislation applicable to the Town, a list of legislation
accepted by vote of the Town, a list of the designated special municipal
employees, and such other information as the Clerk deems appropriate
front time to time. Town agencies and officers who enact or amend
any such policy, rule, regulation or list shall submit the text of that
exactment to the Town Clerk for inclusion in the codification.
C.
§ 1-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 1-7
1:4
Chapter 2
FINANCES
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5

Part 1
[ASdpoepctieadl-5P-u2r-p2o0s0e9 ASpTpMro Bpryi aAtrito.n 1s5]
§ 2-1. Disposition of unspent balances.
Except as otherwise provided by state law, the remaining balance in any
money article shall be closed to surplus revenue by the Town Accountant if:
The monies have yet to be expended by the close of the second full fiscal
year following its appropriation; and
A.
The Town Accountant determines that the funds are not committed by
contract.
B.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:7

Part 2
[AdoUpsteed O5f -R6-e2v0o1lv7inAgT MAc cBoyu Anrtts. 33]
§ 2-2. Purpose.
This part establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town
departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 2-3. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this part without appropriation subject to the following
limitations:
§ 2-4. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
part shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 2-5. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, and this part, the laws, charter
provisions, bylaws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern
the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditure and payment
of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and
authorized by this part. The Town Accountant shall include a statement on
the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures
charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular
report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee,
agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
§ 2-6. Authorized revolving funds.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are
paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund (except for those
employed as school bus drivers).
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
B.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,
or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the select board and Finance Committee.
C.
A. Hazardous Materials Revolving Fund.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:9
Hazardous Materials Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate
fund called the "Hazardous Materials Revolving Fund" authorized
for use by the Fire Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Hazardous
Materials Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all of the disposal fees charged and received by the Fire
Department in connection with hazardous materials incidents.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Fire Chief
may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Hazardous
Materials Revolving Fund for the purchase of equipment and
supplies and the hiring of full-time and/or part-time personnel in
connection with hazardous materials.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Hazardous Materials Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
Sustainability Revolving Fund.
Sustainability Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate fund
called the "Sustainability Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the
Green Fairhaven Committee.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Sustainability
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of
the fees charged and received by the Green Fairhaven Committee
in connection with their activities, including the Community
Gardens and Farmers' Market.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Green
Fairhaven Committee may incur liabilities against and spend
monies from the Sustainability Revolving Fund for the purchase
of equipment, services and supplies in connection with Green
Fairhaven activities and initiatives.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Sustainability Revolving Fund shall operate for
fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
B.
Hoppy's Landing Revolving Fund.
Hoppy's Landing Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate fund
called the "Hoppy's Landing Revolving Fund" authorized for use by
the Marine Resources Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Hoppy's
Landing Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all of the fees charged and received by the Marine Resources
Department in connection with Hoppy's Landing usage.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Marine
Resources Department may incur liabilities against and spend
monies from the Hoppy's Landing Revolving Fund for the purchase
(3)
C.
§ 2-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 2-6
1:10
of equipment, personnel, services and supplies in connection with
Hoppy's Landing.
Fiscal years. The Hoppy's Landing Revolving Fund shall operate for
fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
Town Hall Auditorium Revolving Fund.
Town Hall Auditorium Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate
fund called the "Town Hall Auditorium Revolving Fund" authorized
for use by the Town Administrator.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Town Hall
Auditorium Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all of the fees charged and received by the Selectmen's Office
in connection with Town Hall auditorium rentals.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Town
Administrator may incur liabilities against and spend monies from
the Town Hall Auditorium Revolving Fund to fund improvements,
maintenance and repairs of the Town Hall auditorium.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Town Hall Auditorium Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
D.
Park Utilities Revolving Fund.
Park Utilities Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate fund called
the "Park Utilities Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Board
of Public Works.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Park Utilities
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all
of the fees charged and received by the Board of Public Works in
connection with park usage.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Board of
Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies from
the Park Utilities Revolving Fund to fund park lighting during some
park/sporting events.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Park Utilities Revolving Fund shall operate for
fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
E.
Wellness Committee Revolving Fund.
Wellness Committee Revolving Fund. There shall be a separate
fund called the "Wellness Committee Revolving Fund" authorized
for use by the Wellness Committee and the Town Administrator.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Wellness
Committee Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to
the fund all of the fees charged and received by the Wellness
Committee.
(2)
F.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6
1:11
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Wellness
Committee and/or the Town Administrator may incur liabilities
against and spend monies from the Wellness Committee Revolving
Fund to fund wellness initiatives.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Wellness Committee Revolving Fund shall operate
for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(4)
§ 2-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 2-6
1:12
Chapter 3
AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 155.
§ 3-1. Establishment; members; terms.
§ 3-2. Duties.
The Agricultural Commission shall serve as a facilitator and advocate for
encouraging the pursuit of farming and agriculture in the Town of
Fairhaven, shall promote agricultural-based economic opportunities in the
Town, shall provide dispute-resolution services, shall work with Town
officials and boards to promote and protect agricultural interests and
enforce the Right to Farm Bylaw, Chapter 155.
§ 3-3. Quorum required; majority vote.
There is hereby established an Agricultural Commission consisting of
five members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The initial term of
two members shall be three years, of two members shall be two years,
and of one member shall be one year.
A.
B. After the initial term, the term of a member shall be three years.
One associate member may be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
The term of the associate member shall be one year.
C.
Members and the associate member must be residents of the Town of
Fairhaven.
D.
The Board of Selectmen shall fill a vacancy based on the unexpired term
of the vacancy in order to maintain the cycle of appointments.
E.
Members and the associate member should: represent the Town
geographically, represent the diversity and scale of agricultural
businesses, represent the diversity of the Town's population, and
encourage next-generation farmers. The overall intent is to be inclusive
not exclusive.
F.
G. The Board of Selectmen may remove a member for cause.
The Agricultural Commission shall not meet or conduct business
without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the
Agricultural Commission shall constitute quorum.
A.
B. The Agricultural Commission shall approve its actions by majority vote.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:13
§ 3-4. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, provided that the amendments are not in conflict with the
Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 3-5. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other
section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 6
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 8. Planning Board — See Ch. 65.
§ 6-1. Establishment; members; terms.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 44B. The Committee shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall consist of the following members:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission for a term of one year and thereafter for a term of
three years.
(1)
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission for a term of one year and thereafter for a term of
three years.
(2)
One member designated by the Housing Authority to represent the
Authority for a term of one year and thereafter for a term of three
years. [Amended 5-6-2006 ATM by Art. 11]
(3)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board for
a term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(4)
One member designated by the Board of Public Works to represent
the Board for a term of three years. [Amended 5-5-2007 STM by
Art. 202]
(5)
Four members to be designated by the Board of Selectmen of which
one will be for a term of two years and thereafter for a term of three
(6)
A.
2. Editor's Note: This article provided that this three-year term will commence upon the
conclusion of the current two-year term.
§ 3-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 6-1
1:14
§ 6-2. Duties.
§ 6-3. Quorum required; majority vote; cost estimates.
years and the other three for terms of three years and thereafter
for terms of three years.
B. After the initial appointments, terms will begin on July 1 of each year.
The term shall automatically terminate prior to its expiration in the
event the Committee member no longer serves as a member of the
appointing authority.
C.
Should any commission, authority or board designating a member for
the Community Preservation Committee cease to exist for whatever
reason the Board of Selectmen will determine the appropriate
alternative designating commission, authority or board.
D.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing Town boards,
including, inter alia, the Historical Commission, the Housing Authority,
the Conservation Commission, the Planning Board and the Board of
Public Works in conducting such studies. As part of its study the
Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the
needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted
publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
A.
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations
to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation
of open space; for the acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration and
preservation of historic resources; for the acquisition, creation and
preservation of land for recreational use; for the creation, preservation
and support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or
restoration of such open space, historic resources, land for recreational
use and community housing that is acquired or created as provided
in this section. With respect to community housing, the Community
Preservation Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the
reuse of existing buildings, or construction of new buildings on
previously developed sites.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendations to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside
for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with
community preservation, but for which sufficient funds are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose, or to set aside for later spending funds for general
purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
C.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:15
§ 6-4. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, provided that the amendments would not be in conflict with
Chapter 44B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 6-5. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other
section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 6-6. When effective.
This chapter shall be submitted to the Attorney General of the
Commonwealth upon certification that a majority of voters have approved
a ballot question accepting sections 3 to 7, inclusive, of Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 44B. Upon approval of this chapter by the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth, the Board of Selectmen shall within 14 days
request the designating commissions, authorities or boards to designate a
member to serve on the Community Preservation Committee.
Chapter 8
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands — See Ch. 192. Order of conditions — See Ch. 198, § 198-28.
§ 8-1. Membership; election of officers.
There shall be a Conservation Commission consisting of seven members
appointed by the Board of Selectmen and who may be removed by said
Board pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8C. The Commission shall
elect by majority vote from among the members a Chair and a Co-Chair,
each for a term of one year.
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct
business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members
of the Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum.
A.
The Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by
majority vote.
B.
Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated
costs.
C.
§ 6-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 8-2
1:16
§ 8-2. Duties and authorities.
The Conservation Commission shall have the duties and authorities as set
forth in MGL c. 40, § 8C, and any other applicable law or regulation, and
without intending to limit those duties and authorities thereby created, it
shall also be the duty of the Conservation Commission to:
Chapter 12
CONSTABLES
§ 12-1. Appointment; authority.
Constables shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen from time to
time in such numbers as the Board deems necessary in accordance with
the provisions of MGL c. 41, § 91B, and shall have such authority,
responsibilities and jurisdiction as provided by law.
§ 12-2. Term of office; licensing fee. [Amended 5-9-2000 ATM by
Art. 33]
Constables shall be appointed for a term of one year and shall be residents
of the Town of Fairhaven or the City of New Bedford. They shall pay a
licensing fee of $25.
Chapter 16
COUNCIL ON AGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council on Aging — See Ch. 207.
§ 16-1. Establishment of Council.
A Council on Aging as authorized by Chapter 495 of the Acts of 19563 as
amended is hereby established.
§ 16-2. Title.
The name of the Council shall be the Fairhaven Council on Aging.
Advise other officers and agencies of the town, if so requested by any
such officer or agency, in the use of land owned or controlled by the
town.
A.
B. Administer the provisions of Chapter 192, Wetlands.
3. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40, § 8B.
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:17
§ 16-3. Appointment of members; terms. [Amended 1-26-1977 STM
by Art. 21; 5-6-1980 ATM by Art. 23]
The Council shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The initial Council appointed after the acceptance of this
amendment shall consist of three members appointed for terms of three
years; two members appointed for terms of two years; and two members
appointed for terms of one year. Thereafter, when the term of any member
expires, his or her successor shall be appointed for a term of three years. In
all cases, the members of the Council shall serve until their successors are
qualified.
Chapter 22
DATA PROCESSING CENTER
§ 22-1. Authority; use of center.
There may be a data processing center for the use of any department, office,
board, committee or agency of the town, including the School Committee
and any public authority or special district within the town.
§ 22-2. Duties of Coordinator; appointment.
There shall be a Coordinator of the data processing center who shall
supervise and control the data processing center and who shall provide
programs and systems for the collection, processing, storage and retrieval
of information and the preparation of reports. The Coordinator shall be
appointed by the Selectmen and may also serve in any other public office or
position in the town.
§ 22-3. Advisory Board.
There shall be an Advisory Board, consisting of one designee of each
department, office, board, committee or agency of the town which uses the
services of the data processing center.
§ 22-4. Maintenance, operation and use.
Rules and regulations for the maintenance, operation and use of the data
processing center may from time to time be made and amended by the
Advisory Board, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, or by the
Coordinator with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 22-5. Disputes.
Any and all disputes arising from the application of this bylaw, or the rules
and regulations thereunder, shall be first determined by the Coordinator,
whose decision may be appealed to the Advisory Board, whose decision may
be appealed to the Board of Selectmen, whose decision shall be final.
§ 16-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 22-5
1:18
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 33
FINANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 37.
§ 33-1. Appointment of members; terms. [Amended 8-24-1957 STM
by Art. 13]
There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of 13 members, two
members to be appointed from each voting precinct in the manner and
at the time hereinafter prescribed, and one member to be appointed at
large. The Chair of each voting precinct shall within one month after the
Annual Town Meeting of 1958 appoint from the voters of such precinct two
members to represent the precinct on the Finance Committee. One member
shall be appointed for a term of two years and one for one year. There shall
be appointed each succeeding year by the Chair of each precinct at the
time and in the manner above prescribed one member from such precinct
to serve for a period of two years. The Moderator, Chair of the Board of
Selectmen and Chair of the Finance Committee for the preceding year shall,
annually at a meeting called for the purpose, appoint one member at large,
who shall serve for a period of one year.
§ 33-2. Organizational meeting. [Amended 8-24-1957 STM by Art.
13]
The Finance Committee shall as soon as convenient after notification of
appointment, and at least within two months after the Annual Town
Meeting, meet and perfect an organization by the election of a Chair and a
Clerk who shall serve until their successors are elected.
§ 33-3. Duties. [Amended 2-29-1936 ATM by Art. 43]
The duties of the Finance Committee shall be to thoroughly investigate all
articles on the warrant for the Annual and Special Town Meetings that call
for appropriations of money for town purposes and also all articles that in
any way may affect the finances of the town, and shall report in writing to
the Town Meeting members its recommendations thereto.
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:19
§ 33-4. Compensation. [Amended 4-24-1936 STM by Art. 3]
The Finance Committee shall (with the exception of the Secretary) serve
without pay but may be reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in
performance of its duties upon approval of such expenditures by the Board
of Selectmen. Such expense when incurred and approved for payment by
the Board of Selectmen shall be charged to the Town Meeting Expense
Account.
§ 33-5. Filling of vacancies.
Vacancies among the members of the Finance Committee which may occur
by death, resignation or removal from the town shall be filled in the manner
heretofore specified by appointment for the unexpired term only.
§ 33-6. Hearings.
The Finance Committee shall, upon written request from any petitioner on
any article on the warrant, grant such petitioner a hearing upon said article
before final action on same is determined.
§ 33-7. Annual report.
The Finance Committee shall, annually, not later than one week prior to
the time fixed for the Annual Town Meeting, prepare and publish for the
benefit of Town Meeting members and voters and distribute to the same
its recommendations as to the several articles on the warrant coming
under its jurisdiction, and the amounts required to be appropriated to
cover the expenditures of the various departments of the town for the
next fiscal year. It shall also report, in detail, the amounts of maturing
bonds or notes and the amount required for interest or other outstanding
indebtedness of the town. It shall also at the same time prepare and publish
a comparative statement, in parallel columns, of each department of funds
and the expenditures thereof for the previous two years. It shall at the same
time report and publish estimates of revenues from all sources, as far as
possible, with the probable amount to be levied and raised by taxation to
defray the expenses and liabilities of the town for the next ensuing fiscal
year.
§ 33-8. Eligibility of members. [Amended 8-24-1957 STM by Art. 13;
1-30-2001 STM by Art. 21]
No person shall be eligible to serve on the Finance Committee who is an
employee of the town or who holds an elective or appointive position in
the town government, whether or not the employment or position carries
any salary or compensation, except Town Meeting members elected under
Section 2 of Chapter 285 of the Acts of 1930 and except appointed members
of any advisory or ad hoc committees. This section shall become effective
30 days after adjournment of the Annual Town Meeting of 1958.
Chapter 37
§ 33-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 33-8
1:20
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Committee — See Ch. 33.
§ 37-1. Director of Finance; Divisions.
There shall be a Department of Finance which will be under the direction of
the Director of Finance. The Department of Finance shall provide personnel
and equipment to the offices of the Treasurer, Board of Assessors, Town
Accountant, Town Collector and Purchasing Officer, which shall be the
Divisions of the Department of Finance. The Director of Finance will
coordinate the activities of the various Divisions of the Department of
Finance and, subject to applicable law, shall supervise the operation of
those Divisions.
§ 37-1.1. Role of Director of Finance. [Added 5-4-2013 STM by Art.
5]
The Director of Finance shall act as treasurer and collector.
§ 37-2. Appointment of Director; duties and qualifications.
The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
for a term of one to three years and may be removed at its discretion.
The Director of Finance shall be sworn to the faithful performance of
his/her duties. During the time that he/she holds office, he/she shall
hold no elective Town office, but he/she may be appointed by the
Selectmen or, with their approval, by any other Town officer, board,
committee or commission to any other Town office or position
consistent with the office. He/she shall receive such aggregate
compensation, not exceeding the amount appropriated therefor, as the
Selectmen may determine. He/she shall act by and for the Selectmen
in any matter which they may assign to him/her relating to the
administration of the financial affairs of the Town or of any Town office
or department under their supervision and control or, with the approval
of the Selectmen, may perform such other duties as may be requested
of him/her by any other Town officer, board, committee or commission.
A.
In addition to those duties otherwise established by law, the specific
duties and qualifications of the Director of Finance shall be as follows:
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the operation
of the Finance Department including the Divisions of Accounting,
Collection, Assessing, Treasury and Purchasing. The Director of
Finance shall be responsible for assisting the Town Administrator
in the preparation of the budget and the long-range strategic
financial plan. The Director of Finance shall be responsible for
(1)
B.
§ 33-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-2
1:21
§ 37-3. Board of Assessors. [Amended 5-3-2008 STM by Art. 30]
§ 37-4. Division of Purchasing; Purchasing Officer.
planning and implementing the computerization of the financial
records of the Town. [Amended 5-7-2016 ATM by Art. 36]
The Director of Finance shall be professionally qualified for the
position in terms of training and experience.
(2)
He/she shall have a bachelor's degree in business or public
administration or a related field. A master's degree and a CPA are
desirable.
(3)
He/she shall have a minimum of eight years of experience in public
or private sector financial management, at least half of which
shall be in a supervisory position, and shall have knowledge of
computers, accounting and budgeting.
(4)
He/she shall have a demonstrated ability to work diplomatically
with citizens and employees and shall be able to be bonded.
(5)
The Selectmen may from time to time vary the duties and qualifications
of the Director of Finance if they find that such variance is in the best
interest of the Town and does not derogate from the intent of the bylaws
and is not otherwise contrary to law.
C.
The Board of Assessors shall consist of three members, appointed by
the Board of Selectmen to serve on a part-time basis for a term of three
years.
A.
A member of said Board of Assessors serving on the effective date of
this section shall continue to serve for the balance of the term for which
he/she was appointed.
B.
The members of the Board of Assessors shall be responsible for hearing
appeals and deciding abatements. The Selectmen may from time to
time vary the duties and qualifications of the members of the Board of
Assessors if they find that such variance is in the best interest of the
Town and does not derogate from the intent of the bylaws and is not
otherwise contrary to law.
C.
There shall be a Division of Purchasing within the Department of
Finance, which division shall be under the direction of a Purchasing
Officer. The Purchasing Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen for a term of one to three years and may be removed at its
discretion. He/she shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his/
her duties. He/she may be appointed by the Selectmen or, with their
approval by another Town officer, board, committee or commission, to
any other Town office or position consistent with his/her office. He/she
shall receive such aggregate compensation, not exceeding the amount
appropriated therefor, as the Selectmen may determine.
A.
§ 37-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 37-4
1:22
Chapter 40
CAPITAL PLANNING COMMITTEE
§ 40-1. Capital Improvement Program established.
A Capital Improvement Program is established for land purchases,
construction and renovation of buildings, major equipment and machinery
purchases, road and drainage reconstruction, and the construction and
reconstruction of special facilities such as local school projects, sewer and
water mains, and water treatment and sewage disposal facilities.
§ 40-2. Committee established. [Amended 5-7-2016 ATM by Art. 36]
The Selectmen shall appoint a Capital Planning Committee ("Committee")
consisting of seven voting members, and three or more nonvoting ex officio
members, to assist and advise the Town Administrator in preparing a fiveyear
Capital Improvement Plan. The voting members shall serve terms of
three years. Initially two voting members shall serve for one year, two for
two years, and three for three years, and they may be reappointed. The
Committee shall be comprised as follows:
The Purchasing Officer, under the general direction of the Treasurer,
shall be responsible for the operation of the Purchasing Division. The
duties shall include central purchasing, contract administration, risk
management and inventory control.
B.
The Purchasing Officer shall be qualified for the position in terms of
education and training. He/she shall have an associate of arts degree
in business or a related field. A bachelor's degree would be preferred.
He/she shall have a minimum of five years of experience doing
administrative work in the private or public sector, preferably in the
areas of purchasing, contract administration or risk management, with
the knowledge of computers desirable. He/she shall have a
demonstrated ability to work diplomatically with the public, vendors
and employees.
C.
The Selectmen may vary the duties and qualifications of the Purchasing
Officer if they find such variance is in the best interest of the Town and
does not derogate from the intent of the bylaws and is not otherwise
contrary to law.
D.
Voting members:
(1) One member of the Board of Public Works or an appointee thereof;
A person who is a member of the Fairhaven local School Committee
or an appointee thereof;
(2)
A resident of Fairhaven who represents the business, financial, or
banking community;
(3)
A.
§ 37-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-2
1:23
§ 40-3. Duties of Committee.
The Committee shall:
§ 40-4. Report of anticipated capital outlays to Committee.
By October 15 of each year, each department, board, committee and
commission shall provide to the Committee information concerning all
anticipated capital outlays requiring Town Meeting appropriation for the
ensuing five-year period.
§ 40-5. Public hearing on Capital Improvement Plan.
After the annual presentation of the Capital Improvement Plan by the
Committee to the Selectmen, the Board of Selectmen shall, within 30 days
A resident of Fairhaven with experience in the management of
construction activities;
(4)
A resident of Fairhaven knowledgeable about the Town's needs in
the areas of open space and recreation facilities or activities;
(5)
(6) The Finance Director/Treasurer/Collector;
(7) The Town Administrator; and
Such other nonvoting ex officio members as the Selectmen deem
appropriate from time to time.
(8)
Study proposed capital projects, improvements, and equipment
purchases that have a useful life of at least five years and cost over
$20,000 per item;
A.
Work with Town departments and officers to compile an inventory of
the Town's facilities, equipment, machinery and other capital assets;
B.
Consider the relative need, impact, timing and cost of these
expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of
the Town of Fairhaven;
C.
Prepare an annual report recommending a Capital Improvement
Budget for the next fiscal year and a Capital Improvement Program
Plan, including capital improvements for the next five years. The report
shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen on or before December 31
of each year for consideration and approval;
D.
Present the Capital Improvement Plan to the Annual Town Meeting for
its approval of fiscal year expenditures;
E.
F. Monitor the execution of projects authorized;
Explain and defend to the Town Meeting any deviation which the
Committee proposes from the Capital Improvement Plan.
G.
§ 40-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 40-5
1:24
of the receipt of the plan, hold a public hearing to present the plan for public
comment.
§ 40-6. Appropriation for capital improvements.
No appropriation shall be voted for a capital improvement requested by a
department, board or commission unless the proposed capital improvement
has been considered in the Committee's Capital Improvement Plan, or the
Committee has submitted a report to the Board of Selectmen explaining the
omission of the proposed capital improvement from its Plan.
§ 40-7. Expenditures in preparation for capital improvements.
Such Capital Improvement Program, after its adoption, shall permit the
expenditure on projects included therein of sums from departmental
budgets for surveys, architectural or engineering advice, options or
appraisals; but no such expenditure shall be incurred on projects which
have not been so approved by the Town through the appropriation of sums
in the current year or in prior years, or for preliminary planning for projects
to be undertaken more than five years in the future. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, the Town may appropriate and expend funds for
the purchase of land regardless of when improvements to, or use of, the
land by the Town is anticipated.
Chapter 50
MEETINGS
§ 50-1. Posting of warrant. [Amended 9-14-1972 STM by Art. 3;
5-6-1980 ATM by Art. 22]
The warrant for any Town Meeting shall be served by posting a printed copy
thereof at or near the front entrance of the Town Hall and at or near the
public entrances of all the polling places in the Town at least seven days
before the date of said meeting.
§ 50-2. Presentation of articles to Selectmen.
All articles, other than those specified by law for insertion in the warrant for
the Annual Town Meeting, must be presented in writing to the Selectmen
eight weeks before the holding of said meeting and should have the
signatures of not less than 10 voters of the Town. For Special Town
Meetings all articles must be presented to the Selectmen in writing as
above specified at least 30 days before the date of said meeting.
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:25
§ 50-3. Meeting to elect Town officials. [Amended 3-11-1950 ATM by
Art. 73; 3-17-1951 ATM by Art. 66; 4-11-1974 STM by Art. 1;
5-12-1976 ATM by Art. 14; 1-22-1977 STM by Art. 3]
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the first Monday in April at which
time the election of all Town officials and Town Meeting members shall take
place, and thereafter said meeting will be adjourned to another day for the
consideration of all other articles in the warrant.
§ 50-4. Rules of order.
The procedure and conduct of the business meetings of the Town not herein
provided for shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Parliamentary Practice
so far as they are applicable and are not inconsistent with the bylaws of the
Town.
§ 50-5. Matters of appropriation.
On any appropriation of money, a vote by ballot as hereinafter specified
shall be taken, provided that it is so moved previously to taking the vote and
is supported by at least 25 Town Meeting members.
§ 50-6. Passing of motions. [Added 3-10-1945 ATM by Art. 38]
A vote of the members present shall be required for the passage of a motion
to amend, reconsider or rescind any previous vote of any Annual Town
Meeting, adjournment thereof or of a Special Town Meeting.
§ 50-7. Count of votes. [Added 5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 8]
If a 2/3 vote of Town Meeting is required by statute, the Moderator may
decide the vote upon a show of hands, but shall not take a count or record
the vote, except that if that or any other vote declared by the Moderator is
immediately questioned by seven or more voters, the Moderator shall verify
the vote by dividing the Town Meeting and the vote shall be counted by
tellers.
§ 50-8. Enterprise account, reserve fund. [Added 5-3-2008 ATM by
Art. 21]
Any Annual or Special Town Meeting may appropriate funds from an
enterprise account into a reserve fund, from which reserve fund, transfers
may be made for extraordinary or unforeseen expenditures related to the
purpose of that enterprise. No such transfer of funds may be made from
such a reserve fund except with the prior approval of the Finance
Committee.
§ 50-9. Collective bargaining agreements. [Added 5-5-2012 ATM by
Art. 9]
§ 50-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 50-9
1:26
The provisions of this section shall apply to any collective bargaining
agreement executed after the effective date of this section.
A.
Copies of all agreements, in their entirety, entered into with employees
of the Town pursuant to collective bargaining, including the current
pay schedule and the proposed pay schedule which shall include step
increases and longevity, shall be made available for inspection by the
public at the locations specified in this section no later than 12:00 noon
on the 10th day before the Town Meeting is to vote on the question of
appropriating funds to implement any such agreement.
B.
Accompanying all such agreements shall be a document highlighting
the changes from the previous agreement and the estimated total cost
of each change over the life of the agreement. Such changes shall
include but not be limited to any actual payment or potential payment
for any stipend, bonus, additional sick days, early termination notice,
uniform allowance, personal days, or any matter which will require
monetary payment or compensatory time to be made or given to an
employee.
C.
On or before the time called for above, one copy of any such agreement
shall be provided to the Town Accountant, the Finance Committee and
the Board of Selectmen; and an additional two copies of all agreements
and accompanying documents shall be placed on file in the following
locations no later than the time called for above before such
agreements are to come before the Town Meeting for any action:
(1) Board of Selectmen's office.
(2) Town Clerk's office.
For such agreements involving employees of the various divisions
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Works, in addition
to the offices of the Board of Selectmen and Town Clerk, the
same shall also be placed on file at the Board of Public Work's
Administration Building.
Once filed, said agreements and accompanying documents shall
be made available for inspection to the public during normal
business hours for each such location. A copy of the same shall be
provided to any person requesting a copy; provided, however, that
said copies shall be made only upon prior payment of the cost of
making said copies.
(3)
D.
It shall be the responsibility of each entity or person entering into such
an agreement on behalf of the Town to provide and file the required
number of copies of said documents to the entities and persons and in
the locations specified above. An additional copy shall also be provided
to the person charged with maintaining the Town's Internet website for
the purpose of posting the same thereon; provided, however, the failure
for the same to be so posted shall not be deemed a violation of the
provisions of this section.
E.
§ 50-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-9
1:27
Chapter 56
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 56-1. Powers and duties of Selectmen.
If a motion to appropriate any funds for any such agreement is made
without said agreements and documents having been provided or filed
as called for above, the question shall be postponed until the next
session of the Town Meeting held after such period has elapsed;
provided, upon a majority vote of Town Meeting for each such
agreement the provisions of this subsection may be waived, and a vote
taken on said agreement.
F.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, such
agreements and the powers and duties to negotiate the same shall
remain under the exclusive jurisdiction of the appropriate authorities
as granted by statute or such other applicable law, it being the specific
purpose of this section to require adequate notice of the provisions of
any such agreement be provided to Town Meeting prior to voting on any
requested appropriation for the same.
G.
The Selectmen shall in all cases, not otherwise provided for by law,
bring suit, in the name of the town, against the principal and sureties,
or either or any of them, named in any bond given to the town by any
officer, agent, contractor or other person, for breach of the conditions
of such bond.
A.
The Selectmen shall cause the appearance and answer of the town to
be entered and made in all suits brought against the town at law or in
equity, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and may employ
counsel to defend the same. They may commence and prosecute suits
at law and in equity, in the name of and on behalf of the town, in all
cases not otherwise provided by law or by this chapter, and may employ
counsel therein.
B.
The Selectmen shall consider all claims made against the town and may
settle any just claim, provided that in no case shall a settlement be so
made by a payment of more than $250 without authority of the town.
C.
The Selectmen shall have the power to sell, without the vote of the
town, any and all personal property belonging to the town and no
longer needed at public auction or private sale upon such terms as the
Selectmen deem proper, provided that the value does not exceed 250.
D.
The Selectmen shall furnish the Finance Committee on or before the
first of February of each year with a statement of expenditures of each
department or fund of the town with the amount appropriated therefor
or income therefrom, for the preceding fiscal year. They shall likewise
furnish a comparative statement showing receipts and expenditures of
each department or fund for the preceding two years. They shall report
E.
§ 50-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 56-1
1:28
§ 56-2. Treasurer to execute deeds.
Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land, the
same shall be executed by the Treasurer in behalf of the town, unless the
town shall otherwise vote in special cases.
§ 56-3. Town funds; payments by Treasurer.
The Town Treasurer shall have the custody of all the funds belonging to the
town, except funds for which other provision is made by law, and he/she
shall pay no money from the treasury except upon a warrant signed by or
under the direction of a majority of the Selectmen.
§ 56-4. Itemization and approval of bills.
All bills against the town shall, before the Selectmen give an order on the
Treasurer for their payment, be clearly itemized and, excepting the bills for
the salaries of all town officers, be approved by the officer on whose order
the bill was contracted.
§ 56-5. Clerk to have custody of public records.
The Town Clerk shall have the custody of all public records of the town, if
no other disposition of such records is made by law or ordinance, and shall
certify copies thereof. The word "records" as used above shall mean any
written or printed book, paper, map or plan.
§ 56-6. Clerk to supply ballots.
The Town Clerk shall provide and have in readiness for use at Town
Meetings a sufficient supply of "Yes" and "No" ballots. These ballots shall
not be distinguished from each other in size, shape, color, paper or ink, or
in size and style of type.
§ 56-7. Statement of receipts and expenditures; publication of
annual town reports.
All departments of the town shall make an itemized statement of receipts
and expenditures for publication in an annual town report. Town reports
the amounts of maturing notes or bonds, also the amount of interest (to
be paid) and any order outstanding indebtedness of the town to be paid
during the next fiscal year. [Amended 2-25-1939 ATM by Art. 7]
The Selectmen shall have the power to grant licenses to junk dealers.
Before such licenses shall be granted, all premises shall be inspected
by the Selectmen or their agent, making a written report on the same
and due notice of hearing being given. All such licenses may be revoked
at any time if places are improperly conducted or if in violation of state
laws governing the same.
F.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-7
1:29
shall be distributed not less than ten (10) days before the date of the Annual
Town Meeting.
§ 56-8. Pecuniary interest in contracts prohibited.
No town officer, elective or appointive, or member of a committee chosen
by the town, nor any agent of such officer or committee, shall have any
pecuniary interest in any contract or bargain made or approved in behalf
of the town by himself/herself, any board or committee of which he/she is a
member or for which he/she may act as agent. The Treasurer shall pay no
bills contracted in violation of this chapter.
§ 56-9. Town Collector. [Added 3-11-1944 ATM by Art. 24]
§ 56-10. Payment into treasury; statement. [Added 10-6-1949 STM
by Art. 7]
Every officer shall pay into the treasury of the town all amounts received
by him/her on behalf of the town, except as otherwise provided by law,
and shall make a true return thereof to the Accounting Officer or Town
Accountant, stating the accounts upon which such amounts were received.
§ 56-11. Town office hours. [Added 4-15-1975 ATM by Art. 46]
The hours during which the town offices at the Town Hall are to remain
open for public business shall be determined by vote of the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 56-12. Attorney representation in formation of districts. [Added
2-11-2004 STM by Art. 17]
The Collector of taxes shall collect, under the title of Town Collector, all
accounts due the town.
A.
All accounts coming due the town shall forthwith be committed by
the several officers, boards and committees of the town to the Town
Collector for collection.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow the Town to retain
counsel who may also represent other towns in the formation and
operation of a district of which the Town is or may be a member without
violating MGL c. 268A § 17(a) and (c). Such dual representation allows
the Town to pool resources for a common purpose and preserve scarce
Town funds.
A.
Scope. Pursuant to this section, the official duties of the town counsel
include representing the current or prospective member towns in the
information and operation of a district of which the Town is or may be
a member, provided that the interests of the Town would be advanced
by such dual representation and provided that such dual representation
would not cause a violation of rules governing attorney conduct. Town
B.
§ 56-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 56-12
1:30
Chapter 61
PERSONNEL
§ 61-1. Purpose and authorization.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish fair and equitable personnel
policies and to establish a system of personnel administration based on
merit principles that ensures a uniform, fair and efficient application of
personnel policies. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority
granted by Article LXXXIX of the Constitution of the Commonwealth, MGL
c. 41, §§ 108A and 108C, and Chapter 381 of the Acts of 2014, An Act
Establishing the Position of Town Administrator in the Town Of Fairhaven.
§ 61-2. Applicability.
All departments and positions shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, except elected officers, employees of the School Department, and
any other employee who is excluded by law. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the Town Administrator shall not be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any department head may be
exempted from the provisions of this chapter upon recommendation by
the Town Administrator and vote of the Board of Selectmen. Any such
exemption shall take effect upon the adoption of an employment contract
between the Town and the department head. If there is a conflict between
this chapter or any plans, policies, rules or regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter and an approved collective bargaining agreement,
the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement shall prevail.
§ 61-3. Human Resources Director.
With the approval of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Administrator shall
appoint a Human Resources Director who by experience and education
is qualified to administer this chapter and any plans, policies, rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 61-4. Personnel system.
A personnel system shall be established by the promulgation of policies
pursuant to § 61-5. The personnel system shall make use of modern
concepts of personnel management and shall include but not be limited to
the following elements:
counsel shall discharge such duties only when requested to do so
by the Board of Selectmen, who shall determine whether the dual
representation advances the interests of the Town and conforms to law.
Method of administration. A system of administration will be
incorporated which assigns specific responsibilities for all elements
of the personnel system, including maintaining personnel records,
A.
§ 56-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-4
1:31
§ 61-5. Adoption and amendment of policies and plans.
The Town Administrator, with approval of the Selectmen, shall promulgate
personnel policies and plans defining the rights, benefits and obligations of
employees subject to this chapter. Policies and plans shall be adopted or
amended as follows:
implementing effective recruitment and selection processes,
maintaining the classification and compensation plans, monitoring the
application of personnel policies and periodic reviews and evaluation of
the personnel system.
Classification plan. A position classification plan for all employees
subject to this chapter shall be established, based on similarity of
duties performed and the responsibilities assumed, so that the same
qualifications may be reasonably required for and the same schedule
of pay may be equitably applied to all positions in the same class.
No employee may be appointed to a position not included in the
classification plan.
B.
Compensation plan. A compensation plan for all positions subject to
this chapter shall consist of a schedule of pay grades, which may
include minimum, maximum and intermediate rates for each grade; an
official list indicating the assignment of each position to specific pay
grades; and vacations, holidays, sick leave, other leave and all other
benefits, provided that the payment of such wages and benefits may not
exceed the amount appropriated, or otherwise made lawfully available,
therefor.
C.
Recruitment and selection policy. A recruitment, employment,
promotion and transfer policy shall be established to ensure that
reasonable effort is made to attract qualified persons and that selection
criteria are job related.
D.
Personnel records. A centralized personnel recordkeeping system shall
be established to maintain essential personnel records.
E.
Equal opportunity. The Town shall provide equal opportunity in
employment without discrimination based upon race, color, religion,
national origin, sex or age, or as otherwise prohibited by law.
F.
Preparation of policies and classification and compensation plans. The
Town Administrator shall prepare or amend policies and plans with the
approval of the Selectmen. Any member of the Board of Selectmen,
any administrative authority, or any three persons may suggest
amendments for consideration by the Town Administrator. The Town
Administrator need not consider any proposal already considered in
the preceding six months. All new proposals or amendments shall
be submitted to the Town Administrator in writing. The Town
Administrator shall hold a public hearing on any proposed policies or
amendments. Any proposed policy or plan or amendment thereto shall
A.
§ 61-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 61-5
1:32
§ 61-6. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter and any policies adopted pursuant to this
chapter are severable. If any bylaw or policy provision is held invalid, the
remaining provisions of the bylaw or policy shall not be affected.
§ 61-7. Effective date.
This chapter is amended to eliminate the Personnel Board and to designate
the Town Administrator as the sole authority over the administration of
personnel policies, effective as voted at the May 6, 2017, Annual Town
Meeting. Notwithstanding the elimination of the Personnel Board, all
actions taken prior to the appointment of the Town Administrator by the
Personnel Board within its authority, or by any other Town official or board,
with respect to personnel, including the appointment of all officers and
employees, shall continue in full force and effect subject to future action by
the Town Administrator within the Town Administrator's authority.
be posted at least five days prior to the public hearing in prominent
work locations. Copies of proposals shall be provided to representatives
of each employee collective bargaining unit and a copy shall be filed
with the Selectmen.
Public hearing. The Town Administrator shall present the proposed
policies or amendments, the purpose of the proposal and the
implications of any proposed change at the public hearing. Any person
may attend the hearing, speak and present information. Within 20
days after the public hearing, the Town Administrator shall make a
determination on the proposed policies and shall recommend that the
Selectmen adopt the policies or amendments, with or without
modifications, reject the policies or amendments or indicate that
further study is necessary.
B.
Recommended policies. The Town Administrator shall transmit
recommendations, in writing, to the Selectmen within 20 days after
determination on the proposed recommendations or amendments. The
recommendations of the Town Administrator shall contain the text of
the policy and any explanation that is deemed necessary. The Selectmen
may adopt, reject or return the recommendations for further study
to the Town Administrator. The Selectmen need only act on proposed
policies which the Town Administrator has recommended for adoption.
Policies shall become effective upon their filing with the Town Clerk
following approval by the Selectmen, unless some later date is
specified.
C.
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-7
1:33
Chapter 65
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board rules and regulations — See
Division 3.
§ 65-1. Board established.
There shall be a Planning Board of eight members under the provisions of
MGL c. 41, § 81A, with all of the powers and duties provided therein. Two
members shall be elected at each annual town election for a term of four
years.
§ 65-2. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurring in the Board shall be filled in accordance with MGL c.
41, § 81A.
§ 65-3. Powers and duties.
The duties of such Board shall be such as are stated in MGL c. 41, §§ 81A
to 81J, and further to consider and advise upon municipal improvements,
either at the request of other officials of the town or upon its own initiative.
The Board shall meet at regular intervals. It may also hold public meetings.
It shall at all times have access to all public documents or information in
the possession of any town official or department. It shall examine the plans
for the exterior of any public building, monument or similar feature and
for the development and treatment of the grounds about the same before
the adoption thereof, and may make such recommendations thereon as it
may deem needful. It may make investigations and studies relative to new
street and park developments. It may provide for public lectures and other
educational work in connection with its recommendations. Said Board may
incur expenses necessary to the carrying on of its work within the amount
of its annual appropriation.
§ 65-4. Plans requiring Planning Board approval.
All plans for laying out, extending, discontinuing or changing the limits of
any way, street, public park or square and every purchase of land for the
site of public buildings, and all plans for the location, erection or alteration
of public buildings, shall be submitted to said Board for its opinion. No
public way shall be laid out, altered, relocated or discontinued, unless
the proposed laying out, alteration, relocation or discontinuance has been
referred to the Planning Board and such Board has reported thereon or has
allowed 45 days to elapse after such reference without submitting its report
(MGL c. 41, § 81-I).
§ 61-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 65-5
1:34
§ 65-5. Annual report.
Such Board shall make a report to the town annually, giving information
regarding the conditions of the town and any plans or proposals for the
development of the town and estimates of the cost thereof. Such report shall
be sent to the Selectmen not later than such time in January in each year as
Selectmen may prescribe or as may be prescribed by law in force relative to
reports, and a copy thereof shall be filed with the appropriate state agency.
§ 65-6. Subdivision control. [Added 5-11-1994 ATM by Art. 35]
The Planning Board will be responsible for administration of the Subdivision
Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81-K through 81-GG, the purpose of subdivision
control being to protect the safety, convenience and welfare of the
inhabitants of Fairhaven by regulating the laying out and construction of
ways which provide access to the lots within a subdivision as provided for
under MGL c. 41, § 81-M.
§ 65-7. Initiation of new bylaws; hearings. [Added 5-11-1994 ATM
by Art. 35]
The Planning Board will be responsible for the initiation of new zoning
bylaws or amendments in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 5, and will hold
public hearings for this purpose in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 11.
§ 65-8. Master Plan. [Added 5-11-1994 ATM by Art. 35]
§ 65-9. Professional consultants. [Added 5-11-1994 ATM by Art. 35]
The Planning Board may, when funds are appropriated by Town Meeting,
engage the services of professional consultants or planners who will assist
it in zoning and subdivision reform in keeping with the present and future
needs of Fairhaven. Such assistants will be hired and remain under the
direct control of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall, in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81-D, make
a Master Plan of Fairhaven, or such part or parts thereof as said Board
may deem advisable, and from time to time may extend or perfect such
plan.
A.
Such plan shall be a statement, through text, maps, illustrations or
other forms of communication, that is designed to provide a basis
for decisionmaking regarding the long-term physical development of
Fairhaven.
B.
§ 65-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-9
1:35
Chapter 73
TAX ABATEMENT AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax titles — See Ch. 74.
§ 73-1. Statutory authority.
The Town is authorized, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
59, Section 59A, as amended, to enter into agreements regarding payment
or abatement of some or all of the outstanding real estate taxes, interest,
and penalties owed on a site or portions of a site from or at which there has
been a release of oil or hazardous materials.
§ 73-2. Conditions and components.
The following are necessary conditions and components of any such
agreement:
The site or a portion thereof must be one from, or at which, there has
been a contaminated release of oil or hazardous material.
A.
B. The site or a portion thereof is zoned for commercial or industrial uses.
The agreement must be for the purpose of environmental cleanup and
redevelopment of such site, and shall require submission of any plans
to address such cleanup and redevelopment.
C.
The agreement must provide:
The principal amount due of outstanding taxes, interest and
penalties, before abatement of any amount thereof;
(1)
(2) The amount of taxes, interest and penalties to be abated, if any;
The net amount of taxes, interest and penalties due after
abatement;
(3)
(4) The percent of interest to accrue, if determined applicable;
(5) The monthly payments, if applicable;
(6) The inception date of payment;
(7) The date of final payment; and
(8) Late penalties and other terms of repayment.
D.
Agreements can only be made with an eligible person as defined under
MGL c. 21E, § 2.
E.
§ 65-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 73-2
1:36
§ 73-3. Provision of copies.
Copies of the agreement shall be provided to the eligible person, the Board
of Selectmen, the Commissioner of Revenue, the Department of
Environmental Protection and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Chapter 74
TAX TITLES
§ 74-1. Selling of title conveyed to town for nonpayment of taxes.
The Treasurer, prior to the foreclosure of the right to redeem, may sell
and assign any title conveyed to the town by a Tax Collector's deed for
nonpayment of taxes.
§ 74-2. Public sale; notice.
After foreclosure by the town of the right of redemption under a tax title or
taking, the Selectmen may sell said land at public sale by giving notice of
the time and place of sale by publication one or more times in a newspaper
published in this town.
§ 74-3. Low-value sale. [Added 7-27-1939 STM by Art. 9]
The Selectmen shall sell at private sale any and all parcels of land to which
the town has or will obtain title under MGL c. 60, §§ 79 and 80, being a socalled
low-value sale.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 82
ALARMS
Such agreements shall be negotiated by a committee consisting of
the Town Administrator, the Town Treasurer and the Chair, or other
designee, of the Board of Assessors, and shall be subject to approval by
the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 5-7-2016 ATM by Art. 36]
F.
Such agreements shall be signed by the eligible person and the
Chairman of the Board of Selectmen.
G.
H. Such agreements shall be notarized and attested to by the Town Clerk.
Such agreements shall contain any other provisions as may be required
by law or regulation of the Department of Revenue.
I.
In the event any such agreement reduces the tax to be paid, abatements
must be processed and charged to the overlays for the fiscal years of
the taxes abated.
J.
§ 73-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-1
1:37
§ 82-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated;
ALARM — A signaling device of any description that, if activated, is
reasonably calculated to summons the Police Department, including, but not
limited to, so called "burglar alarms," "holdup alarms" and "panic alarms."
Motor vehicle alarms, fire alarms, and alarms on governmental buildings
shall be exempt from this chapter.
FALSE ALARM — Activation of an alarm resulting in a response by the
Police Department where there is no actual or threatened criminal activity
or harm to a person or property. False alarms include, but are not limited
to, an alarm activated through mechanical failure, malfunction improper
installation, negligence or human error. Activation of an alarm shall not be
considered a false alarm when it is caused by a power outage, earthquake,
damage to a building or severe weather conditions.
§ 82-2. Records.
Whenever an alarm is activated by whatever means with the result that
there is a response to the location of the alarm by the Police Department, a
record of the alarm shall be made and kept by the Police Department, and
notice shall be posted at the property. If such alarm is a false alarm, the
notice shall specify.
§ 82-3. False alarms; service fees.
It shall be unlawful for an alarm to be falsely activated more than three
times in a calendar year. Beginning with the fourth false alarm in a calendar
year, the owner or person in control of such premises shall pay a service
fee of $25 per occurrence to the Fairhaven Police Department. Starting
with the fifth false alarm and up to and including the ninth false alarm in
a calendar year, the owner or person in control of such premises shall pay
a service fee of $50 per occurrence. Starting with the 10th false alarm in
a calendar year, the service fee shall be $100 per occurrence. Notice of
such service fee shall be posted at the premises or mailed to the owner
or person in control of such premises. The service fee shall be paid to the
Fairhaven Police Department with 30 days of notice. After 30 days, interest
shall accrue at the maximum statutory rate as provided for in MGL c. 40
§ 21E and MGL c. 59 § 57.
§ 82-4. Automatic shut off devices; service fees.
Any audible alarm installed after April 1, 2003 shall be equipped with an
automatic shut off device that shall shut off the audible component of the
alarm within 30 minutes of activation. In the event of a response by the
Fairhaven Police Department to an alarm in violation of this provision, the
owner or person in control of such premises shall pay a service fee or $50
to the Fairhaven Police Department. Notice of such violation and service
§ 82-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 82-4
1:38
fee shall be posted at the premises or mailed to the owner or person in
control of such premises, and, if the violation is not corrected within 30 days
of said notice, each day thereafter shall be deemed a separate violation,
until brought into compliance. The service fee shall be paid to the Fairhaven
Police Department within 30 days of notice. After 30 days, interest shall
accrue at the maximum statutory rate as provided for in MGL c. 40 § 21E
and MGL c. 59 § 57.
§ 82-5. Recorder messages; service fees.
It shall be unlawful to install, allow to install, or use any alarm system
that notifies the police communications center of an alarm activation by
use of a recorded message. In the event of a response by the Fairhaven
Police Department to an alarm in violation of this provision, the owner or
person in control of such premises shall pay a service fee of $50 to the
Fairhaven Police Department. Notice of such violation and service fee shall
be posted at the premises or mailed to the owner or person in control
of such premises, and, if the violation is not corrected within 30 days of
said notice, each day thereafter shall be deemed a separate violation, until
brought into compliance. The service fee shall be paid to the Fairhaven
Police Department within 30 days of notice. After 30 days, interest shall
accrue at the maximum statutory rate as provided for in MGL c. 40 § 21E
and MGL c. 59 § 57.
Chapter 83
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverage licensing rules — See Ch.
204.
§ 83-1. Public consumption. [Amended 5-5-2007 ATM by Art. 28;
5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 30]
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess an open container
of alcoholic beverage or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol as
defined by MGL c. 94C, § 1, on any public way or any way in which the
public has a right of access, including persons in or upon a motor vehicle
while on any public way or any way in which the public has a right of access,
or on any sidewalk appurtenant thereto, and on or within any park, or upon
the grounds of any school or public building or public beach within the Town
of Fairhaven.
§ 83-2. Violations and penalties; noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $100. Any Fairhaven Police Officer taking cognizance of
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:39
a violation of this chapter may enforce this chapter through noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D and § 1-6 (Noncriminal
disposition) of this Code.
§ 83-3. Exception.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Board of Selectmen
as licensing authority may grant a temporary permit for consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any public place subject to terms and conditions set
by the Board.
§ 83-4. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquid intended for human consumption as
a beverage and containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume at sixty
degrees F.
OPEN CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other receptacle used to contain
an alcoholic beverage that has the cap, lid or cork removed or otherwise is
opened in a manner so that the contents can be poured or consumed.
Chapter 87
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 405. Rodent infestation — See Ch. 461.
§ 83-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 83-4
1:40
PART 1
Dogs
[Adopted 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 69 (Ch. XVIII of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 87-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article I, the following terms mean:
DOG OFFICER — The person or persons employed by the Town as its
enforcement officer and shall include any police officer or constable of said
town.
DOG POUND — Any premises designated by action of the Town for the
purpose of impounding dogs and caring for all dogs found running at large
in violation of this Part 1.
OWNER — Any person, group of persons or corporation owning or keeping
or harboring a dog or dogs.
RESTRAINT[Amended 5-4-1996 ATM by Art. 34] — A dog shall be
considered under restraint within the meaning of this Part 1 if:
§ 87-2. Enforcement.
The provisions of this Part 1 shall be enforced by the Dog Officer or Dog
Officers and any police officer or constable of said town.
§ 87-3. Restraint.
The owner shall keep his/her dog under restraint at all times.
§ 87-4. Impoundment fees. [Amended 5-5-1987 ATM by Art. 16]
Any dog impounded hereunder may be reclaimed as herein provided upon
payment by the owner to the Dog Officer of the sum of $4 for each day such
dog is kept.4
§ 87-5. Confinement of certain dogs.
A. The animal is within the property limits of its owner or keeper; or
The animal is under the immediate control of its owner or custodian
on a leash or chain affixed to the collar or harness of the animal.
[Amended 10-16-2002 STM by Art. 9]
B.
The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every
fierce, dangerous or vicious dog and not take such dog out of such
building or secure enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled and
upon a leash. The Dog Officer may destroy any such dog which is found
not to be so confined and without such a muzzle.
A.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 206, Part 1, Animal Control Fees, for the current animal control fee
structure.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:41
§ 87-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-10-1978 ATM by Art.
28; 1-11-1979 STM by Art. 2; 5-4-1996 ATM by Art. 34]
Penalties for the violation of any provision of this Part 1 shall be assessed
and collected in accordance with the procedure established under MGL c.
140, § 173A (Noncriminal Disposition of Complaints for Violation of Dog
Control Laws); provided, however, that notwithstanding the schedule of
fines provided under said law, the fine for the first violation shall be $25, and
the fine for the second and each subsequent violation shall be $50, except
as provided in § 87-9.
§ 87-7. License fee. [Added 5-1-1982 ATM by Art. 10]
In addition to the dog license fee described in MGL c. 140, § 139, a fee of
$1 shall be paid to the Town for each license issued therefor. The foregoing
shall take effect with the license period commencing April 1, 1983.
§ 87-8. Licensing of dogs. [Added 5-4-1985 ATM by Art. 41]
A person who at the commencement of a license period (the time between
April 1 and the following March 31 of any year, both dates inclusive)
becomes the owner or keeper within the Town of Fairhaven of a dog six
months old or over which is not duly licensed and the owner or keeper of a
dog when it becomes six months old during a license period shall cause it
to be registered, numbered, described and licensed on or before June 10 of
the current license period and until the end of such license period, and the
owner of a dog so registered, numbered, described and licensed during any
license period, in order to own or keep such dog after the beginning of the
succeeding license period, shall, before the beginning thereof, cause it to be
registered, numbered, described and licensed for such period as provided
by MGL c. 140, § 137.
§ 87-9. Statutory authority; assessment of penalties. [Added
5-4-1985 ATM by Art. 41]
This section and preceding § 87-8 are enacted pursuant to authority of MGL
c. 140, §§ 173 and 173A. Penalties for the violation of § 87-8 hereof shall
be assessed and collected in accordance with the procedure established
under said § 173A (Noncriminal Disposition of Complaints for Violation of
Municipal Dog Control Laws); provided, however, that the fine for any
violation of § 87-8 hereof, including the first offense, will be the sum of $25.
The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure any dog
that has been impounded more than twice by the Dog Officer and not
take such dog out of such building or secure enclosure unless such a
dog is well secured by a leash. Failure to do so may result in such dog
being taken permanently.
B.
§ 87-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 87-10
1:42
§ 87-10. Sanitary disposal of dog excrement.5 [Added 11-23-1998
STM by Art. 17]
No person owning or having custody or control of a dog shall permit such
dog to defecate on any public street or sidewalk of the Town, including the
Town wharves, or on any public park, beach or grounds of a public building,
including school grounds, unless such person picks up the dog waste and
disposes of it in a sanitary manner, including lawful disposal as solid waste
or sewage. This section shall not apply to the visually impaired in custody
or control of a Seeing Eye dog, or to any person unable to comply with the
requirements of this section due to a physical disability. This section may
be enforced by the Dog Officer, the Board of Health Agent, and any other
person so designated by the Board of Health or the Board of Selectmen.
§ 87-11. Excessive barking or other disturbance. [Added 5-5-2001
by Art. 6]
Upon written complaint, the Police Department or Animal Control
Officer may take cognizance that a dog owned or harbored in the Town
is a nuisance by reason of excessive barking or other disturbance or
that by such barking or other disturbance is a source of annoyance
to any person. The Police Department or Animal Control Officer shall
investigate said complaint and inform the person owning or harboring
such dog in writing to abate the nuisance.
A.
If the Police Department or the Animal Control Officer shall issue two
such warnings to a person in one calendar year, the Police Department
or Animal Control Officer shall fine the person $50 for each successive
offense. It shall be in the discretion of the Police Officer or Animal
Control Officer issuing the fine to pursue a violation of this section
under criminal or noncriminal disposition.
B.
5. Editor's Note: A regulation adopted by the Board of Health on 7-8-2015 provided that each
violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $100 per offense.
§ 87-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-11
1:43
Chapter 93
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 97. Excavations and wells — See Ch. 110.
§ 93-1. Building Commissioner. [Amended 5-8-1986 ATM by Art. 37]
§ 93-2. Permit fees.
A schedule of fees for permits as authorized under Section 118.0 of the
Basic Code shall be as established and revised from time to time by the
Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 97
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 97-1. Statutory authority.
Acting under the authority granted under MGL c. 40, § 21, and MGL c.
148, § 59, as amended, the Town of Fairhaven establishes a Numbering
of Buildings Bylaw, for the numbering of residential, commercial and
industrial buildings in the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 97-2. Purpose.
The standards set forth in this chapter are made for the purpose of
promoting the public health and safety by providing a means of locating
residential, commercial and industrial property and all other structures
The Building Commissioner shall be appointed in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 143, § 3Y, which was accepted by the town under
Article 9 of the 1987 Annual Town Meeting.
A.
The office of Wiring Inspector, Gas Inspector, Plumbing Inspector and
such other inspection offices as the appointing authority thereof shall
so determine shall be placed under the administrative control and
supervision of the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner
shall keep consolidated records of all inspections made pursuant to the
Basic Code or any other bylaws or regulations concerning the erection,
alteration and demolition of buildings within the town.
B.
The compensation of the Building Commissioner shall be as established
by the Personnel Bylaw and Classification Plan.6
C.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Personnel.
§ 87-11 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 97-2
1:44
by police, fire, rescue and other emergency services and for such other
purposes requiring the location of such structures as may be required.
§ 97-3. Administration.
§ 97-4. Criteria for numbering system.
The following criteria shall govern the development of the numbering
system and the assignment of numbers:
This chapter shall be administered by the Town of Fairhaven Assessor's
office which shall assign building numbers to all existing and new
buildings for residential, commercial, industrial and all other structures
in conformity with the plan developed pursuant to this chapter. The
Assessor's office shall also be responsible for the maintaining of the
following official records of this numbering system, which is to include:
A town-wide alphabetical list of property owners by last name,
showing assigned numbers.
(1)
A town-wide alphabetical list of streets with the property owners
listed in order of their assigned numbers.
(2)
A town-wide alphabetical list of property owners listed by map and
lot number with address.
(3)
A.
B. Similar or duplicate street names shall not be accepted or allowed.
C. All new names of streets shall be applied by the Assessor's office.
Wherever possible changes of similar or duplicate street names shall be
made where the least number of residents are involved.
D.
Should the streets of the same name have an equal number of residents,
the newest street shall be changed.
E.
Odd and even numbers. On streets running north-south, the odd
numbers shall be placed on the east side of the street and even numbers
placed on the west side of the street. On streets running east-west, the
odd number shall be placed on the south side of the street and the even
number placed on the north side of the street.
A.
Number origins. On streets running north-south, the lower numbers
shall begin at the most southerly point. On streets running east-west,
the lowest numbers shall begin at the most westerly point. On streets
running in other directions, numbers shall begin in the most southerly
point or most westerly point.
B.
C. Exceptions. There shall be no exceptions to the numbering system.
§ 97-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:45
§ 97-5. Compliance.
All occupants, residents and businesses are required to display assigned
numbers in the following manner:
Chapter 106
ENTERTAINMENT
§ 106-1. Sunday activities; penalties.
Whoever on Sunday conducts any activity or offers the use of any
equipment, for which activity or use a Sunday entertainment license is
required and for which a license has not been granted, shall be punished by
a fine of $50 for each violation.
§ 106-2. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
In addition, such violation, whether or not otherwise prosecuted, may be
considered by any town board or officer as grounds for the suspension,
revocation or denial of any other license applicable to the premises upon
which such suspension occurred.
Chapter 110
EXCAVATIONS AND WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wells — See Ch. 487.
§ 110-1. Erection of barriers; penalty.
Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or
structure is within 30 feet of the roadway, the assigned number shall be
displayed on the front of the residence or structure in clear view of the
street and in the vicinity of the front door or entry.
A.
Number at the street line. Where the residence or structure is 30 feet
or more from the roadway, the assigned number shall be displayed on
the front of the residence or structure in the vicinity of the front door
or entry and shall also be displayed on a post, fence or the mailbox at
the property line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence
or structure.
B.
Any person excavating land or any person in charge of such excavation
and any owner of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers
or take other suitable measures within two days after such person
has been notified, in writing, by the Building Commissioner or the
A.
§ 97-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 110-1
1:46
§ 110-2. Covering or filling of wells; penalty.
Chapter 113
EXPLOSIVES AND INFLAMMABLE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Underground storage tanks — See Ch. 176.
§ 113-1. Issuing of licenses.
The Board of Selectmen may, as provided by MGL c. 148, § 13, issue a
license for the keeping, storage, manufacture or sale of any of the items
named in MGL c. 148, § 9.
§ 113-2. Conditions and restrictions.
Any such license granted shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed in the license by the Board of Selectmen, which may
include a condition that the license be exercised to such extent and within
such period as may be fixed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 113-3. License and registration fees.
Selectmen that in his, her or their opinion such excavation constitutes
a hazard to public safety.
Whoever violates any of the provision of this section shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $200 per day for every day such person is in
violation of such notice commencing with the fourth day thereof. The
Superior Court has jurisdiction in equity to compel compliance with this
section. See MGL c. 40, § 21, cl. (19), as amended.
B.
Owners of land whereon is located an abandoned well or a well in use
shall either provide a covering for such well capable of sustaining a
weight of 300 pounds or fill same to the level of the ground.
A.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500. See MGL c. 40, § 21,
cl. (20), as amended.
B.
The fees to be charged for licenses granted under this chapter are
hereby established as follows:
(1) Zero to 8,000 gallons: $25.
(2) More than 8,000 gallons: $50.
A.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-3
1:47
Chapter 119
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board fees — See Ch. 306. Board of Health fees — See Ch. 422.
The owner or occupant of any land licensed as provided heretofore
shall, on or before the 13th day of April each year, file with the Town
Clerk a certificate of registration setting forth the name and address of
the holder of such license and pay therefor a fee of $15.
B.
The license fee and annual registration fee shall be waived for any
political subdivision or agency thereof.
C.
§ 113-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 113-3
1:48
PART 1
Sealer of Weights and Measures
[Adopted 5-5-1984 ATM by Art. 13 (Ch. XXIV of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 119-1. Establishment of fees. [Amended 5-1-1999 STM by Art. 18]
Except as otherwise provided, sealers and deputy sealers shall receive
the following fees for sealing and inspecting the following weighing and
measuring devices and automated retail checkout systems:
Device Fee
Balances and scales
Over 10,000 pounds capacity $75.00
Over 5,000 to 10,000 pounds
capacity
$40.00
Over 1,000 to 5,000 pounds
capacity
$30.00
Over 100 to 1,000 pounds
capacity
$25.00
1 to 100 pounds capacity $10.00
Weights
Avoirdupois (each) $1.00
Metric (each) $1.00
Apothecary (each) $1.00
Troy (each) $1.00
Certified weights (each) $4.00
Capacity measures
Vehicle tanks, each indicator $ 8.00
Each 100 gallons or fraction
thereof
$4.00
Liquid
1 gallon or less $1.00
More than 1 gallon $2.00
Liquid measuring meters
Inlet 1/2 inch or less (oil,
grease)
$8.00
Inlet more than 1/2 inch to 1
inch (gasoline)
$15.00
Inlet more than 1 inch
Vehicle tank pump $30.00
Vehicle tank gravity $45.00
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-1
1:49
Device Fee
Bulk storage $50.00
User furnishes prover $30.00
Pumps
Each stop pump $2.00
Other devices
Taxi meters $20.00
Odometer-Hubodometer $20.00
Leather measuring
(semiannual)
$8.00
Wire/rope/cordage $8.00
Linear measure
Yardsticks $1.00
Tapes $1.00
Miscellaneous
Milk jars, per gross $16.00
Dry measures $1.00
Reverse vending machines $10.00
Automatic electronic checkouts
Fewer than 4 cash registers or
computer terminals
$75.00
No less than 4 no more than 11
cash registers or computer
terminals
$150.00
More than 11 cash registers or
computer terminals
$250.00
§ 119-2. Effective date.
The foregoing fees shall become effective and replace fees presently in
effect on July 1, 1984.
§ 119-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 119-2
1:50
PART 2
Fire Department
[Adopted 5-5-1987 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 119-3. Acceptance of fee schedule.
The following is the fee schedule pertaining to Fire Department permits:
Type of Permit or Item Fee
Blasting permit $5.00
Oil burner permit $5.00
LPG storage permit $5.00
Model rockets permit $2.00
Removal of tanks permit, per
tank
$5.00
New tank installation permit,
per tank
$5.00
Smokeless/black powder permits 3.00
Fire report photocopies
First page $3.00
Each additional page $1.00
Fireworks permits (N/C for
town)
$5.00
Tank truck inspections $5.00
Portable space heaters used in
construction sites (temporary)
$5.00
Fumigation permit $3.00
§ 119-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:51

PART 3
Clerk
[Adopted 5-7-1988 STM by Art. 7; (Ch. XXV of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 119-4. Establishment of fees.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 262, § 34, the following fees are
established for the office of Town Clerk.
Item Fee
Correcting errors in a record of birth $10.00
Furnishing certificate of birth $5.00
Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of birth
$4.00
Entering delayed record of birth $10.00
Filing certificate of a person
conducting business under any title
other than real name
$20.00
Filing by a person conducting
business under any title other than
his/her real name of a statement of
change of residence or of his/her
discontinuance, retirement or
withdrawal from or change of
location of such business
$10.00
Furnishing certified copy of
certificate of person conducting
business under any title other than
his/her real name or a statement by
such person of his/her
discontinuance, retirement or
withdrawal from such business
$5.00
Recording the name and address, the
date and number of the certificate
issued to a person registered for the
practice of podiatry in the
commonwealth
$20.00
Correcting errors in a record of
death
$10.00
Furnishing a certificate of death $5.00
Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of death
$4.00
Entering notice of intention of
marriage and issuing certificates
thereof
$15.00
§ 119-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-4
1:53
Item Fee
Entering certificate of marriage filed
by persons married out of the
commonwealth
$5.00
Issuing certificate of marriage $5.00
Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of marriage
$4.00
Correcting errors in a record of
marriage
$10.00
Recording power of attorney $10.00
Recording certificate of registration
granted to a person to engage in the
practice of optometry or issuing a
certified copy thereof
$20.00
Recording the name of the owner of
a certificate of registration as a
physician or osteopath in the
commonwealth
$20.00
Recording order granting locations of
poles, piers, abutments or conduits,
alterations or transfers thereof and
increase in number of wires and
cable or attachments under
provisions of MGL c. 166, § 22
$40.00; additional streets $10.00
Examining records or papers relating
to birth, marriage or death upon the
application of any person
Actual expense thereof, but not less
than $5.00
Copying any manuscript or record
pertaining to a birth, marriage or
death
$5.00
Receiving and filing a complete
inventory of all items to be included
in a closing-out sale
First page $10.00
Additional page $2.00
Filing a copy of written instrument or
declaration of trust by trustees of an
association or trust or any
amendment thereof as provided by
MGL c. 182, § 2
$20.00
Recording any other documents
First page $10.00
Additional page $2.00
§ 119-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 119-4
1:54
Item Fee
Voter's certificate $5.00
§ 119-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-4
1:55
Chapter 122
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 93.
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the safety of the Town of Fairhaven
residents from carbon monoxide poisoning.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR — A device designed to
detect the presence of carbon monoxide, and which complies with all
applicable state and federal regulations, bears the label of a nationally
recognized standard testing laboratory, and meets the revised standard of
at least UL 2034 dated October 1, 1995 and subsequent revisions or its
equivalent.
FIRE CHIEF — The head of the Fire Department, or his or her designee.
TOWN — Town of Fairhaven.
§ 122-3. Sale or transfer of any building or structure.
Upon the sale or transfer of any building or structure designed or occupied
in whole or in part for residential purposes in the Town, the seller shall
submit to an inspection by the Fire Chief for purposes of compliance with
this chapter.
§ 122-4. Installation of carbon monoxide detectors.
Any building or structure designed or occupied in whole or in part for
residential purposes in the Town which utilizes a fossil fuel powered
heating unit contained within the interior of the building or structure
shall, upon the sale or other conveyance of an interest in title to such
building or structure, be equipped with approved carbon monoxide
detectors by the seller. Owner(s) of such building or structure shall
install either an approved battery-powered carbon monoxide detector,
an approved primary-powered carbon monoxide detector or a
combination-powered carbon monoxide detector. The carbon monoxide
detector shall be placed outside the sleeping area but not less than
15 feet from the heating unit. The carbon monoxide detector shall
be installed per the manufacturer's specifications. The Fire Chief may
A.
§ 119-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 122-4
1:56
§ 122-5. Certificate of compliance and inspections.
§ 122-6. Fines and enforcement.
§ 122-7. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 122-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2006, or on such later
date as may otherwise be provided by law, and shall apply thereafter to
any building or structure designed or occupied in whole or in part for
residential purposes in the Town which utilizes a fossil fuel powered heating
unit contained within the interior of the building or structure, upon the sale
or other conveyance of an interest in title to such building or structure on
and after such effective date.
Chapter 125
require the installation of additional units if it is deemed necessary
because of the nature or design of the structure.
The owner of a building or structure, which is subject to the provisions
of this chapter, shall supply, install, test as per the manufacturer's
specifications, and maintain required carbon monoxide detectors. The
owner shall also supply all the necessary equipment required for the
operation of carbon monoxide detectors.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way, to make inoperable
a carbon monoxide detector required under this chapter, except in
the normal procedure of maintenance, including the replacement of
batteries.
C.
The Fire Chief shall, upon inspecting carbon monoxide detectors
required by this chapter, issue a stamp of endorsement affixed to the
certificate of compliance (MGL c. 148, § 26F) required upon sale or
transfer of all structures used in whole or in part for residential
purposes. Only certificates of compliance with the carbon monoxide
detector endorsement will be released to the property owner.
A.
No additional fee will be charged for the inspection required by this
chapter.
B.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of $100, for each day of such violation.
A.
The Fairhaven Fire Chief and/or his or her designee shall be the
enforcing persons of this chapter.
B.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:57
GARAGES, SERVICE STATIONS AND UNREGISTERED MOTOR
VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Location of automobile services — See Ch.
198, § 198-25.
§ 125-1. License required.
§ 125-2. Issuing of license by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen, after public hearing, may issue an original or
renewal license for the operation of a garage, repair shop or service station.
§ 125-3. Expiration of license.
A license issued under this chapter shall expire on the last day of December
next following its effective date of issuance, except that a license issued
after the first day of October shall expire on the last day of December of the
following calendar year.
§ 125-4. Application for license; fee.
Application for a license or renewal under this chapter shall be made in
writing to the Board of Selectmen on a form provided by the Board with
an application fee of $10. The Board may reject any application which it
deems inadequately completed. Upon receipt of a completed application,
the Board shall schedule a public hearing. Renewal applications should be
filed no later than the last business day in November.
§ 125-5. Notice of hearing.
Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the applicant to the owners
and occupants of land abutting the subject premises, including land directly
across any way from the subject premises, by mail, return receipt
requested, at least 10 days before the public hearing. In addition the
applicant shall cause the same notice to be printed in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town at least one week before the public hearing.
No person, who is not licensed under this chapter for the operation of
a garage, repair shop or service station or under MGL c. 140 for the
sale of motor vehicles, shall keep more than one unregistered motor
vehicle ungaraged on premises owned by him/her or under his/her
control, except farm vehicles used on the premises for farming. No such
unlicensed person shall keep any unregistered motor vehicle or any
vehicle in need of substantial repair in a yard fronting on a way.
A.
No person or employee of a person who is not licensed under this
chapter shall operate a garage, repair shop or service station.
B.
§ 122-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 125-5
1:58
The notice shall be in a form provided by the Board of Selectmen. Proof
of such notice shall be made by the applicant to the Board at the public
hearing. The Board may vary the notice requirements of this section if it
determines by majority vote that equivalent or actual notice was given or
that the public interest would be served by waiving such requirements.
§ 125-6. Conditions imposed by Board.
The Board of Selectmen may issue a license under this chapter if it
determines that the operation of the licensed activity is not detrimental to
the neighborhood and is consistent with the protection and promotion of
the convenience, health, morals, safety and welfare of the community. The
Board may impose conditions in writing upon any license issued hereunder.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, limitations on the hours
and days of operation, the noise and odor emanating from the premises,
the location, number and type of vehicles or parts stored externally on the
premises and any other conditions that the Board of Selectmen determines
to protect or promote the interest in this chapter.
§ 125-7. Transfer of licenses.
A license issued under this chapter may not be transferred to another
person or premises.
§ 125-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
condition imposed on a license pursuant to § 125-6 shall be subject to a fine
of $50 per violation for each day that such violation continues.
§ 125-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter, the Board
of Selectmen may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder if it
determines after hearing that the license holder has violated the provisions
of this chapter or any condition imposed on a license pursuant to § 125-6 or
that the licensed operation is in violation of any other law.
§ 125-10. Exceptions.
The prohibition of § 125-1B of this chapter shall not apply to any person
operating a garage, repair shop or service station as of the effective date of
this chapter until the first day of January next following such effective date.
§ 125-11. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
GARAGE — Any building or other structure for the storage of motor
vehicles, whether or not incidental to the repair or service of such vehicles,
but not including a garage accessory to a residential structure.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-11
1:59
MOTOR VEHICLE — Motor vehicle as defined by the Massachusetts
General Laws and automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, motor homes,
trailers, mobile homes, snowmobiles, motorcycles, trailbikes, minibikes and
any other form of motorized or self-propelled vehicle.
REPAIR SHOP — Any building or other structure or premises for the repair
or service of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
SERVICE STATION — A gasoline service or sales station, including selfservice
gasoline stations, including a car wash or other place for
nonmechanical services.[Amended 5-3-1997 STM by Art. 16]
VEHICLE IN NEED OF SUBSTANTIAL REPAIR — A motor vehicle which
is inoperable due to mechanical damage or deterioration or the removal of
parts or which is not in present use due to mechanical or body damage or
deterioration or the removal of parts.
Chapter 132
HARBOR POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Union Wharf — See Ch. 225.
Nasketucket River Basin pesticide
application — See Ch. 483, Part 1.
Fees for boat marinas — See Ch. 422.
Discharge of polluted waters — See Ch. 448.
Boat pump-out haulers — See Ch. 466.
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BOAT — Any vessel or watercraft moved by oars, paddles, sails or other
power mechanism, inboard or outboard, or any other vessel or structure
floating upon the water, whether or not capable of self-locomotion.
MARINA — All areas where four or more boats are berthed, anchored, tied,
stored, docked or otherwise kept, whether private or public, and includes a
boat or boats for hire.
OWNER — Any person who alone or jointly or severally with others, or
any partnership, corporation or other entity who or which holds legal or
equitable title to a marina.
POLLUTION — Sewage, garbage, trash and debris, chemicals, petroleum
products or any other materials which might contaminate or degrade the
water quality.
WATERS OF THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN — All streams, lakes, marshes,
ponds, watercourses, waterways and all other bodies or accumulations of
§ 125-11 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 132-1
1:60
water, natural or artificial, public or private, laying within the corporate
boundaries of subject town.
§ 132-2. Requirements of marina owners.
All owners of marinas or areas where boats are berthed shall provide
adequate toilet facilities, portable water supply and garbage containers
which meet the requirements of the Board of Health. The Board of Health
may designate the location of such facilities.
§ 132-3. Toilet facility standards.
Toilet facilities will be required at a marina in accordance with the following
standards:
§ 132-4. Houseboats.
Houseboats used as residences shall not dock in waters covered by this
chapter unless approved by the local Board of Health.
§ 132-5. Use of toilet facilities on boats.
It shall be the responsibility of every owner to see that toilet facilities on
boats shall not be used when berthed. Adequate toilet facilities on shore
shall be provided for all boat owners and guests. All marine toilet facilities
(marine heads) shall be kept locked or sealed when berthed.
§ 132-6. Pump-out facilities. [Added 5-5-1990 ATM by Art. 22]
In all marinas where 10 or more slips are available for boat docking,
boat pump-out facilities shall be provided by the marina for use by the
patrons. Boat pump-out facilities are those mechanisms which effectively
pump wastes from the marine toilet facilities (marine heads) to an approved
disposal area, such as a sewer or approved tight tank. Said facilities are
Minimum of one toilet and one lavatory for each sex up to 20 boat
docking slips and/or permanent mooring buoys.
A.
Additional facilities above the minimum shall be provided at the rate
of one toilet and one lavatory for each sex for every additional 30 boat
docking slips and/or permanent mooring buoys, or fraction thereof.
B.
At the discretion of the local Health Officer, when boats are being
utilized as residences for twenty-four-hour periods, a minimum of two
showers for up to 40 boat docking slips and/or permanent mooring
buoys and additional facilities shall be provided at the rate of two
showers for each additional 40 boat docking slips and/or permanent
mooring buoys, or fraction thereof.
C.
All of these facilities must be connected in an approved manner to
water supply and sewage disposal systems as approved by the local
Board of Health.
D.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-6
1:61
to be under the jurisdiction of the Board of Health and other local and
state approving authorities. All existing marinas must have these facilities
approved and available for their patrons use within six weeks of the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 132-7. Discharge into waters prohibited.
No sewage, garbage, refuse or other contaminants shall be discharged from
marine craft into any waters covered by this chapter at any time.
§ 132-8. Authority to board marine vessel.
Local Board of Health personnel and/or authorized representatives shall
have the right of entry to board any marine vessel or boat to determine
whether or not a pollution violation exists.
§ 132-9. Copy of regulations to be kept for public inspection.
All owners of marinas or other berthing areas will be sent a copy of this
chapter, and it shall be maintained as a record for the public to review.
§ 132-10. Permit application.
An application for an annual permit will be sent to the owners of berthing
areas prior to January 1 of each year. This form shall be completed and
returned to the local Board of Health. This permit may be revoked at any
time by the local Board of Health if any of the provisions of this chapter are
violated.
§ 132-11. Posting of permit.
All marinas shall obtain an annual permit from the local Board of Health.
Such permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
§ 132-12. Violations and penalties.
Anyone who willfully violates this chapter will be subject to a fine not to
exceed $100 for each violation.
§ 132-13. Time period for compliance.
All existing marinas shall have a period of two years from the effective date
of this chapter to be brought up to the minimum standards for this chapter,
in so far as the requirements for the provisions of sanitary accommodations
are concerned.
§ 132-14. Extension of time period.
Where it is adequately shown to the local Board of Health that extreme
financial hardship would be caused to a marina owner in meeting the
minimum standards of this chapter, the local Board of Health may extend
§ 132-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 132-14
1:62
the time for meeting compliance, but such an extension shall not exceed
two years from the date of enactment, provided that said owners agree in
writing to a schedule which will indicate all work to be done and the times
for its completion within the extension period.
§ 132-15. Amendments; when effective.
This chapter may be revised and/or added to within the provisions of laws of
the town. This chapter shall take effect upon approval by Town Meeting vote
as provided for in the bylaws of the town and after approval of the Attorney
General in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 32.
§ 132-16. Designated agent.
The local Board of Health may designate all authority granted by this
chapter to a designated agent who will have full power and effect of said
Board in investigation and enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 141
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 132-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-16
1:63

PART 1
Delinquent Taxpayers
[Adopted 5-6-1995 STM by Art. 12 (Ch. XXXI of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 141-1. Denial or revocation of license for failure to pay taxes.
Any licensing authority for the Town of Fairhaven may deny any application
for or revoke or suspend any local license or permit, including renewals
and transfers issued by any board, officer, department for any person,
corporation or business enterprise, who has neglected or refused to pay any
local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges
or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of
such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or
exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose
owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or any other municipal charges, provided that:
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records
of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal
charges (hereinafter referred to as the "Tax Collector") shall annually,
and may periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission
or division (hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority") that
issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of
the persons, corporations or business enterprises (hereinafter referred
to as the "party") that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, and that
such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an
abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax
Board. [Amended 5-5-2018 ATM by Art. 31]
A.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax
Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is
the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter
is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or
about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list
furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided,
however, that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector,
as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a
hearing to be held not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list
shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of
said license or permit to any party. The Tax Collector shall have the
right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing
authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension
shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be
relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any
appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license
or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be
B.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-1
1:65
§ 141-2. Exceptions.
This Part 1 shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open
burning, MGL c. 48, § 13; bicycle permits, MGL c. 85, § 11A; sales of
articles for charitable purposes, MGL c. 101, § 33; children work permits,
MGL c. 149, § 69; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses,
MGL c. 140, § 21E; dog licenses, MGL c. 140, § 137; fishing, hunting,
trapping license, MGL c. 131, § 12; marriage licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28; and
theatrical events, public exhibition permits, MGL c. 140, § 181.
§ 141-3. Exclusion from provisions by bylaw.
The Town may, from time to time, exclude any local license or permit from
this Part 1 by bylaw.
reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate
issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with
respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or
other municipal charges payable to the municipality as of the date of
issuance of said certificate.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment
agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a
certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and the
validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement
shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or
permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a
hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
C.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or
revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest
by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members
of his/her immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the
business or activity conducted in or on said property.
D.
§ 141-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 141-3
1:66
PART 2
Pawnbrokers; Dealers in Junk, Old Metals or Secondhand Articles
[Adopted 5-7-2011 STM by Art. 22]
§ 141-4. Licenses.
§ 141-5. Recordkeeping.
No individual or entity may carry on the business of pawnbroker, or
deal in junk, old metals, or any secondhand articles without a license
from the Board of Selectmen. The licensee shall, at the time of receiving
such license, file with the Town Clerk, a bond to the Town in the
sum of $5,000 with two personal sureties approved by the Town Clerk
or a surety company authorized to do business in Massachusetts and
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations
pertaining to the licensed business.
A.
Licenses issued pursuant to this section may only be granted to: 1)
suitable persons who have been residents of the Town, or residents of
an adjoining city or town, for the six months preceding the issuance of
the license; or 2) to businesses with a majority of principals, deemed
to be suitable individuals, who have been residents of the Town, or
residents of an adjoining city or town, for the six months preceding
the issuance of the license. Licenses issued under this section shall
be renewed on an annual basis and may be suspended, revoked, or
canceled at any time at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen.
B.
Every person or entity holding a license issued pursuant to § 141-4 shall
require the person who pawns, sells, or exchanges any property upon
the licensed premises to personally fill out a form, approved by the
Chief of Police, providing his or her full name, address, driver's license
number, social security number, and motor vehicle registration number
used by such person, if any. The form shall include a full description
of the article, including all distinguishing marks and numbers, and
the time and date of the transaction. The licensee shall also include
on the form a personal description of the person offering the article
to the licensee, including complexion, height, weight, age, hair color,
eye color, and the presence of any distinguishing characteristics. The
licensee shall not accept any article unless he or she is provided with
a copy of an identification card bearing the person's photograph, which
shall be attached, along with a photograph of the articles, to the form
described above.
A.
A copy of all forms and identification cards and photographs described
in Subsection A shall be provided to the Chief of Police within one
business day of the transaction. The licensee shall also preserve and
keep, for a period of at least six years from the date of the transaction,
a copy of the record, which shall be furnished to any Town police officer
if requested.
B.
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-5
1:67
§ 141-6. Dealing with minors .
No person or entity holding a license issued under § 141-4 shall directly or
indirectly purchase or receive by way of barter, or exchange any article or
loan any money to, any individual that such keeper knows to be, or should
have reason to believe is, a minor.
§ 141-7. Notice of circumstances indicating stolen property.
Every person or entity holding a license issued pursuant to § 141-4 shall
immediately notify the officer in charge of police headquarters of any
attempt or suspected attempt on the part of any person entering the
licensed premises for the disposal of property by pawn, sale, exchange,
or by any other means, when the attending circumstances indicate any
possibility that said property has been stolen, or is unlawfully in the
possession of the person offering it for pawn, sale or exchange.
§ 141-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity holding a license issued pursuant to § 141-4 who
violates any of the preceding sections shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $50 for each offense, and any license held by such person or
entity may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Selectmen.
Every person or entity holding a license issued pursuant to § 141-4 shall
put in some suitable and conspicuous place in their premises a sign
containing the licensee's name and occupation.
C.
All merchandise contained on the premises of a business licensed under
§ 141-4 may, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by
any member of the Town's Police Department.
D.
Any licensee who makes any false statement on any form or otherwise
fails to comply with the provision of the Subsections A through D above
may be subject to the penalties described in § 141-8.
E.
§ 141-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 141-8
1:68
PART 3
Criminal History Checks
[Adopted 5-7-2011 STM by Art. 23]
§ 141-9. Authorization for criminal history check.
Any person applying for any license or permit to carry on business as
a pawnbroker, or to deal in junk, old metals, or secondhand articles,
or to engage in the business of hawking and peddling, or door-to-door
sales, or to act as a hackney driver within the Town, is required to
submit, prior to making such application within the Town, a full set of
his or her fingerprints, taken by the Town's Police Department, along
with a fee of $100, for submission to the State Police Identification Unit
and Department of Criminal Justice information System Board (CHSB)
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) so that the applicant's
fingerprints can be compared against state and federal criminal
records.
A.
B. (Reserved)
The Town may deny any application for the issuance, transfer, or
renewal of any license described In Subsection A above, or may revoke
or suspend such license if it has been issued previously, or may refuse
to allow any individual or entity to conduct such business within the
Town, if the Town and/or the Chief of Police determines that that
person or entity is not fit, based upon the results of the Chief's own
investigation and the reports received from the CHSB and the FBI, to
do business within the Town.
C.
§ 141-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-9
1:69
Chapter 145
WATERWAYS, MOORINGS AND BOAT USAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor pollution control — See Ch. 132. Union Wharf — See Chs. 177 and 225.
§ 145-1. Applications and regulations.
§ 145-2. Definition of terms.
The following words, for the purposes of this chapter of these bylaws shall,
unless another meaning is clearly apparent for the way in which the words
are used, have the following meanings:
VESSEL — Every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the
water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the
water.
§ 145-3. Speed limit; no wake; posted areas.
§ 145-4. Abandonment and removal of vessels. [Amended 5-2-2009
STM by Art. 16]
This chapter applies to all persons, vessels, objects or structures on or
using the waters of the Town of Fairhaven.
A.
The Harbormaster is authorized to prescribe regulations to carry out
this chapter.
B.
Failure of the Harbormaster to prescribe regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
C.
Speed limit and no wake.
Vessels shall not exceed five miles per hour and shall make no
wake, in posted areas.
(1)
Vessels shall make no wake within 150 feet of: bathers, divers,
piers, docks, floats, small vessels propelled by means other than
machinery, vessels not underway or the shore.
(2)
A.
The number and location of five miles per hour and/or no wake posted
areas may be changed at the discretion of the Harbormaster.
B.
No vessel, mooring, or other object shall be abandoned, sunk, or placed
where it may constitute a hazard to navigation. All vessels, moorings, or
other objects shall be properly secured, properly moored, and properly
permitted.
A.
§ 141-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 145-4
1:70
§ 145-5. Moorings.
Any vessel, mooring, or other object constituting a hazard to navigation,
or not properly moored, or not properly permitted, and any vessel or
object improperly secured, swamped, sunk, washed ashore, or found
in a restricted area, may be removed or relocated at the direction of
the Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster. If the owner can be
identified from registration numbers on the vessel, mooring, or other
object, the Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster shall provide
notice to the named owner by mail posted to the registered address,
seven days prior to removing or relocating the vessel, mooring, or other
object. No other notice shall be required.
B.
The expense of such removal or relocation and liability incurred
therefor shall be the responsibility of the owner, and shall constitute a
lien upon said vessel, mooring, or other object removed.
C.
Nothing in the above subsections shall restrict earlier action by the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster, with or without notice to
the owner, if, in their judgment, such action is necessary to protect life
or property, which shall include, but not be limited to, removal of a
vessel, mooring, or other object located in a navigable channel, illegally
located on a mooring designated for someone else, or in the event
of an emergency as determined by the Harbormaster or an Assistant
Harbormaster.
D.
The Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster shall assign the
location and approve the type and adequacy of every mooring in the
waters of the Town of Fairhaven.
A.
The owner of the mooring shall comply with all reasonable requests
of the Harbormaster, all mooring and mooring permit regulations, and
shall insure that:
Each mooring owned by him meets the requirements as established
by mooring regulations and any other requirements of the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster for the service
intended.
(1)
That each mooring owned by him is maintained in good and
serviceable condition on the assigned location for the mooring.
(2)
All mooring buoys, markers, mooring spars, vessels, or similar
objects attached to a mooring are clearly visible at all times, and
properly and clearly identified as prescribed regulations adopted
under this chapter,
(3)
Mooring spars shall be painted, and at any state of the tide be at an
angle of not less than 45° with an exposed length of not less than
18 inches.
(4)
B.
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:71
§ 145-6. Mooring permits.
The owner of a mooring may sell or transfer the ownership of mooring
tackle owned by him, but does not constitute a sale of the mooring
location.
C.
The assigned location of the mooring shall not be transferred to anyone
else without the written approval of the Harbormaster or an Assistant
Harbormaster.
D.
Before placing in the water or using any mooring, the owner of a
mooring shall obtain from the Harbormaster or an Assistant
Harbormaster a mooring permit.
A.
The permit application shall require information as to the type of the
mooring tackle, a description of the vessel or object to be moored, and
the location of the mooring.
B.
Proof of ownership of the mooring tackle may be required before a
mooring permit is issued.
C.
The Harbormaster shall adopt regulations regarding the period of time
that a mooring permit is valid, procedures for renewal and the issuance
of new permits.
D.
A mooring permit may be revoked by the Harbormaster at any time
for failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the
regulations prescribed by the Harbormaster regarding moorings or
mooring permits.
E.
When a mooring permit is revoked, expires, or when a mooring permit
holder/owner sells or transfers ownership of a mooring he shall, within
30 days, surrender the mooring permit and remove or dispose of the
mooring.
F.
Discontinuance of use.
When a permit holder/owner of a mooring discontinues the use
of a mooring for the vessel described in the mooring permit, the
permit holder/owner may retain the mooring location for a period
not7 to exceed two years after the end of the calendar year after its
discontinuance, and the mooring may be used by another vessel as
prescribed in § 145-10.
(1)
If after two years the permit holder/owner does not own a vessel
requiring the mooring, the Harbormaster may reassign the
mooring location.
(2)
G.
The Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Harbormaster, shall
set the fees for mooring permits.
H.
7. Editor's Note: The word "not" was added editorially at the direction of the Town. It was not
included in the article as amended.
§ 145-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 145-7
1:72
§ 145-7. Waiting lists for mooring location assignment.
§ 145-8. Moving, relocating, removal, inspection of moorings.
§ 145-9. Lost moorings.
In mooring areas that have reached maximum mooring saturation,
the Harbormaster may, in order to equitably assign mooring locations,
establish waiting lists and procedures for the administration of such
waiting lists.
A.
Failure to comply with the procedures established by the Harbormaster
will result in removal from the waiting list.
B.
Moorings shall not be moved from an approved location without the
prior written approval of the Harbormaster or an Assistant
Harbormaster.
A.
If for any reason the approval location of a mooring is not adequate for
the vessel, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder/owner to
move the mooring, within 10 days, to a new location approved by the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster.
B.
In the event that a mooring is moved from its approved location by
storm, ice or other cause, it shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder/owner of the mooring to, at the earliest possible opportunity,
but in no case later than 14 days from the date the dislocation of
the mooring is or could be discovered, relocate the mooring to the
location originally approved, or to another location approved by the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster.
C.
The Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster may, at any time,
inspect any mooring; may remove or cause to be removed any mooring
that fails to meet mooring regulations or specifications.
D.
The Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster may relocate, remove
or cause to be removed or relocated any mooring whenever, in their
judgment, the safety of other vessels or the maximum use of the area
requires such action.
E.
Inspection.
All moorings shall inspected by a qualified person before being
placed in service, and at not less than every two years thereafter.
(1)
A qualified person is an individual who has received written
approval to inspect moorings from the Harbormaster or an
Assistant Harbormaster.
(2)
F.
Any expenses of such inspection, removal or relocation and any liability
incurred therefor, shall be the responsibility of the permit holder/owner
of said mooring.
G.
§ 145-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-9
1:73
§ 145-10. Moorings may be used by persons other than permit
holder.
At times when a mooring is not being used by the mooring permit holder/
owner, or when a mooring permit holder/owner has discontinued the use
of a mooring (See § 145-6G.), the mooring may be used by another vessel,
provided prior written approval is obtained from both the permit holder/
owner of the mooring and the Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster,
subject to the following provisions:
§ 145-11. Moorings may be sold at auction.
The Harbormaster shall have the authority to sell at public auction on behalf
of the Town any mooring removed under the authority of §§ 145-8 and 145-9
of this chapter if the mooring has not been identified and claimed by its
owner within six months of its removal.
§ 145-12. Operation and responsibility.
In the event that a mooring is lost it shall be the responsibility of
the permit holder/owner to, at the earliest possible opportunity, locate,
mark and properly identify said lost mooring.
A.
If after six months the permit holder/owner fails to locate, mark and
properly identify a lost mooring, he shall have relinquished his right
to the approved location, and the mooring may be removed by the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster.
B.
When a mooring is used by a vessel owned and operated by an
individual who is not the permit holder/owner of the mooring, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner/operator of said vessel to maintain the
mooring and leave it in the same condition as when first used by him.
A.
If during the period of use by another vessel the mooring is lost,
dislocated or damaged, the owner/operator of the vessel using the
mooring shall be liable to the permit holder/owner of the mooring for
a sum of money sufficient to recover, restore, renew or relocate the
mooring to the approved location, and to the condition it was first used
by him.
B.
In crowded mooring areas, where there are established waiting lists
for mooring location assignment, such mooring assignment shall not
be assigned by the mooring owner but be temporarily assigned to an
individual on the waiting list.
C.
Vessel operators are responsible for their wake at all times, and shall
not operate a vessel in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the life, safety, or property of any person.
A.
No person shall operate any vessel in a manner that violates
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90B, or any regulations adopted
thereunder or any other state or federal law that may apply.
B.
§ 145-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 145-12
1:74
§ 145-13. Jurisdiction.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held or construed to supersede
or conflict with or interfere with or limit jurisdiction of the United States
Government with respect to the enforcement of the navigation, shipping,
anchorage or other associated Federal laws, or regulations, or any laws, or
regulation of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 145-14. Penalties. [Amended 5-2-2009 STM by Art. 16]
The owner of any vessel, mooring, or other object not properly secured or
not properly permitted and anyone found in violation of these rules and
regulations shall be liable to 1) a noncriminal citation not to exceed $100
per offense; and, if deemed necessary by the Harbormaster; 2) removal of
the mooring; and/or 3) removal of the vessel, and the costs associated with
such action, including towing of vessel, storage of the mooring tackle or
vessel. Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, this chapter shall be
enforced by the Harbormaster, his or her assistants, harbor police, or other
enforcing officers. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 145-15. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Harbormaster may file an
appeal with the Fairhaven Board of Selectmen by delivering such appeal, in
writing, to the Town Hall within 15 days of the ruling of the Harbormaster.
However, said person must comply with the Harbormaster's ruling until a
decision is made by the Board of Selectmen on the appeal. Such appeal
shall state specifically the nature of the ruling and the reason the person is
aggrieved.
§ 145-16. Waterways users fee. [Added 10-29-2008 STM by Art. 12]
Nothing in these regulations shall exonerate any vessel, or the owner,
master or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to comply
with this chapter or the neglect of any precaution which may be
required by the ordinary practice of seamen, or by special
circumstances of the case.
C.
Boat owners using the waters of Fairhaven, MA will be subject to a
waterways user fee. The waterways user fee is a fee used to help
offset the cost of operating services provided by the Town of Fairhaven,
MA. Services include, but are not limited to, dredging, maintenance
projects, fire, emergency, police security, boater education,
environmental protection, enforcement and harbor management
services. Additional services may be provided as the need arises.
A.
All boats using the waters of Fairhaven, MA for more than 14 days
per year (calendar year) are subject to the waterways users fee in
Fairhaven, MA. Exceptions to the waterways users fee are boats that
are on trailers put in and taken out for each occasion of use, boats less
than 16 feet in length, boats belonging to the Town of Fairhaven or used
B.
§ 145-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-16
1:75
by the Town of Fairhaven, or any other boat used for law enforcement
by government agencies and any boat within the waters of Fairhaven
for service work provided by a Fairhaven marine service company. The
fee schedule is based on a per-foot charge on boats' overall length as
determined by the Harbormaster and is set at $1 per foot for residents
and $4 per foot for nonresidents as defined herein. This waterway users
fee is a yearly fee and is due by June 30 of each calendar year, or
immediately after the fourteen-day benchmark is met if after June 30 of
the current calendar year. The Board of Selectmen, in consultation with
the Harbormaster, may amend these fees from time to time.
Facilities providing services such as mooring space, docking, slips or
summer in-and-out services shall, as a condition of their permit to
operate as a business in Fairhaven, MA, notify all of their customers
of this required fee to the Town of Fairhaven, MA, when signing a
contract or agreements that allows them to keep their boat in the Town
of Fairhaven qualifying them for the waterway users fee under the
guidelines as described herein.
C.
Payment is to be made in person or via U.S. Mail to the Town of
Fairhaven, Office of the Tax Collector. For those paying in person, a
waterways user fee sticker application will be made available by the
Office of the Tax Collector. The Office of the Tax Collector will, upon
payment, provide a sticker which is to be affixed to the port side stern
area of the boat. If payment is made via mail, the boat owner must
provide the following information.
(1) Name of owner.
(2) Address of owner.
(3) Telephone number.
(4) Registration numbers/documentation numbers.
(5) Year manufactured.
(6) Length.
(7) Color.
Place boat kept during the season.
In addition, the boat owner must provide a self-addressed stamped
envelope to receive a sticker via the mail.
Checks will be considered receipt of payment for those made via
mail. (Do not send cash as a payment.) The Town of Fairhaven's
Office of the Tax Collector is located at 40 Center Street,
Fairhaven, MA 02719.
(8)
D.
Violators will be subject to a fine in the amount of 120% of the water
user fee due the Town of Fairhaven, not to exceed $300. Once paid,
the waterway user fee will be considered paid and a waterways user
E.
§ 145-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 145-16
1:76
Chapter 150
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sunday activities — See Ch. 106. Use of streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
§ 150-1. Indecent behavior.
No person shall behave in a rude, disorderly, insolent or insulting manner or
make any indecent noise, sound or gesture in any public way or other place
or near any dwelling house in the town.
fee sticker will be provided. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or
on complaint before the District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with § 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Harbormaster hereunder
may file an appeal with the Fairhaven Board of Selectmen by delivering
such appeal, in writing, to the Town Hall within 15 days of the decision
of the Harbormaster. Such ruling shall state specifically the nature of
the decision and the reason the person is aggrieved.
F.
G. (Reserved)
Definitions.
DOCKING/SLIPS — Space made available to boat owners to secure
their boat.
FACILITY — Any business in Fairhaven providing marine services, slips,
mooring or any summer seasonal storage and operates by permit issued
by the Town of Fairhaven, MA.
MOORINGS — Any type of device that allows a boat to be tied up to
it, providing a position to secure the boat within the coastal waters of
Fairhaven, MA.
RESIDENTS —
SUMMER SEASONAL IN-AND-OUT SERVICES — Any business that
provides a service that allows a boat owner to remove or put in his/her
boat each time of use within the coastal waters of Fairhaven, MA.
(1) A registered voter in the Town of Fairhaven, MA.
(2) A person who is domiciled in the Town of Fairhaven, MA.
(3) A person who pays real estate taxes to the Town of Fairhaven, MA.
(4) A spouse or dependent of any of the above.
H.
§ 145-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:77
§ 150-2. Indecent language.
No person shall use any profane, indecent, insolent or insulting language,
make any threats or use any other language tending to create a breach of
the peace in any public way or other public place in the town, or within
audible distance of any dwelling house or other building therein.
§ 150-3. Throwing substances on sidewalks.
No person shall throw or place upon any sidewalk or crosswalk any banana
skin, orange peel or any slippery or greasy substance.
§ 150-4. Graffiti. [Amended 5-11-1994 ATM by Art. 36]
§ 150-5. Bathing in public; nudity.
§ 150-6. Games of chance.
No person shall expose in or place upon any public way, public grounds or
other public places any table or device of any kind by means of or upon
which any game of hazard or chance shall be played, nor shall any person
play in any such game at such table or device in or upon any public way,
public grounds or other public places in the town.
§ 150-7. Use of frozen public waterways. [Added 3-30-1972 ATM by
Art. 70]
No person shall make any figures or write any words upon or deface
by marks in any manner any fence, building, monument, sidewalk,
crosswalk, ledge, street or other town property.
A.
The Treasurer of the town shall pay up to $100 for each fine or
assessment collected for a violation of this section as a reward for
information leading to the successful prosecution of that case. The
determination as to whom and in what amount such reward is to be paid
shall be made by the Selectmen in their sole discretion.
B.
The Town Treasurer shall pay the balance of each fine or assessment
into an account to be held by him/her, and to be used for restitution
to pay the cost of repair or restoration of town property defaced in
violation of this chapter.
C.
No person shall bathe in any of the waters of the town in a state of
nudity, in places exposed to public view or in immediate sight of the
occupants of any dwelling house.
A.
No person or persons shall remove their clothes in an automobile or
other exposed location adjacent to a bathing beach. [Added 2-29-1936
ATM by Art. 44]
B.
No person shall be permitted upon any public waterway, including
skating rinks, ponds, rivers, streams or any body of water within the
A.
§ 150-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 150-7
1:78
§ 150-8. Throwing objects at motor vehicles. [Added 1-11-1979 STM
by Art. 20]
§ 150-9. Swimming in Fort Phoenix area. [Added 5-8-1984 ATM by
Art. 22]
§ 150-10. Diving from Causeway Bridge. [Added 3-26-1966 ATM by
Art. 56]
No diving, swimming or bathing will be permitted from the Causeway
Bridge and for a distance of 100 feet east and 100 feet west of the bridge.
§ 150-11. Depositing papers on public ways.
No person shall deposit papers, circulars or advertising matter of any kind
in the public ways of the town or distribute the same through the town in
such manner as to create a disturbance or litter.
§ 150-12. Electronic or video card games. [Added 5-1-2004 STM by
Art. 13]
town over which the town has jurisdiction until the ice on any of the
above-mentioned has been declared safe by the Board of Public Works.
After being declared safe by the Board of Public Works, persons using
them, do so at their own risk.
Whoever violates this section shall be liable to a fine of not more
than $20 which may be recovered by indictment or complaint before a
District Court.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, shoot or otherwise propel
any missile, including but not limited to snowballs, ice, stones or other
objects, at or in the direction of any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle
or other motor vehicle of any type while said motor vehicle is being
operated or parked on any public way or any way or other area to which
the public has access within the Town of Fairhaven.
A.
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $25.
B.
Diving, swimming or bathing in the water adjacent to the town's
coastline in the Fort Phoenix area from the western boundary of Fort
Phoenix State Beach to and including the hurricane dike to its western
extremity within the Town of Fairhaven is hereby prohibited.
A.
Whoever violates this section shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$20 which may be recovered by complaint in the District Court.
B.
Electronic or video card games. No person shall keep or cause to be
kept, operate or suffer to be operated, in any premises open to the
public owned or leased by him, or subject to his control, any electronic
or video poker or other electronic or video card game.
A.
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-12
1:79
Chapter 155
RIGHT TO FARM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Commission — See Ch. 3.
Building construction — See Ch. 93.
Wetlands — See Ch. 192.
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
§ 155-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
Fines and enforcement. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $100. Such fines shall inure to
the Town. Any Fairhaven Police Officer taking cognizance of a violation
of this section may enforce this section through noncriminal disposition
in accordance with MGL c. 40 § 21D and § 1-6 of the Town Code. A
violation of this section occurring in an establishment licensed for retail
of any alcoholic beverage shall subject the licensee to sanctions as
determined by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
Severability. If any provision of this section is declared invalid and
unenforceable, the other provisions shall continue in full force and
effect.
C.
D. Effective date. This section shall become effective on July 1, 2004.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to state with emphasis the
right to farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under
Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations
thereunder, including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9; Chapter
111, Section 125A; and Chapter 128, Section 1A. We, the citizens of the
Town of Fairhaven, restate and republish these rights pursuant to the
Town's authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment
of the Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This chapter encourages the pursuit of sustainable agriculture,
promotes sustainable agriculture-based economic opportunities, and
protects farmlands within the Town of Fairhaven by allowing
sustainable agricultural uses and related activities to function with
minimal conflict with abutters and Town agencies. This chapter shall
apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town.
B.
Nothing in this chapter shall override and existing local or state, laws
or regulations such as, but not limited to, Chapter 198, Zoning, Chapter
192, Wetlands, the Wetlands Protection Act and the Building Code.
C.
§ 150-12 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 155-2
1:80
§ 155-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARM — Includes any parcel, or contiguous parcels of land, five acres or
greater in size, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, aquaculture, or accessory thereto.
FARMING — Encompasses activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
FARMING OR AGRICULTURE OR THEIR DERIVATIVES — Includes, but is
limited to the following:
A. Breeding, planting, growing, and raising of crops;
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
B.
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators
and disease organism of plants and animals;
C.
Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides in compliance with
local, state and federal regulations;
D.
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agri-tourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or services of
the farm;
E.
F. Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm; and
The operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, including signage
thereto; subject to Chapter 198, Zoning, and appropriate Building
Codes; and
G.
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or apparatus
owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used expressly for
the purpose of propagation, processing, management or sale of the
agricultural products.
H.
A. Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
B. Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural,
aquaculture, floricultural, viticulture, or horticultural commodities;
C.
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forestland and any
other forestry or lumbering operations;
D.
E. Raising of livestock, including horses;
F. Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise;
§ 155-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:81
§ 155-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Fairhaven.
The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays,
weekdays and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant
incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may
be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more
than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community
and society in general. The benefits and protections of this chapter are
intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming
operations and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practice. Moreover, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed as
acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which
is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
§ 155-4. Disclosure and notification.
§ 155-5. Resolution of disputes.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance with
Keeping and raising of poultry, livestock, and other domesticated
animals for food; and
G.
Other agricultural purposes as listed under the Standard Industrial
Classification, U.S. Department of Labor, Division A, Agriculture,
Forestry and Fishing, maintained by O.S.H.A.
H.
Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale contract is entered
into, or prior to the sale or exchange of real property if no purchase and
sale agreement exists, for the purchase or exchange of real property,
or prior to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other possessory
interest in real property, located in the Town of Fairhaven, the
landowner shall present the buyer or occupant with a disclosure
notification which states the following:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage
the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the
production of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its
natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform
buyers or occupants that the property they are about to acquire or
occupy lies within a Town where farming activities occur. Such farming
activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause
noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that this
property may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations."
A.
A copy of the disclosure notification shall be given on a Town-approved
form prepared and signed by the landowner, prior to the sale, purchase,
exchange or occupancy of such real property.
B.
§ 155-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 155-5
1:82
the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board of
Health, in accordance with statute and appropriate bylaws and regulations
of the Town of Fairhaven. The filing of the grievance does not suspend the
time within which to pursue any other available remedies that the aggrieved
may have. The Board of Selectmen, Zoning Enforcement Officer or the
Board of Health shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the referring Town
authority within an agreed-upon time frame.
§ 155-6. Severability.
If any section, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid by any court of last resort, every other section,
paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect. This chapter
restates the various protections afforded to commercial farms throughout
Massachusetts state law and is intended to educate citizens that farming
activities are valued in the Town of Fairhaven. Our few remaining
commercial farms provide essential components to maintain the character
of the Town. The notification provisions of this chapter will enhance
awareness relative to the value of agriculture in the Town of Fairhaven.
There are no new benefits or protections provided in this chapter beyond
those contained in state laws.
Chapter 158
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
432.
§ 158-1. Connection to public system; variance.
The owner or occupant of any building upon land abutting on a public or
private way in which there is a common sewer shall, within two years,
connect the same therewith by a sufficient drain.
A.
A variance from this requirement may be granted by the Board of
Health on the following conditions:
That said land, by reason of its grade or level or any other cause,
cannot be drained into such sewer until such incapacity is removed;
and
(1)
That a private septic system is installed which meets the
requirements of the Board of Health.
(2)
B.
§ 155-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:83
§ 158-2. Cost of construction; assessment. [Amended 5-6-1995 STM
by Art. 20; 5-6-2000 STM by Art. 13]
After deducting any federal or state grants from the total cost of the
laying out and construction of any main drains or of a system or systems
of sewerage and sewage disposal, the remaining cost shall be paid by
assessment of the cost of such public improvements to be apportioned
among the owners of property fronting on either side of that portion of a
public or private way in which such drain or sewer lays, such assessment to
be made according to the number of principal structures on such land, and
in the case of vacant land, or vacant portions of built upon land, according
to the number of buildable lots into which such land may be divided under
the Zoning Bylaw, but no assessment in respect of such land which by
reason of its grade or level or any other cause cannot be drained into such
sewer shall be made until such incapacity is removed. The relative portion
of payment provided by this section may be changed from time to time by
vote of the town at any Town Meeting.
Chapter 164
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landfill — See Ch. 437. Solid waste — See Ch. 471.
Said variance shall be effective only for so long as the property meets
these variance requirements as the same may be from time to time
amended.
C.
§ 158-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 158-2
1:84
Part 1
[Adopted 9-10-195G3aSrbTaMg eB Fy rAormt. O14u t(sCidhe. ITXo,w Snec. 10 Of The 1934
Bylaws)]
§ 164-1. Permit required. [Amended 5-2-1992 STM by Art. 4;
12-10-1992 STM by Art. 11]
No person shall bring into the town or transport through the streets of
the town any garbage from outside the town without a special permit
issued annually by the Board of Health.
A.
Such permit shall be issued upon a determination by the Board of
Health that:
The applicant has sufficient capacity, including proper equipment,
for the safe transport of such waste;
(1)
(2) Such waste will not be improperly disposed of; and
The intended transport, disposal and nature of such waste will not
otherwise violate any law and will not otherwise result in harm or
a threat of harm to the public health or safety.
(3)
B.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-1
1:85

Part 2
[Adopted 5-4-1991 STM By ArRt.e c1y2c (liCnhg. XXXIV Of The 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 164-2. Purpose.
There is hereby established a mandatory recycling program in the Town of
Fairhaven for the purpose of recycling any type of solid waste, including but
not limited to glass, paper, plastics, cardboard, metal food containers and
leaf and yard wastes.
§ 164-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as follows:
RECYCLING — Collection and processing of a waste product for use as a
raw material in the manufacture of the same product or a similar one. For
the purpose of this Part 2, recyclables are considered to be:
GARDEN WASTES — Organic plant matter.
GLASS — Brown, clear and green food and beverage containers with caps,
rings and Styrofoam removed. Excluded are blue glass, flat glass, plate
glass and glass commonly referred to as "window glass."
LEAVES — Seasonal deposition from deciduous and coniferous plants and
trees.
METAL FOOD CONTAINERS — Aluminum, tin cans and tin plated steel
cans.
OTHER — Ferrous metals (iron, steel), tires, waste oil and batteries.
PAPER — Newspaper, office paper and computer paper.
PLASTICS — PET (polyethylene terephthalate) 1: soda bottles; and HDPE
(high-density polyethylene) 2: milk, juice and water jugs and other opaques.
YARD WASTES — Lawn clippings, garden waste and weeds.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage and rubbish normally collected for disposal by
the town or its contractor.
§ 164-4. Ownership of waste.
From the time of collection the materials shall become the property of the
Town of Fairhaven or its designated contractor.
§ 164-5. Collection schedule. [Amended 5-2-1992 ATM by Art. 15]
The Board of Health has the authority to add, delete or delay collection
of recyclables depending on the existence of favorable markets and proper
means of collection and delivery of the materials to said markets.
§ 164-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:87
§ 164-6. Applicability. [Added 5-2-1992 ATM by Art. 15]
This Part 2 shall apply to all residences, schools and municipal facilities.
§ 164-7. Curbside pickup or delivery to recycling center. [Added
5-2-1992 ATM by Art. 15]
All items of the following types must be separated from other solid waste,
from each other and into subcategories and will be picked up at curbside on
designated collection days or may be delivered to the town recycling center
at designated times:
§ 164-8. Delivery to recycling center only. [Added 5-2-1992 ATM by
Art. 15]
All items of the following types must be separated from other solid waste,
from each other and into subcategories and shall be delivered to the
recycling center at designated times.
§ 164-9. Recycling fee. [Added 5-2-1992 ATM by Art. 15]
The Board of Health, subject to the approval of Town Meeting, shall
annually establish a fee to be assessed per household. The fee shall be
based on the net cost of the household waste as a proportion of all waste
recycled by the town after consideration for the reimbursement from the
resale of recyclables and shall be uniformly assessed to each household
unit.
§ 164-10. Compliance and enforcement. [Added 5-2-1992 ATM by
Art. 15]
A. Newspaper.
B. Glass.
C. Paper.
D. Plastic.
E. Leaves.
F. Metal food containers.
A. Garden/yard waste.
Ferrous metals (i.e. household appliances, pipes, metal doors and other
similar large items made of ferrous metal).
B.
C. Tires.
D. Waste oil.
E. Batteries.
§ 164-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 164-10
1:88
Solid waste which has not been separated as required by §§ 164-7 and
164-8 of this Part 2 will not be picked up at curbside. Waste refused at
curbside must be removed by the resident within 24 hours of refusal. It
shall be a violation of this Part 2 to fail to participate in the recycling
program or to fail to separate waste as required by the approving
authority.
A.
No person other than the resident or agents authorized by the
approving authority shall be allowed to remove items designated in
§§ 164-7 and 164-8 from solid waste which has been separated or put at
curbside for pickup.
B.
Enforcement of this recycling program will be made by the Board of
Health or its agents or by any police officer. Any person committing
a first violation of this Part 2 shall be given written notice which may
be by letter, notice given in hand or notice affixed to any solid waste
container used by that person. Any subsequent violation by that person
shall be enforced as otherwise provided by law.
C.
The Board of Health may enact such regulations as it deems necessary
from time to time for the operation and enforcement of this recycling
program.
D.
§ 164-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-10
1:89
Chapter 169
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Obstructing public ways — See Ch. 150.
§ 164-10 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 164-10
1:90
Part 1
[Adopted 2-17-1934 ATSMtr eBeyt AUrste. 3R7e gAusl aCthio. nVsII Of The 1934 Bylaws]
§ 169-1. Placing objects in streets.
No person shall place or cause to be placed in any one of the public streets,
ways or places without a permit from the Superintendent of the Board
of Public Works or, in his/her absence, from the Board of Selectmen any
dirt, rubbish, wood, timber, building material or matter of any kind under
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $15. When such permit is granted,
the applicant must maintain a suitable cautionary signal over or near the
obstruction as a warning to those using the same way or place in a lawful
manner.
§ 169-2. Vehicles in streets at night.
§ 169-3. Use of wheeled devices for transportation. [Amended
12-7-1996 STM by Art. 8]
No person shall leave any wagon, cart or other vehicle in any street,
public way or place or any sidewalks of the town, nor allow same to
remain overnight, without maintaining a suitable and sufficient light on
same to prevent injury to travelers using the public way or place in a
lawful manner. Violations of the above regulation shall be punished by
a fine of $10 to $20 for each and every offense.
A.
No person shall leave a vehicle having a carrying capacity of more than
one ton in any street or public way during the period from 1/2 hour
after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise unless for the purpose of making
temporary stops not exceeding one hour in duration. The violation of
this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $20 for each
and every offense. [Added 11-16-1961 STM by Art. 9]
B.
No person shall operate or ride any wheeled device for human
transportation, including but not limited to a scooter, roller skates,
skateboard, roller skis or in-line skates, but not including devices
intended to aid the handicapped or infirm or carriages, strollers or
similar devices being used to transport infants or young children, in or
on any of the following:
Any public building and the walkway, stairs or grounds of a public
building.
(1)
Any Town property, public way or part thereof, including the
sidewalk if posted by the Town prohibiting such use.
(2)
Any private property or part thereof if posted by the owner, lessee
or person in charge of the property prohibiting such use.
(3)
A.
B. When the use of any such device is not otherwise prohibited:
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-3
1:91
§ 169-4. Coasting on sidewalks.
No person shall coast upon any sidewalk of the Town or upon any public
way, except at such times and in such places as may from time to time be
designated by the Chief of Police and the Superintendent of the Board of
Public Works.
§ 169-5. Selling merchandise on sidewalks. [Amended 11-6-1997
STM by Art. 18]
A person shall not operate or ride any such device on a street,
way or parking lot which is open to motor vehicle traffic so as to
endanger or interfere with motor vehicle traffic on any such street,
way or parking lot and shall at all times yield the right-of-way to
motor vehicle traffic, except as otherwise provided by the traffic
laws and regulations of the commonwealth.
(1)
Operators or riders of any such device shall yield the right-of-way
to other pedestrians using public sidewalks or upon a street or
way and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with pedestrian
traffic on a public sidewalk or upon a street or way.
(2)
Any person who violates this section shall be fined $25 for the first
violation, $50 for the second violation and $100 for every subsequent
violation. In addition to any other remedy provided for by law, fines
for the violation of this section may be recovered by noncriminal
disposition in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D.
C.
Except as provided in this section, no person shall sell any food,
beverages or merchandise and/or to rent equipment or other things
on and from any Town sidewalk. The Board of Selectmen may, from
time to time, determine that it is in the public interest to authorize the
sale of food, beverages or merchandise on Town sidewalks. Following
such determination, any person may submit an application for a permit
issued by the Board of Selectmen in the manner provided by this
section.
A.
Application for permit; hearing; issuance.
An application for permit under this section shall be submitted to
the Board of Selectmen along with a plan detailing the location of
tables, chairs and other fixtures or equipment to be used, clearance
for sidewalk passage, clearance for access and egress to the
property; side property line setbacks; and such other information
as the Board of Selectmen may require to demonstrate compliance
with this section. The applicant shall submit a complete copy of the
application and attachments to the Building Commissioner; Board
of Health; Chief of Police; Fire Chief; and Superintendent of Public
Works. Upon proof of delivery to the listed Town officers, a hearing
before the Board of Selectmen shall be scheduled to be held within
less than 14 days. The applicant shall give notice of the hearing
(1)
B.
§ 169-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 169-5
1:92
by registered mail to all abutting property owners and owners
abutting the way directly across from the subject property and its
abutting properties by registered mail.
At the hearing, the applicant shall submit proof of delivery of the
notice to the Board of Selectmen, along with certification from the
Board of Assessors of the persons entitled to notice.
(2)
A permit shall be issued to an applicant whose application
demonstrates compliance with the standards set forth in this
section.
(3)
Each permit issued shall specify:
The area in which food, beverages or merchandise may be sold or
sidewalk cafe may be operated.
(1)
The hours of operation shall begin no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and
conclude no later than 8:00 p.m. of the same day.
(2)
No tables, chairs or any other furnishings shall be placed in the
area used for the sidewalk cafe during any period when the
sidewalk cafe or sidewalk sale of merchandise is not open and
being operated. All storage of tables, chairs and other furnishings
shall be stored inside the business premises.
(3)
The sale of food, beverages or merchandise shall only occur on
the sidewalk immediately abutting the storefront. No sale of food,
beverages or merchandise shall obstruct sidewalk pedestrian
traffic, accessibility to vehicles parked adjacent to the curb, or
create public health or safety hazards. A forty-eight-inch minimum
paved clear dimension for pedestrian use shall be required. Such
clearance shall be measured from the face of the curb to the
nearest point of the sates area.
(4)
Tables, chairs and other furnishings shall not block a required
forty-eight-inch minimum pathway serving as access and egress
from the store.
(5)
No tables, chairs or other furnishings shall be located within the
required zoning side yard setbacks.
(6)
Sidewalk cafes shall be used only as seating areas. Storage, kitchen
or restroom uses are not allowed.
(7)
Alcoholic beverages shall not be served, sold or consumed in the
public right-of-way.
(8)
The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance showing
sufficient coverage for liability resulting from sidewalk sales.
(9)
Signs not in conformance with the Zoning Bylaw relative to signs
are prohibited.8
(10)
C.
§ 169-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-5
1:93
§ 169-6. Animals on streets.
No person shall permit any horse, cattle, sheep, swine or neat animals or
other grazing animals to pasture, graze or go at large on any street or public
place.
§ 169-7. Affixing posters or writing on public property.
No person shall in any manner affix any bill, placard or poster nor paint,
draw or write any words, figures or devices upon any property of the town,
not his own, without permission of the owner, bordering on the highway, nor
upon any Town property without first obtaining consent of the Selectmen.
§ 169-8. Excavations.
Lighting shall not be affixed to any vehicle, tree or other Town
property.
(11)
Noise produced by any audio equipment or other device used
to attract attention to the place where the food, beverages or
merchandise is being sold shall not be allowed.
(12)
The sidewalk area within 100 feet of where food, beverages or
merchandise is sold shall be monitored for trash that may be
produced by the operation. The permit holder, at its sole expense,
shall be responsible for keeping this area clean.
(13)
Sidewalks will be required to be swept and washed at the
conclusion of business each day by the permit holder. Trash
disposal and electricity will be provided from within the
establishment.
(14)
Permits issued under this section are renewable on January 1
through application to the Board of Selectmen.
(15)
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to suspend or
revoke any permit in the event of a violation of the terms or
conditions of this section.
(16)
The Board of Selectmen may, after notice to permit holders, public
notice and a public hearing determine that it is no longer in the public
interest to allow the sale of food, beverages or merchandise on Town
sidewalks and may thereupon revoke or refuse to renew all permits
issued under this section.
D.
No person who is not in the employ of the Town or some office or
department thereof having authority so to do shall dig up or excavate
or assist in breaking up or digging up or excavating any part of a public
street, highway or Town way, or removing any gravel or other similar
A.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Zoning.
§ 169-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 169-8
1:94
§ 169-9. Town repair of private ways. [Added 5-6-1980 ATM by Art.
21]
The Town may make temporary repairs on private ways (commonly referred
to an "unaccepted streets") as herein provided.
§ 169-10. Discharge of water or other liquids. [Added 1-11-1979
STM by Art. 7]
No person shall pump, siphon or otherwise discharge any water or other
liquid substance under his/her control into or across any public street or
sidewalk without having first notified the Board of Public Works of such
proposed pumping, siphoning or other discharge and having received from
the Board of Public Works a written permit authorizing same.
thing from a public street, highway or Town way, unless he/she has
obtained from the Board of Selectmen a written license therefor.
Said licensee shall restore said street, highway or Town way to a
condition satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen, and the expense
of repairs on said ways rendered necessary by said digging up and
occurring within one year thereafter shall be borne by such licensee.
B.
Such repairs may include the filling of holes in the subsurface of such
ways and repairs to the surface materials thereof. Materials for such
repairs shall, where practical, be the same as or similar to those used
for existing surfaces of such ways.
A.
B. Repairs may include the installation and construction of drainage.
Petitions for repairs shall contain a description of the repairs, together
with an estimate of the cost, be signed by a majority of the abutters
and submitted to the Board of Public Works, which, after investigation
and determination that said repairs are required by public necessity,
may at its discretion recommend that Town Meeting authorize said
repairs and appropriate funds therefor. For purposes of this subsection,
"a majority of the abutters" shall mean the owners of more than 50% of
the frontage.
C.
Betterment charges shall not be assessed for repairs performed
hereunder.
D.
The Town shall not be liable on account of any damage caused by
repairs made pursuant to this section.
E.
No cash deposit shall be required for repairs made pursuant to this
section.
F.
Repairs as provided by this section may be made only on such ways as
have been open to the public for 10 years or more.
G.
§ 169-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-10
1:95

Part 2
[Adopted 2-17-S1n9o3w4 RATemMo Bvayl A Arnt d3 7W Aatse Cr hF.r VomIII R, Soeocfss. 1 Through 3,
Of The 1934 Bylaws]
§ 169-11. Discharge of water from roof on sidewalks.
No owner of a building abutting upon or adjacent to the line of any street
shall cause, permit or suffer the water from the roof of such building to
discharge upon or flow across the surface of the sidewalk adjacent to such
building.
§ 169-12. Snow barriers or guards required.
Every owner of a building abutting upon or any part of which stands within
15 feet of the line of any public street, the roof of which building pitches or
slopes towards the street, shall fit or provide such roofs with snow barriers
or guards sufficient to effectually prevent the sliding of snow and ice from
such building into any part of the street.
§ 169-13. Removal of snow and ice.
The tenant, occupant, owner or agent of any building or lot of land
bordering on any street, lane, square or public place shall not allow or
permit any accumulation of snow or ice to remain on the sidewalk adjacent
to said building or lot of land after being ordered to remove same by the
Police Department. Upon failure to comply with the order, within six hours
after notification, by the tenant, occupant, owner or agent above specified,
it is hereby ordered that said snow or ice shall be removed by the Board
of Public Works, and costs of removal shall be assessed to the owner of the
building or lot of land so involved.
§ 169-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-13
1:97

Part 3
[Adopted 3-9-1974 ATMS Btrye eAtr tA.c 4c2e p(tCahn.c XeIsV Of The 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 169-14. Relocation, alteration or repair of streets.
The Selectmen shall have authority for layout, relocation, alteration and
ordering of repairs on ways as provided by MGL c. 82, § 21. The Selectmen
shall not give notice of intention to layout, relocate or alter any Town way or
private way unless and until a plan of such layout, relocation or alteration
for filing with the Town Clerk, as required by MGL c. 82, § 23, has been
prepared and submitted to the Selectmen. The Selectmen shall cause such
plan to be prepared at the cost of the Town only if such layout, relocation or
alteration is proposed by the Board of Public Works, the Planning Board and
the Board of Selectmen to serve the public convenience or necessity. Such
plan shall otherwise be prepared at the expense of the person or persons
petitioning for the layout, relocation or alteration.
§ 169-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-14
1:99

Part 4
[Adopted 5-4-19D9r6ivAeTwMay B Ayn Adr St.i d3e5w (aClhk. CXoXnXsItXru Ocft iTohne 1934 Bylaws);
Amended In Its Entirety 10-29-2008 STM By Art. 11]
§ 169-15. License and permit required.
§ 169-16. Application for permit.
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed
driveway or sidewalk showing its layout, finish grades, material and
construction techniques and sufficient crosscut views to detail the
underlayment and any variations in underlayment through the layout and
by a certificate showing that the applicant is bonded and insured to protect
the interests of the Town in its public ways.
The Superintendent of Public Works may request any other information or
documentation that he deems necessary to make a decision based upon the
design standards enacted pursuant to § 169-19.
§ 169-17. Prohibited acts.
The following shall be violations of this Part 4:
No person shall engage in the construction, upgrade or extension of
any driveway or sidewalk, which is, in whole or in part, in the layout
of a public way, who is not licensed to perform such work by the
Board of Public Works; and no person shall perform or allow another to
perform such work, without first obtaining a permit from the Board of
Public Works or its designee. The Board of Public Works shall annually
license contractors to perform such work, providing they have the
demonstrated capacity and knowledge of proper construction methods
for driveways and sidewalks, as determined by the BPW. Permits shall
be issued for a period of not more than six months but may be renewed
upon written request and approval.
A.
Permits will be issued jointly to the property owner and the contractor,
both of whom will be responsible for compliance with rules, regulations
and permit conditions. The Board of Public Works shall issue a permit
as soon as practical following receipt of a completed application, or
shall render a decision in writing, specifying the reasons for denial of
said permit. A permit denial shall be based upon consideration of public
safety or the protection of private and public property, using the design
standards adopted pursuant to § 169-19.
B.
The Board of Public Works shall report to the Building Department the
name of any person determined to have been in violation of this Part 4
two or more times in the 12 months prior to such report. The Building
Department shall establish a procedure requiring the applicant for a
building permit to certify that no part of the work which is the subject
of the building permit application will be performed by a person who
has been so reported by the Superintendent.
C.
§ 169-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-17
1:101
§ 169-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Part 4 shall be subject to
a fine of $100 for each offense, except the performing or allowing the
performance of work without a permit or by an unlicensed contractor, for
which the fine shall be $300 for each offense. Each day the violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense until a faithful restoration of the public
way to its former condition is completed or unless otherwise agreed to by
the Board of Public Works or its designee. Fines shall be applicable to both
the property owner and the contractor, as determined by the Board of Public
Works. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the
District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with § 21D of
Chapter 40 of the General Laws. The Board may also revoke the license of
permitted contractors found in violation of this Part 4, according to its rules
and regulations.
§ 169-19. Design standards.
The Board of Public Works may impose reasonable restrictions,
requirements, rules, regulations, conditions, size and opening limits, or
standards (collectively "design standards") for the construction of a
driveway.
Construction of a driveway or sidewalk in a public way without a permit
or by an unlicensed contractor.
A.
B. Removal of Town curbing without a permit.
C. Removal of Town sidewalk without a permit.
D. Construction not in compliance with the permitted plan.
Failure to return to the Board of Public Works granite curbing and
granite blocks removed from the site.
E.
F. Failure to install protective safety barriers.
G. Failure to provide temporary paving the same day as the excavation.
Failure to call the BPW at least 48 hours in advance to schedule
inspection of construction work.
H.
I. Failure to post signs as required by the BPW.
§ 169-17 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 169-19
1:102
Chapter 171
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 171-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — The
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code
created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted
by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the
establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy
efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy
conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code are the IECC
with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of Building
Regulations and Standards.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the Massachusetts Building
Code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts
Building Code, based on further amendments to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings
built to this Code.
§ 171-2. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy-efficient
alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant sections of
the building code for new buildings.
§ 171-3. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 115.AA, as indicated.
§ 171-4. Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into
the Town of Fairhaven General Bylaws.
A.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the inspector of buildings or
Building Commissioner and effective as of July 1, 2018.
B.
§ 169-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-4
1:103
Chapter 176
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Explosives and inflammable materials — See
Ch. 113.
Fire Department fees — See Ch. 119, Part 2.
§ 176-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to supplement the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations 527, Section 9 et seq., relative to underground storage tanks
and containers.
§ 176-2. Applicability.
All new underground storage tanks and containers installed pursuant to 527
CMR are covered by this chapter.
§ 176-3. Type of container required.
§ 176-4. Inspection column.
§ 176-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Fire Chief.
Chapter 177
UNION WHARF FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Waterways, moorings and boat usage — See
Ch. 145.
Union Wharf — See Ch. 225.
Tanks and containers covered by this chapter shall be of the
environmental type which consists of a dual liner containment system.
A.
The dual liner containment requirement is meant to provide early
detection of possible leakage should the liner or outer jacket covering
fail due to corrosion or other causes.
B.
Tanks and containers covered by this chapter shall be equipped with an
inspection column leading to an area between the inner and outer walls
of the dual liner containment type of tank.
A.
The inspection column is to be of such a design as to allow the
continuous monitoring of such tanks.
B.
§ 171-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 176-5
1:104
§ 177-1. Authority to establish.
The Selectmen shall have the authority:
Chapter 182
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Throwing objects at motor vehicles — See Ch.
150.
Vehicles in streets at night — See Ch. 169,
Part 1.
To impose a fee or schedule of fees for the use of Union Wharf for the
purpose of berthing, docking, loading, unloading or otherwise servicing
any vessel;
A.
B. To establish regulations for such uses of Union Wharf; and
To amend such fees and regulations from time to time in their
discretion.
C.
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-1
1:105

PART 1
Winter Parking
[Adopted 4-4-1970 ATM by Art. 77 (Ch. VIII, Secs. 4 and 5 of the
1934 Bylaws)]
§ 182-1. Parking regulations.
No vehicle shall be permitted to remain either on the east side of streets
running north and south or on the north side of streets running east or west,
during the time of any snowfall or any snow removal operations in the Town
of Fairhaven or any other times as specified by order of the Board of Public
Works. The Board of Public Works is authorized to remove, or cause to be
removed, to some convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle
interfering with the work of removing or plowing snow or ice from any way,
and the cost of such removal with all storage charges resulting therefrom
shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle.
§ 182-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this Part 1 shall, in addition to the foregoing provision, be
liable to a fine of not more than $20 which may be recovered by indictment
or complaint before a District Court.
§ 182-3. (Reserved)9
9. Editor's Note: Former § 182-3, Exceptions, added 5-11-1994 ATM by Art. 38, was repealed
2-12-2014 ATM by Art. 10.
§ 182-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-3
1:107

PART 2
Parking Violation Fines
[Adopted 5-7-1983 ATM by Art. 13 (Ch. XXIII of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 182-4. Schedule of fines. [Amended 11-16-1983 STM by Art. 8;
5-4-1996 ATM by Art. 33; 1-30-2001 STM by Art. 22; 5-5-2007 ATM
by Art. 29]
The schedule of fines for parking violations shall be as follows:
Code Nature of Violation Penalty
01 Expired parking meter $5.00
02 Not within marked area $15.00
03 Not within 12 inches of curb $20.00
04 Parking on left side or wrong side of street $15.00
05 Illegal angle parking $15.00
06 Other (specify) $10.00
07 Parking within crosswalk $20.00
08 Parking on sidewalk $20.00
09 Parking within taxi stand $15.00
10 Parking within bus stop $20.00
11 Parking within 20 feet of intersection $20.00
12 Parking within loading zone $20.00
13 Parking within no-parking zone $15.00
14 Parking overtime in restricted area $20.00
15 Double parking $30.00
16 Obstructing public transportation by leaving
less than 10 feet for passing of traffic
$30.00
17 Parking within 10 feet of hydrant $50.00
18 Parking within service zone $20.00
19 Parking within five feet of driveway $20.00
20 Impeding snow removal $30.00
21 Parking adjacent to any center strip or island
within a public way
$30.00
22 Parking or leaving unauthorized vehicle
within parking spaces designated for use by
disabled veteran or handicapped person
$100.00
23 Parking or leaving vehicle within a fire lane $20.00
24 Parking in violation of winter parking ban $20.00
§ 182-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-4A
1:109
§ 182-4A. Amendment of Fine Schedule. [Added 5-5-2007 ATM by
Art. 29]
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority from time to time and
without further Town meeting approval to amend the Schedule of Fines as
set forth in § 182-4.
§ 182-4A FAIRHAVEN CODE § 182-4A
1:110
PART 3
Town-Owned Land
[Adopted 11-29-1988 STM by Art. 7 (Ch. XXX of the 1934 Bylaws)]
§ 182-5. Operation of motor vehicles on Town-owned land.
The operation, use or maintenance of any motor vehicles, whether
registered or unregistered, by any person other than a Town employee or
officer acting within the scope of his/her employment or office with the
Town or under the terms of a contract with the Town upon any area of land
owned, maintained or operated by the Town, other than a public way, a
private way, recorded right-of-way or designated drive or parking area, is
hereby prohibited unless expressly authorized by prior written consent of
the Board of Selectmen or other Town agency having control of that land.
§ 182-6. Violations and penalties.
The violation of this Part 3 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200
for each and every offense.
§ 182-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-6
1:111

PART 4
Trailers Not Attached to Motor Vehicles Prohibited
[Adopted 5-3-2008 ATM by Art. 46]
§ 182-7. Trailers and structures unattached on public ways.
No automobile trailer, boat trailer, utility trailer, trailer coach, any portable
structure or vehicle so constructed and designed as to be attached to
a motor vehicle and any portable structure or nonmotorized vehicle so
constructed and designed as to permit occupancy thereof, for dwelling,
sleeping purposes or commercial uses, shall be parked on public ways
or other Town property unless such trailer or structure is attached to
a motor vehicle in a safe and proper fashion as it is constructed and
designed to be so as to be able to be immediately towed without any
further connections and/or adjustments by the motor vehicle to which it is
so attached. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this
section shall not apply to any trailer being currently used in its specific
function for traffic control or for any validly permitted construction project.
§ 182-8. Violations and penalties; removal of trailer.
Any person who violated any of the provisions of this Part 4 shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $20. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Such fines shall inure
to the Town. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint
before the District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in accordance
with Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
A.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall be authorized to remove, to
some convenient place, through the agency of a person or persons
in the employ of the Police Department or of the Town or by an
independent contractor, any such nonmotorized vehicle or trailer
described above parked or standing on any part of a way under the
control of the Town. The owner of the nonmotorized vehicle or trailer
described about shall be liable, in addition to the above stated fine, for
the reasonable cost of such removal and for the storage costs, if any,
resulting therefrom.
B.
§ 182-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-8
1:113
Chapter 187
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and wells — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 475.
Wells — See Ch. 487.
§ 182-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 182-8
1:114
PART 1
Water Use Restriction
§ 187-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by the Town pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21 and its
police powers to protect public health and welfare. This chapter implements
the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 69B,
and MGL c. 40, § 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply
emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection
(hereafter, the Department).
§ 187-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions imposed
by the Town or by the Department.
§ 187-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, or
other entity, public or private.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the Town under § 187-4.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department under MGL c. 21G, §§ 15-17.
WATER USE or WATER CONSUMER — Any person who uses water, or has
control of, or the right to control, the use of water supplied by the Town's
system.
§ 187-4. Declaration of a state of water supply conservation.
The Board of Public Works (hereinafter, the Board) may declare a state of
water supply conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of the
Board that a shortage of water exists or is impending, and that conservation
measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all
water consumers.
§ 187-5. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one or
more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the
use of water as necessary to protect the water supply:
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-5
1:115
§ 187-6. Public notice of a state of water supply conservation.
Public notice of any determination, provision, restriction, requirement or
condition imposed by the Board as part of a state of water supply
conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform
the public of the state of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed
under § 187-5 shall not take effect until 24 hours following publication of
notice. Notice of the state of water supply conservation shall also be given
to the Department.
§ 187-7. Revision or termination of a state of water supply
conservation notice.
A state of water supply conservation or the restrictions imposed may be
revisited or terminated by a majority vote of the Board upon determination
that such a revision is appropriate to achieve the purposes of this chapter
or that the water shortage or the threat of such a shortage no longer exists.
Public notice of the revision or termination shall be given in the same
manner provided in § 187-6.
§ 187-8. State of water supply emergency; compliance with
department orders.
Upon notice to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department, no person shall violate any
provision, restriction, requirement, or condition of any order approved or
issued by the Department.
§ 187-9. Penalties.
Any person who violates § 187-5 or 187-8 shall be liable to the Town in
the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent
violation. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before
the District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with § 1-6 of
these bylaws. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Odd/even day outdoor watering: Outdoor watering on property with
odd-numbered street addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days.
Outdoor watering on property with even-numbered street addresses is
restricted to even numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering ban: Outdoor watering is prohibited or restricted.
Outdoor watering hours: Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, as designated by the Board.
C.
Filling swimming pools: Filling of swimming pools is prohibited or
restricted.
D.
Automatic sprinkler use: The use of automatic sprinkler systems is
prohibited or restricted.
E.
§ 187-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 187-9
1:116
PART 2
Betterments
§ 187-10. Payment of costs of improvement.
The Town shall pay 50% of the cost of laying out and constructing water
pipes or a system or systems of water distribution, after deducting from the
total cost any federal or state grants and the remaining 50% of the cost
shall be paid by assessment of the cost of such public improvements, to be
apportioned among the owners of property fronting on either side of that
portion or portions of a public or private way in which such water pipe
lays. Such assessment shall be made according to the number of principal
structures on such land, and in the case of vacant land, or vacant portions
of built upon land, according to the number of buildable lots into which
such land may be divided under the Zoning Bylaw. The relative portion of
payment provided by this section may be changed from time to time by vote
of the Town at Town Meeting.
§ 187-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-10
1:117

PART 3
Water Supply
§ 187-11. Protection of water supply.
§ 187-12. Second water meter.
The Board of Public Works may authorize the installation of a second water
meter on a property to measure the usage of water for outside use only, and
for which a sewer usage fee shall not be assessed. The Board shall establish,
and may from time to time amend, a fee for annual inspection of such
second meters. The annual inspection shall be performed to insure that
there is no cross connection from the second water meter to any plumbing
in the house which is, in turn, connected to the Town sewer system. A
violation of this section shall result in a warning, and any subsequent
violation shall result in a fine of $100, plus removal of the second meter so
that all Town water used on the property shall pass through one meter.
No person except an employee of the Fairhaven Board of Public Works,
or of the Fairhaven Fire Department, in the performance of his duties,
or a person acting with the permission of the Fairhaven Board Public
Works shall open or discharge from any fire hyrdrant connected to the
Fairhaven water system.
A.
The unauthorized opening or discharging from any fire hydrant
connected to the Fairhaven water system shall be punished by a fine of
$100 for the first offense and $200 for the second and each subsequent
offense.
B.
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-12
1:119

PART 4
General
§ 187-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Town's Board of Public Works, the
Board of Health, the Town police, special police and any other locally
designated body or official having police powers.
§ 187-14. Right of entry.
Agents of the Enforcement Authority may enter any property for the
purpose of inspecting or investigating any violation of this Part 1, or
enforcing against the same.
§ 187-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
§ 187-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-15
1:121
Chapter 192
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 8. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the wetlands, related water
resources and adjoining land areas in the Town of Fairhaven by controlling
activities deemed by the Fairhaven Conservation Commission likely to have
a significant or cumulative effect upon wetland values, including but not
limited to the following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood
control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention,
water pollution control, fisheries, wildlife habitat, recreation, aesthetics
and agriculture values (collectively, the "wetland values protected by this
chapter").
§ 192-2. Regulated activities. [Amended 5-1-2010 STM by Art. 13]
Except as permitted by the Fairhaven Conservation Commission or as
provided in this chapter, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon or
alter the following resource areas:
§ 192-3. Exceptions.
Any freshwater or coastal wetland, marsh, wet meadow, bog, or swamp;
or within 100 feet of these resource areas.
A.
Any bank, beach, creek, dune, lake, river, pond, stream, estuary, or
ocean; or within 100 feet of these resource areas.
B.
C. Any land under lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, estuaries or the ocean.
Lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface
water, lands subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage, or flooding;
or within 100 feet of these resource areas.
D.
The permit and application required by this chapter shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing or replacing an existing and
lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public
to provide electric, gas, water, telephone or other telecommunication
services, provided that the structure or facility is not substantially
changed or enlarged.
A.
The permit and application required by this chapter shall not apply to
emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety
of the public, provided that:
B.
§ 187-15 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 192-3
1:122
§ 192-4. Permit application and requests for determination.
The work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be
performed by an agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or
a political subdivision thereof.
(1)
Advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission
or its agent prior to commencement of work or within 24 hours
after commencement.
(2)
The Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency
project.
(3)
The work is performed only for the time and place so certified for
the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency.
(4)
Within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit
application shall be filed with the Conservation Commission for
review as provided by this chapter.
(5)
Upon failure to meet these requirements and any other requirements
imposed by the Commission pursuant to this chapter, the Commission
may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency
project certification and order restoration and mitigation measures.
C.
Written application shall be filed with the Conservation Commission
to perform regulated activities regulated as defined in § 192-2. The
application shall include such information and plans as are deemed
necessary by the Commission to describe proposed activities and their
effects on the environment. No activities shall commence without
receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
A.
In its discretion the Commission may accept the notice of intent and
plans filed under MGL c. 31, § 40 (the Wetlands Protection Act) as the
application and plans under this chapter. Any person desiring to know
whether or not the proposed activity of an area is subject to this chapter
may request a determination for the Commission in writing. Such a
request for determination shall contain data and plans specified by the
regulations of the Commission.
B.
At the time of an application or request, the applicant shall pay a
filing fee specified in the regulation of the Commission, said fee to
be in addition to any fee required by MGL c. 131, § 40 (the Wetlands
Protection Act). The Commission may establish filing fees in amounts
reasonably designed to recover the cost to the Town of processing such
application, including the cost to the Town of professional services for
design review, site inspection and testing and related services. The
Commission may waive the filing fee for an application or request filed
by a government agency and shall waive all fees, costs and expenses for
a request for determination filed by a person who is not the owner or a
person acting on behalf of the owner.
C.
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:123
§ 192-5. Notice and hearings.
§ 192-6. Permits; determinations and conditions.
At the same time any person files an application or request for
determination with the Conservation Commission, he/she shall give
written notice thereof, by certified mail or hand delivery to all abutters
according to the most recent records of the Assessors, including those
across a traveled way, a body of water or a Town line. The notice to
abutters shall enclose a copy of the application or request, with plans,
or shall state where copies may be examined by abutters. When a
person requesting a determination is other than the owner or a person
acting on behalf of the owner, the request, the notice of the hearing and
the determination itself shall be sent by the Commission to the owner(s)
as well as the person making the request.
A.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application or
request for determination, with written notice given, at the expense of
the applicant, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least
five working days prior to the hearing.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed application or request for determination
and shall issue its permit, denial or determination in writing within
21 days of the close of said public hearing. In its discretion, the
Commission may combine this hearing under this chapter with a
hearing conducted under MGL c. 131, § 40 (the Wetlands Protection
Act).
C.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue any hearing to
a date certain announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the
hearing, which may include receipt of additional information offered by
the applicant or others, information and plans required of the applicant
deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion or comments and
recommendations of other Town boards and officials. If the applicant
objects to a continuance or postponement, the hearing shall be closed,
and the Commission shall take action on the information then available
to it.
D.
If, after a public hearing, the Conservation Commission determines that
the activities which are the subject of the application are not likely
to have a significant or cumulative effect upon the wetlands values
protected by this chapter, the Commission shall, within 21 days of
the close of the hearing, issue a permit for the activities requested.
Such permit shall be without conditions. If, after a public hearing, the
Conservation Commission determines that the activities which are the
subject of the application are likely to have a significant or cumulative
effect upon any or all of the wetlands values protected by this chapter,
the Commission shall, within 21 days of the close of the hearing, issue a
permit for the activities requested, in which case the Commission shall
impose conditions which it deems necessary or desirable to protect
A.
§ 192-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 192-6
1:124
§ 192-7. Regulations.
After public notice and public hearing, the Conservation Commission shall
promulgate rules and regulations to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a
legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
§ 192-8. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this chapter:
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within or effecting resource areas protected by this
chapter:
those values, and all activities shall be done in accordance with those
conditions, or deny a permit.
The Commission may deny a permit for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to meet the requirement of this chapter.
Failure to submit necessary information and/or plans requested by
the Commission.
(2)
Failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards
and other requirements in regulations of the Commission.
(3)
Failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative
effects upon any or all of the wetland values protected by this
chapter.
(4)
B.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issue. Any permit may
be renewed once for an additional period, up to three years, provided
that a written request for renewal is received by the Commission prior
to expiration and that the Commission may grant such extension as it
finds necessary to allow completion of the permitted work.
C.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or modified by
the Commission after public notice and notice to the holder of the
permit and a public hearing thereon, upon a finding of the existence
of circumstances which would justify the denial of or imposition of
conditions on a permit.
D.
In its discretion, the Commission may combine the permit or other
action on an application issued under this chapter with the order of
conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
E.
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, loam, peat, gravel or
aggregate materials of any kind.
A.
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-8
1:125
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation company, business organization, trust, estate, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or political subdivision thereof to the
extent subject to Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, the Town of Fairhaven and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.
§ 192-9. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any security
required by any other Town or state board, agency or official, the
Conservation Commission may require that the performance and
observance of any conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in
part by one or more of the methods described below:
§ 192-10. Enforcement.
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns or flood retention characteristics.
B.
C. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade
water quality.
D.
E. Placing of fill or removal of material which would alter elevation.
Driving of piles, erection, alteration or repair of buildings or structures
of any kind.
F.
G. Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
H. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees.
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other
physical or chemical characteristics of water.
I.
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to contribute
to pollution or any body of water or groundwater.
J.
By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other
undertaking of financial responsibility in an amount sufficient in the
opinion of the Commission.
A.
By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable
in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record,
running with the land to the benefit of the Town of Fairhaven requiring
the permit conditions to be performed before any interest may be
conveyed other than a mortgage interest.
B.
The Conservation Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall
have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose
A.
§ 192-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 192-10
1:126
§ 192-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 192-12. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon
the wetland values protected by this chapter.
§ 192-13. Relation to Wetland Protection Act.
This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Statutes, independent of
MGL c. 131, § 40 (the Wetlands Protection Act) and regulations thereunder.
§ 192-14. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination which previously has been issued.
of performing their duties under this chapter and make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys or samplings as the Commission
deems necessary.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders and civil and criminal court actions.
B.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and Town
Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon
request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
C.
Town boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer
having police powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in
enforcement.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations
thereunder or permits issued thereunder shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $300. Each day or portion thereof during which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each
provision of the bylaw regulations or permit violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
A.
In the alternative to criminal prosecution, the Commission may elect
to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D.
B.
§ 192-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-14
1:127

Chapter 194
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands — See Ch. 192.
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
§ 194-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and
pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR
122.34.
§ 194-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Fairhaven, the
protection of Fairhaven's water bodies and groundwater, and the
protection of Fairhaven's natural resources through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This
chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
B. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff associated with
developed land uses and the accompanying increase in impervious
surface are major causes of impairment of water quality and flow in
lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands, and groundwater. The harmful
impacts of illicit discharge, soil erosion, and sedimentation are:
(1) Impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams,
rivers, wetlands, groundwater, and drinking water supplies;
(2) Contamination of drinking water supplies;
(3) Erosion of stream channels and downstream coastal areas;
(4) Alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat;
(5) Flooding;
(6) Overloading or clogging of municipal stormwater management
systems.
C. The objectives of this chapter are to:
194:1
(1) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
(2) Prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system and require their removal;
(3) Protect water resources;
(4) Require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation;
(5) Control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from
land-disturbance activities in order to minimize potential impacts
of flooding;
(6) Require practices to manage and treat stormwater runoff
generated from new development and redevelopment;
(7) Establish minimum construction and post-construction stormwater
management standards and design criteria for the regulation and
control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality;
(8) Protect groundwater and surface water from degradation;
(9) Promote infiltration and the recharge of groundwater;
(10) Maximize recharge of groundwater in the Fairhaven Aquifer
Protection District.
(11) Prevent pollutants from entering the Town's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and reduce or eliminate pollutants
entering the Town's MS4 from existing users;
(12) Ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and
stormwater runoff management practices are incorporated into the
site planning and design process and are implemented and
maintained;
(13) Ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of
structural stormwater best management practices;
(14) Require practices to control waste such as discarded building
materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary
waste at construction sites that may cause adverse impacts to
water quality;
(15) Comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to
stormwater discharges, including total maximum daily load
requirements;
(16) Establish the Town of Fairhaven's legal authority to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter through inspection,
monitoring and enforcement; and
§ 194-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-2
194:2
§ 194-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
ABUTTER — The owner(s) of land abutting the lot or lots on which activity
regulated by this chapter is occurring or proposed.
AGRICULTURE — The normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural or aquaculture use, as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act and its implementing regulations.
ALTERATION OF DRAINAGE CHARACTERISTICS — Any activity on an area
of land that changes the water quality, or the force, quantity, direction,
timing or location of runoff flowing from the area. Such changes include:
change from distributed runoff to confined, discrete discharge; change in
the volume of runoff from the area; change in the peak rate of runoff from
the area; and change in the recharge to groundwater on the area.
APPLICANT — Any "person" as defined below requesting a soil erosion and
sediment control permit for proposed land-disturbance activity or a permit
relating to or involving stormwater management.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — An activity, procedure,
restraint, or structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity of
or improve the quality of stormwater runoff; schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Board of Public Works for the Town of
Fairhaven and its employees, agents or others designated by that Board to
enforce this chapter.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
Clearing activities generally include grubbing activity as defined below.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — The erection or placement of a building or
other structure, or the placement of any impervious surface, in or on the
ground, or site preparation for such activities, including, but not limited to,
activities subject to NPDES construction permits as laid out in the eligibility
conditions of the permit.
CONSTRUCTION AND WASTE MATERIALS — Excess or discarded building
or site materials, including but not limited to concrete truck washout,
(17) Support Chapter 198, § 198-31 (Earth removal regulations),
Chapter 198, § 198-31.1 and Chapter 322, § 322-26 (Stormwater
management).
§ 194-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-3
194:3
chemicals, litter and sanitary waste at a construction site that may
adversely impact water quality.
DEVELOPMENT — The modification of land to accommodate a new use or
expansion of use, usually involving construction.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or commonwealth from any source.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND — Any action, including clearing and grubbing,
that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand,
rock, gravel, or similar earth material.
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE MONITOR — A registered professional engineer
or other trained professional selected by the Conservation Commission
and retained by the holder of a minor land-disturbance permit or a full
land-disturbance permit to periodically inspect the work and report to the
Conservation Commission and/or Planning Board.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by natural or artificial
forces such as wind, water, ice, gravity, or vehicle traffic and the subsequent
detachment and transportation of soil particles.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A document
containing narrative, drawings and details developed by a registered
professional engineer (PE), registered professional land surveyor (PLS), or
a certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC) which
includes best management practices, or equivalent measures designed to
control surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation during pre-constructionand
construction-related land-disturbance activities.
EROSION CONTROL — The prevention or reduction of the movement of soil
particles or rock fragments due to stormwater runoff.
ESTIMATED HABITAT OF RARE WILDLIFE AND CERTIFIED VERNAL
POOLS — Habitats delineated for state-protected rare wildlife and certified
vernal pools for use with the Wetlands Protection Act regulations (310 CMR
10.00) and the Forest Cutting Practices Act regulations (302 CMR 16.00).
FLOODING — A local and temporary inundation or rise in the surface of a
body of water, such that it covers land not usually under water.
GRADING — Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
GRUBBING — The act of clearing land surface by digging or grinding up
roots and stumps.
HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material, including
any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic,
radioactive, or infectious characteristics, either separately or in
combination with any substance or substances, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
§ 194-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-3
194:4
safety, welfare, property, or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Toxic or hazardous
materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy
metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance
defined as "toxic" or "hazardous" under MGL c. 21C and MGL c. 21E, and
the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal or illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain
system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains, sinks or toilets, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency before the effective date of this chapter,
or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system or a watercourse or the waters of the commonwealth that is
not composed entirely of stormwater, except for projects exempted by this
chapter or by regulations issued thereunder. The term does not include a
discharge in compliance with an NPDES stormwater discharge permit or
resulting from firefighting activities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious
surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
and rooftops.
IMPOUNDMENT — A stormwater pond created by either constructing an
embankment or excavating a pit which retains a permanent pool of water.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
INFILTRATION — The act of conveying surface water into the ground to
permit groundwater recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff from
a project site.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY or LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity,
including without limitation: clearing, grubbing, grading, digging, cutting,
excavation of soil, placement of fill, and construction that causes a change
in the position or location of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth
material.
LOAD ALLOCATION or WASTE LOAD ALLOCATION — The maximum
concentration or mass of a pollutant which can be discharged to a waterway
§ 194-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-3
194:5
from nonpoint sources without causing a violation of surface water quality
standards as established in an applicable total maximum daily load (TMDL).
LOT — A single parcel of land held in identical ownership throughout and
defined by metes, bounds, or boundary lines in a recorded deed or on a
recorded plan.
MASSACHUSETTS ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT — MGL c. 131A and its
implementing regulations at 321 CMR 10.00 which prohibit the "taking" of
any rare plant or animal species listed as endangered, threatened, or of
special concern.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY — The policy
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, as amended, that
coordinates the requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated
under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c.
131 § 40 and the Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, MGL c. 21, §§ 23 through
56. The policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of
performance standards to reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water
bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM
SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or human-made or -altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Fairhaven.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of
the United States.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm drain
system not composed entirely of stormwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan describing the
functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing
operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure
that it continues to function as designed.
OUTFALL — The point at which stormwater flows out from a discernible,
confined point source or discrete conveyance into waters of the
commonwealth.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS (ORWs) — Waters designated by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as ORWs. These
waters have exceptional sociologic, recreational, ecological and/or aesthetic
values and are subject to more stringent requirements under both the
Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) and the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards set forth in the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy. ORWs include vernal pools
§ 194-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-3
194:6
certified by the Natural Heritage Program of the Massachusetts
Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement,
all Class A designated public water supplies with their bordering vegetated
wetlands, and other waters specifically designated.
OWNER — A person with a legal or equitable interest in property.
PERMITTEE — The person who holds a land-disturbance permit and
therefore bears the responsibilities and enjoys the privileges conferred
thereby.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete means of
conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or
may be discharged.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter,
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is considered toxic
or detrimental to humans or the environment and is or may be introduced
into the municipal storm drain system or any sewage treatment works, or
into any water, watercourse or waters of the commonwealth. Pollutants
shall include without limitation:
PRE-CONSTRUCTION — All activity in preparation for construction.
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnance, accumulations, and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes;
G. Sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens;
H. Dissolved and particulate metals;
I. Animal wastes;
J. Rock; sand; salt; soils;
K. Construction wastes and residues; and
L. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 194-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-3
194:7
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIORITY HABITAT OF RARE SPECIES — Habitats delineated for rare
plant and animal populations protected pursuant to the Massachusetts
Endangered Species Act1 and its regulations.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
REDEVELOPMENT — Development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition
or phased projects that disturb the ground surface, including impervious
surfaces, on previously developed sites. The creation of new areas of
impervious surface or new areas of land disturbance on a site constitutes
development, not redevelopment, even where such activities are part of a
common plan which also involves redevelopment. Redevelopment includes
maintenance and improvement of existing roadways, including widening
less than a single lane, adding shoulders, correcting substandard
intersections, improving existing drainage systems and repaving; and
remedial projects specifically designed to provide improved stormwater
management, such as projects to separate storm drains and sanitary sewers
and stormwater retrofit projects.
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES — Owners, persons with financial responsibility,
persons with operational responsibility, and persons with administrative
responsibility.
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind
or water from its origin to another location; the product of erosion
processes.
SEDIMENTATION — The process or act of deposition of sediment.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land or area of property where land-disturbing
activities are, were, or will be performed.
SLOPE — The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal
distance to vertical distance.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, rock, gravel, or similar material.
STABILIZATION — The use, singly or in combination, of mechanical,
structural, or vegetative methods, to prevent or retard erosion.
1. Editor's Note: See MCL c. 131A, § 1 et seq.
§ 194-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-3
194:8
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document containing narrative,
drawings and details prepared by a registered professional engineer (PE),
a registered professional land surveyor (PLS), or a certified professional
in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC) which includes structural
and nonstructural best management practices and activities to identify
sources of pollution or contamination and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/
or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable, and to manage and
treat stormwater runoff generated from regulated development activity. A
stormwater management plan also includes an operation and maintenance
plan describing the maintenance requirements for structural best
management practices.
STRIP — Any activity which removes the vegetative ground surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of
topsoil.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — A plan required under the
Clean Water Act2 for a pollutant which causes or contributes to a violation
of state surface water quality standards in a specific geographic area, and
which establishes the maximum amount of that pollutant (referred to as the
load allocation and waste load allocation) which may be discharged to the
affected waters of the commonwealth by one or more categories of users
without violating state surface water quality standards.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TSS — Material, including but not limited
to trash, debris, and sand, suspended in stormwater runoff.
VERNAL POOLS — Temporary bodies of freshwater which provide critical
habitat for a number of vertebrate and invertebrate wildlife species.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning, or processing
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of
any material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or human-made channel through which water
flows, including a river, brook, stream, underground stream, pond or lake.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and
groundwater.
WETLAND RESOURCE AREA — Area specified in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act MGL c. 131, § 40, and in the Town of Fairhaven
Wetlands Protection Bylaw.3
2. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 194-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-3
194:9
WETLANDS — Tidal and nontidal areas characterized by saturated or
nearly saturated soils most of the year that are located between terrestrial
(land-based) and aquatic (water-based) environments, including freshwater
marshes around ponds and channels (rivers and streams), brackish and salt
marshes; common names include marshes, swamps and bogs. Freshwater
wetland, marsh, bog, wet meadow and swamp are defined in MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and are collectively known as vegetated wetlands. Credible evidence
as to wetland affinities of other vegetation in an area shall be considered in
making wetland determinations.
§ 194-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to land-disturbing activities on any developed and
undeveloped land within the jurisdiction of the Town of Fairhaven and water
and other materials entering the Town of Fairhaven municipal storm drain
system. Land disturbance of 40,000 square feet or more in area is hereby
prohibited except in compliance with this chapter. The discharge of any
substance other than stormwater into the municipal stormwater system is
hereby prohibited except in compliance with this chapter.
A. Regulated land-disturbance activities.
(1) Regulated activities shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Land disturbance of greater than 40,000 square feet,
associated with construction or reconstruction of structures;
(b) Development or redevelopment involving multiple separate
activities in discontinuous locations or on different schedules if
the activities are part of a larger common plan of development
that all together disturbs 40,000 square feet or more of land;
(c) Paving, repaving or other change in surface material over an
area of 40,000 square feet or more causing a significant
reduction of permeability or increase in runoff;
(d) Construction of a new drainage system or alteration of an
existing drainage system or conveyance serving a drainage
area of more than 40,000 square feet;
(e) Any other activity altering the surface of an area exceeding
40,000 square feet that will, or may, result in increased
stormwater runoff flowing from the property into a public way
or the municipal storm drain system; or
(f) Construction or reconstruction of a structure or structures
with more than 40,000 square feet of roof drainage, or
combined roof and surface drainage.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 192, Wetlands.
§ 194-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-4
194:10
(2) Erosion and sedimentation control requirement. A project which
includes land disturbance of less than 40,000 square feet shall be
considered to be in conformance with this chapter if soils or other
eroded matter have been or will be prevented from being deposited
onto adjacent properties, rights-of-way, public storm drainage
systems, or wetlands or watercourses. The design, installation, and
maintenance of erosion and sediment control operations and
facilities shall adhere to the standards specified in the regulations
to this chapter.
(3) Exempted projects. Notwithstanding the provisions of above, the
procedural requirements of this chapter shall not apply to activities
which have been approved by the Planning Board or the
Conservation Commission, provided that the applicant has
submitted to the Board of Public Works a written determination
from the Planning Board or the Conservation Commission that the
project complies with the performance standards otherwise
required by this chapter.
B. Discharge prohibitions.
(1) Prohibition of illegal discharges: No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants
or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater. The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is
prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in
violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(a) Water line flushing;
(b) Flow from other potable water sources;
(c) Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(d) Diverted stream flows;
(e) Rising groundwater;
(f) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(b)(20);
(g) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater (e.g., sump pump),
provided that where a pump intake exists inside a structure,
§ 194-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-4
194:11
the operator seeks a permit from the Board of Public Works
prior to discharge and thereafter discharges in accordance
with the requirements of the permit and applicable laws and
regulations;
(h) Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, or air-conditioning condensation;
(i) Noncommercial washing of vehicles;
(j) Springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
(k) Discharge from swimming pool water (if
dechlorinated–typically less than one ppm chlorine), provided
the water is allowed to stand for one week prior to draining
and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a
nuisance;
(l) Discharge from street sweeping;
(m) Firefighting activities;
(n) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Board of Public Works prior to the time of
the test;
(o) Discharges specified in writing by the Board of Public Works as
being necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare, or the
environment; and
(p) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain
system.
(2) Suspension of MS4 access.
(a) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The Board of Public Works will
notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
(b) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
The violator may petition the Board of Public Works for a
reconsideration and hearing. Any person commits an offense if
the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
§ 194-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-4
194:12
§ 194-5. Administration.
The Board of Public Works shall administer, implement and enforce this
chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board of Public
Works through this chapter may be delegated in writing by the Board of
Public Works to its employees or agents.
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
Board of Public Works.
(c) The Board of Public Works may, without prior notice, suspend
MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to
the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to
comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
Board of Public Works may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters
of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
(3) Industrial or construction activity discharges: Any person subject
to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Board of Public Works prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
C. Exempt activities. The following activities are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use
as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and
its associated regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
(2) Repair of septic systems when required by the Board of Health for
the protection of public health and compliance with Subsection B.
(3) Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn
areas associated with a single-family dwelling, provided such
maintenance does not include the addition of more than 50 cubic
yards of soil material, construction of any walls, alteration of
existing grades by more than one foot in elevation, or alteration of
drainage patterns.
(4) The construction of fencing that will not alter existing terrain or
drainage patterns.
(5) Construction of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, electric,
telephone, etc.) that will not alter terrain or drainage patterns.
§ 194-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-6
194:13
§ 194-6. Regulations.
The Board of Public Works may adopt, and periodically amend, rules,
regulations, and/or written guidance to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter. Failure by the Board of Public Works to promulgate such rules and
regulations, or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court, shall not act
to suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter. Such regulations, rules or
guidance may include, without limitation, provisions for the establishment
of one or more categories of administrative review approvals for specific
types or sizes of projects. Administrative review applications that meet all
the standard requirements may be issued by one or more agents designated
in writing by the Board of Public Works, without the requirement for a
public hearing as detailed in this chapter. Administrative review approval
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
§ 194-7. Land-disturbance permits.
Permit issuance is required prior to any activity disturbing 40,000 or more
square feet of land. The site owner or his agent shall apply for the permit
with the Board of Public Works. While application may be made by a
representative, the permitted must be the owner of the site.
A. Applications. An application shall be made to the Board of Public Works
in a form and containing information as specified in this chapter and in
the regulations adopted by the Board of Public Works and shall be
accompanied by payment of the appropriate application and review
fees.
B. Fees. Fees shall be established by Board of Public Works to cover
expenses connected with public notice, application review, and
monitoring permit compliance. The fee shall be sufficient to also cover
professional review. The Board of Public Works is authorized to retain a
registered professional engineer or other professional consultant to
advise the Board of Public Works on any or all aspects of these plans.
Applicants must pay review fees before the review process may begin.
C. Information requests. The Board of Public Works may request such
additional information as is necessary to enable the Board of Public
Works to determine whether the proposed land-disturbance activity will
protect water resources and comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
D. Determination of completeness. The Board of Public Works shall make a
determination as to the completeness of the application and adequacy
of the materials submitted. No review shall take place until the
application has been found to be complete.
E. Coordination with other boards. On receipt of a complete application
for a land-disturbance permit, the Board of Public Works shall
distribute one copy each to the Planning Board, Department of Public
Works, Board of Health, and the Building Inspector for review and
§ 194-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-7
194:14
comment. Said agencies shall, in their discretion, investigate the case
and report their recommendations to the Board of Public Works. The
Board of Public Works shall not hold a hearing on the land-disturbance
permit until it has received reports from said agencies or until said
agencies have allowed 45 days to elapse after receipt of the application
materials without submission of a report thereon.
F. Entry. Filing an application for a land-disturbance permit grants the
Board of Public Works or its agent permission to enter the site to verify
the information in the application and to inspect for compliance with
permit conditions, to the extent permitted by law.
G. Hearing. Once in receipt of a complete application for a landdisturbance
permit, the Board of Public Works shall hold a public
hearing and shall take final action within 90 days from the close of the
hearing unless such time is extended by agreement between the
applicant and the Board of Public Works. Notice of the public hearing
shall, at least seven business days prior to said hearing, be given by
publication in a local paper of general circulation, and by posting. The
Board of Public Works shall be responsible for publishing the notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or Town once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14 days
before the day of said hearing, and posting the notice at the Town Hall.
The Board of Public Works shall make the application available for
inspection by the public during business hours at their Town of
Fairhaven Office.
H. Action. The Board of Public Works may:
(1) Approve the application and issue a permit if it finds that the
proposed plan will protect water resources and complies with the
requirements of this chapter;
(2) Approve the application and issue a permit with conditions,
modifications or restrictions that the Board of Public Works
determines are required to ensure that the project will protect
water resources and complies with the requirements of this
chapter; or
(3) Disapprove the application and deny a permit if it finds that the
proposed plan will not protect water resources or fails to meet the
objectives of and to comply with the requirements of this chapter. If
the Board of Public Works finds that the applicant has submitted
insufficient information to describe the site, the work, or the effect
of the work on water quality and runoff volume, the Board of Public
Works may disapprove the application, denying a permit.
I. Project changes. The permittee, or his or her agent, must notify the
agent of the Board of Public Works in writing of any change or
alteration of a land-disturbing activity before the change or alteration
occurs. If the agent of the Board of Public Works determines that the
change or alteration is significant, the agent of the Board of Public
§ 194-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-7
194:15
§ 194-8. Erosion and sedimentation control plan.
Works may require that an amended application or a full application be
filed in accordance with this section. If any change or alteration from
the land-disturbance permit occurs during land-disturbing activities,
the agent of the Board of Public Works may require the installation of
interim erosion and sedimentation control measures before approving
the change or alteration.
J. Waivers.
(1) Following a public hearing on a waiver request, the Board of Public
Works may waive strict compliance with any requirement of this
chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder,
where:
(a) Such action is allowed by federal, state, and local statutes and/
or regulations; and
(b) Is in the public interest; and
(c) Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(2) Any applicant must submit a written request to be granted such a
waiver. Such a request shall be accompanied by an explanation or
documentation supporting the waiver request and demonstrating
that strict application of the chapter does not further the purposes
or objectives of this chapter.
(3) All waiver requests shall be discussed and voted on at the public
hearing for the project.
(4) If, in the Board of Public Works' opinion, additional time or
information is required for review of a waiver request, the Board of
Public Works may continue a hearing to a certain date announced
at the meeting. In the event the applicant objects to a continuance,
or fails to provide requested information, the waiver request shall
be denied.
A. The erosion and sediment control plan should include a written
description of the plan as well as an emergency response outline
(including response phone numbers) and a maintenance schedule. The
plan shall meet the following objectives and criteria:
(1) Keep disturbed areas small: no more than 60 feet in width and 100
feet in length of a single lot, or five acres of the overall tract at one
time. Said plan shall identify design issues and methods employed
to address such items as topography, soils, vegetation, steep
slopes, wetlands and water bodies.
(2) Stabilize and protect disturbed areas quickly: Exposed areas and
stockpiles shall be revegetated within 40 days of being exposed.
The Board of Public Works, depending on weather conditions, may
§ 194-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-8
194:16
§ 194-9. Stormwater management plan.
The stormwater management plan shall contain sufficient information to
describe the nature and purpose of the proposed development, pertinent
conditions of the site and the adjacent areas, and proposed best
management practices for the permanent management and treatment of
stormwater. The stormwater management plan shall contain sufficient
information for the Board of Public Works to evaluate the environmental
impact, effectiveness, and acceptability of the measures proposed by the
applicant for reducing adverse impacts from stormwater. The plan shall be
designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards
set forth in the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy and DEP
Stormwater Management Handbook Volumes I and II. The stormwater
management plan shall fully describe the project in drawings, and
narrative. The applicant shall submit such material as is required for the
administration of this chapter.
§ 194-10. Operation and maintenance plans.
require slope and stockpile stabilization sooner. Methods for
stabilizing disturbed areas include mechanical, structural, and
vegetative. In some cases, some or all of these methods should
be combined in order to retard erosion. These methods shall be
identified in the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(3) Keep stormwater runoff velocities low: Velocities of runoff should
be in the range of two to 10 feet per second. The removal of the
existing vegetative cover during the development and the resulting
increase in impermeable surface area after development will
increase both the volume and velocity of runoff. These increases
must be taken into account when providing for erosion control.
(4) Protect disturbed areas from stormwater runoff: Conservation
measures can be utilized to prevent water from entering and
running over the disturbed area. Diversions and other control
practices to intercept runoff from higher elevations, store or divert
it away from vulnerable areas, and direct it towards stabilized
outlets should be utilized. Selected measures should be identified
on the plan and in text.
(5) Retain sediment within site area: The best way to control sediment
is to prevent erosion; however, sediment can be retained by two
methods:
(a) Filtering runoff as it flows and detaining sediment; or
(b) Detain runoff for a period of time so that the soil particles
settle out.
A. An operation and maintenance plan (O&M plan) for the permanent
stormwater management system is required at the time of application
§ 194-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-10
194:17
§ 194-11. Inspection and site supervision.
for all projects. The maintenance plan shall be designed to ensure
compliance with this chapter and that the Massachusetts Surface Water
Quality Standards contained in 314 CMR 4.00 are met in all seasons
and throughout the life of the system. The operation and maintenance
plan shall include any requirements deemed necessary by the Board
of Public Works to insure compliance with said plan, including without
limitation a covenant. The Board of Public Works shall make the final
decision of what maintenance option is appropriate in a given situation.
The Board of Public Works will consider natural features, proximity
of site to water bodies and wetlands, extent of impervious surfaces,
size of the site, the types of stormwater management structures, and
potential need for ongoing maintenance activities when making this
decision. Once approved by the Board of Public Works, the operation
and maintenance plan shall be recorded at the Bristol County Registry
of Deeds by the permittee, shall run with the land, shall remain on file
with the Board of Public Works and shall be an ongoing requirement.
The operation and maintenance plan shall conform to the requirements
listed in the regulations adopted by the Board of Public Works for
the administration of this chapter. Stormwater management easements
shall be provided by the property owner(s) in areas and as necessary to
carry out the required maintenance.
B. Changes to operation and maintenance plans.
(1) The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify
the Board of Public Works or its agent of changes in ownership or
assignment of financial responsibility.
(2) The maintenance schedule in the maintenance agreement may be
amended to achieve the purposes of this chapter by mutual
agreement of the Board of Public Works and the responsible
parties. Amendments must be in writing and signed by all
responsible parties.
A. Pre-construction meeting. Prior to clearing, excavation, construction,
or any land-disturbing activity requiring a permit, the applicant, the
applicant's technical representative, the general contractor, pertinent
subcontractors, and any person with authority to make changes to the
project, shall meet with the Board of Public Works or its designated
agent to review the permitted plans and proposed implementation.
B. Commission inspection. The Board of Public Works or its designated
agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either
approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the approved plans and any
conditions of approval. One copy of the approved plans and conditions
of approval, signed by the Board of Public Works shall be maintained at
the site during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections,
§ 194-10 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-11
194:18
§ 194-12. Surety.
The Board of Public Works may require the permittee to post, before the
start of land-disturbance activity, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
cash, or other acceptable security. The form of the bond shall be approved
by Town Counsel, and be in an amount deemed sufficient by the Board of
Public Works to insure that the work will be completed in accordance with
the permit. If the project is phased, the Board of Public Works may release
part of the bond as each phase is completed in compliance with the permit,
but the bond may not be fully released until the Board of Public Works has
received the final report as required by § 194-13 and issued a certificate of
completion.
the permittee shall notify the agent of the Board of Public Works at least
three working days before each of the following events:
(1) Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized;
(2) Rough grading has been substantially completed;
(3) Final grading has been substantially completed;
(4) Bury inspection: prior to backfilling of any underground drainage
or stormwater conveyance structures;
(5) Close of the construction season; and
(6) Final landscaping (permanent stabilization) and project final
completion.
C. Permittee inspections. The permittee or his/her agent shall conduct and
document inspections of all control measures no less than weekly or as
specified in the permit, and prior to and following anticipated storm
events. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall
effectiveness of the control plan, and the need for maintenance or
additional control measures. The permittee or his/her agent shall
submit monthly reports to the Board of Public Works or designated
agent in a format approved by the Board of Public Works. The Board of
Public Works may require, as a condition of approval, that an
environmental site monitor, approved by the Board of Public Works, be
retained by the applicant to conduct such inspections and prepare and
submit such reports to the Board of Public Works or its designated
agent.
D. Access permission. To the extent permitted by law, or if authorized by
the owner or other party in control of the property, the Board of Public
Works, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon privately
owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this
chapter and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys
or sampling as the Board of Public Works deems reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with the permit.
§ 194-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-13
194:19
§ 194-13. Final reports.
Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall submit a report (including
certified as-built construction plans) from a registered professional
engineer (PE), registered professional land surveyor (PLS), or a certified
professional in erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC) certifying that
all erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved changes and
modifications, have been completed in accordance with the conditions of
the approved land-disturbance permit. Any discrepancies should be noted
in the cover letter.
§ 194-14. Certificate of completion.
The Board of Public Works will issue a certificate of completion upon receipt
and approval of the final reports and/or upon otherwise determining that
all work of the land disturbance permit has been satisfactorily completed
in conformance with this chapter. The certificate of completion shall be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds by the owner(s).
§ 194-15. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Board of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the Board of Public Works.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Board of Public Works ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state
and federal law.
(3) The Board of Public Works shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the Board of Public Works to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Board of Public Works has the right to require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
§ 194-13 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-15
194:20
§ 194-16. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
The Board of Public Works will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Board
of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Board of Public Works access
to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge
permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility
with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
Board of Public Works reasonable access to the permitted facility
for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required
by this chapter.
(7) If the Board of Public Works has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the Board of Public Works may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 194-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 194-17
194:21
§ 194-17. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 194-18. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Board of Public Works in person or
by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the Board of Public Works within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 194-19. Enforcement.
A. The Board of Public Works or an authorized agent of the Board of Public
Works shall enforce this chapter, regulations, orders, violation notices,
and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies
for such violations.
B. Orders.
(1) The Board of Public Works or an authorized agent of the Board of
Public Works may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of
this chapter or the regulations thereunder, which may include:
(a) A requirement to cease and desist from the violating activity
until there is compliance with the chapter and any existing
permits.
§ 194-17 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-19
194:22
(b) Maintenance, installation or performance of additional erosion
and sedimentation control measures.
(c) Monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
(d) Remediation of erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or
indirectly from the land-disturbing activity.
(e) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges.
(f) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property.
(2) If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of erosion and sedimentation, stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards is required, the order shall set forth a
deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be
completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator
or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the
specified deadline, the Town of Fairhaven may, at its option,
undertake such work, and the property owner shall reimburse the
Town's expenses.
(3) Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate
the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the
property owner shall be notified of the costs incurred by the Town
of Fairhaven, including administrative costs. The violator or
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
or basis of costs with the Board of Public Works within 30 days of
receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is
not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest
or within 30 days following a decision of the Board of Public Works
affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special assessment
against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on the
owner's property for the amount of said costs.
C. Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter,
or regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300 for each offense. Each day or part thereof
that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
D. Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town of Fairhaven may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure, in which case the Board of Public Works or
authorized agent shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for each
violation shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

E. Appeals. All decisions or orders of the Board of Public Works shall be
final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.

§ 194-20. Compliance with provisions of EPA's general permit for
MS4s in Massachusetts.
This chapter shall be implemented by the Board of Public Works in
accordance with the requirements of the EPA's most recent general permit
for MS4s in Massachusetts relating to illicit connections and discharges,
construction site runoff, and post-construction stormwater management.
The Board of Public Works shall include these requirements in any
regulations that it issues. The Board of Public Works may establish
additional requirements by regulation to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter, so long as they are not less stringent than those
in the MS4 general permit for Massachusetts.
§ 194-21. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstance shall be
held invalid for any reason, all other provisions shall continue in full force
and effect to the extent permitted by law.

§ 194-19 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 194-21
194:24

Chapter 198
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 8.
Planning Board — See Ch. 65.
Garages and service stations — See Ch. 125.
Marina regulations — See Ch. 132.
Wetlands — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
Animals — See Ch. 405.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 475.
§ 192-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 192-14
1:128
ARTICLE I
Authority; Purpose; Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 3-23-1968 ATM by Art. 58; 4-4-1970 ATM by Art. 60;
3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 74; 2-9-1978 STM by Art. 2; 5-3-1986 STM
by Art. 6; 5-7-1988 ATM by Art. 10; 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 20;
5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 24]
§ 198-1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter
40A of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any
amendments thereof.
§ 198-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 198-3. Administration.
This chapter shall be administered by the Building Commissioner. No
building shall be erected, structurally or externally altered and no use of
land or a building shall be started or changed without a building permit
having been issued by the Building Commissioner. No premises shall be
equipped or used without an occupancy permit issued by the Building
Commissioner. No such permits shall be issued for construction or use in
violation of any provisions of this chapter.
To promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Fairhaven.
A.
To lessen the danger from fire, flood, panic and other natural or
manmade disasters.
B.
C. To improve and beautify the town.
D. To prevent overcrowding of land.
E. To avoid undue concentration of population.
To facilitate the adequate needs of water, water supply, drainage,
sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements.
F.
To conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation
of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the
environment.
G.
H. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town.
To preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of the
regulations to fulfill said objectives.
I.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-4
1:129
§ 198-4. Enforcement.
The Building Commissioner may institute appropriate legal proceedings
to enforce the provisions of this chapter or to restrain by injunction any
violations thereof, or both, and shall institute and take any and all such
action as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with any and all of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 198-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, business or other legal entity violating any provision of this
chapter, any conditions under which a permit is issued or any decision
rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals or other special permit granting
authority may be fined not more than $300 for each offense. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 198-6. Planning Board.
The Fairhaven Planning Board is hereby designated as one of the special
permit granting authorities (SPGA) under the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(See § 198-15C of this chapter.)
§ 198-7. Zoning Board of Appeals.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals of five members
and four associate members appointed by the Selectmen, as provided in
MGL c. 40A, which shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction under
this chapter in the manner prescribed in Chapter 40A of the General
Laws. The Board established hereunder shall act as the permit granting
authority for appeals under MGL c. 40A, §§ 8 and 10, and one of the
special permit granting authorities as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 9. This
subsection should not be construed as to limit any of the authority of
the Zoning Board of Appeals under any other section of Chapter 40A.
A.
An Appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved by reason of his/her inability to obtain a permit or
enforcement action from the Fairhaven Building Commissioner for
reasons in violation of the provisions of Chapter 40A or this Chapter
198, Zoning, as provided under MGL c. 40A, § 8. An appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals may also be taken by the Regional Planning
Agency for the Town of Fairhaven, an officer or board of the Town of
Fairhaven or an abutting city or Town of Fairhaven who is aggrieved by
an order or decision of the Fairhaven Building Commissioner pertaining
to the provisions of Chapter 40A, or this Chapter 198, Zoning, as
prescribed under MGL c. 40A, § 8.
B.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not hear an appeal from any decision
made by another special permit granting authority as established under
MGL c. 40A, § 9. Such appeals shall be made to Superior Court as
required under MGL c. 40A, § 17. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
C.
§ 198-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-7
1:130
§ 198-8. Special permit.
§ 198-9. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize upon appeal, or upon petition
in cases where dimensional modifications are sought with respect to a
particular parcel of land or to an existing building thereon, a variance
from the terms of this chapter, where, owing to conditions specifically
affecting each parcel or such building, but not affecting generally the zoning
district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
hold public hearings in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A
on all appeals and petitions brought before it.
A special permit issued by a special permit granting authority (SPGA)
as provided for in this chapter shall be required for certain uses
permitted in specified districts. Such special permits may be issued for
specific uses, which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter and shall be subject to additional conditions, safeguards
and limitations on time, space and use as the designated SPGA may
reasonably require. A special permit shall not be issued by an SPGA
for an excluded or prohibited use as defined in this chapter. The SPGA
shall take into account the general purpose and intent of this chapter
and, in order to preserve community values, may impose conditions
and safeguards deemed necessary to protect the surrounding
neighborhood, in addition to the applicable requirements of this
chapter, and shall not issue a special permit which shall appear to be
detrimental to the public interest because:
It appears that the intent of the performance standards of § 198-24
or other requirements of this chapter cannot be or will not be met.
(1)
Traffic generated or patterns of access and egress would cause
congestion, hazard or substantial change in established
neighborhood character.
(2)
The continued operation of or development of adjacent uses as
permitted by this chapter would be adversely affected by the
nature of the proposed use.
(3)
(4) A nuisance or hazard would be created.
The specific proposal derogates from the intent and purpose of the
chapter.
(5)
A.
No special permit shall be issued except following a public hearing
within 65 days after filing of an application with the granting authority.
Failure of the special permit granting authority to act within 90 days
following said public hearing shall be deemed a grant of the application.
A special permit granted under this section shall lapse if substantial use
thereof or construction has not begun within two years, except for good
cause.
B.
§ 198-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-9
1:131
this chapter would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to
the appellant and where desirable relief may be granted without nullifying
or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this chapter, but
not otherwise. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A on all variance applications
brought before it.
§ 198-10. Amendments.
This chapter may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition or
repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5, and
any amendments therein.
§ 198-11. Validity.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 198-12. Applicability of greater restrictions.
Where the application of this chapter imposes greater restrictions than
those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements,
covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 198-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when, following adoption by the town, it is
approved by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
and is published or posted as provided by law. Upon its effective date, it
shall supersede the Zoning Bylaw and all amendments to it previously in
effect.
§ 198-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-13
1:132
ARTICLE II
Use and Intensity Regulations
§ 198-14. Establishment of districts.
The Town of Fairhaven is hereby divided into the following types of
districts: [Amended 3-28-1970 ATM by Art. 56; 5-15-1976 ATM by
Art. 69; 10-7-1982 STM by Art. 14; 5-10-1988 ATM by Art. 11;
5-6-1995 ATM by Art. 24; 5-3-1997 STM by Art. 15]
Rural Residence Districts RR
Single Residence Districts RA
General Residence Districts RB
Apartment/Multifamily Districts RC
Park Districts P
Business Districts B
Industrial Districts I
Agricultural Districts AG
Nasketucket Overlay District NRB
Floodplain District FP
(Refer to § 198-28)
Mixed Use District [Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 26]
MU
Wetland Resource Protection District
[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 8]
WRP
A.
The boundaries of these districts are defined and bounded on the
map accompanying this chapter and on file with Clerk of the Town
of Fairhaven entitled "Town of Fairhaven Zoning Map," as amended
through May 7, 2011. That map, as clarified through measurements
identified on plats on file with the Town Clerk's office, all explanatory
matter thereon and all subsequent amendments to it are hereby made
part of this chapter.10 [Amended 5-1-2010 ATM by Art. 32; 5-7-2011
STM by Art. 10]
B.
Except when labeled to the contrary, boundary or dimension lines
shown approximately following or terminating at streets, railroad or
utility easement, center or layout lines, boundary or lot lines, or the
channel of a stream shall be construed to be actually at those lines;
when shown approximately parallel, perpendicular or radial to such
lines shall be construed to be actually parallel, perpendicular or radial
thereto. When not locatable in any other way, boundaries may be
determined by scale from the map.
C.
10.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 198-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-14
1:133
§ 198-15. Use regulations. [Amended 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 24]
Where a district boundary line divides any lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, the regulations for any district in which the lot has
frontage on a street may be extended not more than 20 feet into the
other districts.
D.
No building or structure shall be erected or used and no premises shall
be used except as set forth in the Use Regulation Schedule. Symbols
employed shall mean the following.
Y A permitted use
N An excluded or prohibited use
A A use authorized under special permit as provided for in §§ 198-6,
198-7, 198-8, 198-15C and 198-16 and as otherwise specified
within this chapter
A.
Where an activity might be classified under more than one of the
following uses, the more specific classification shall determine
permissibility; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern.
B.
Special permit uses. [Amended 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 24;
12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1; 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 26; 2-11-2004
STM by Art. 15; 5-6-2006 ATM by Art. 9]
The Planning Board shall be the SPGA for all use allowed by
special permits within the Apartment/Multifamily [RC], Park [P],
Wetland Resource Protection District [WRP], Business [B], Mixed
Use [MU], Industrial [I] Districts and as otherwise specified in this
chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the SPGA for all
uses allowed by special permits within the Rural Residence [RR],
Single Residence [RA], General Residence [RB], Agricultural [AG]
Districts and as otherwise specified in this chapter.
(1)
Where any proposed use, or expansion of a use otherwise permitted
[Y] or authorized [A] in an Apartment/Multifamily [RC], Park [P],
Wetland Resource Protection District [WRP], Business [B], or
Industrial [I] District results in a requirement of a total of five or
more parking spaces for the previously existing and new demand
combined pursuant to the provisions of § 198-27 of this chapter,
such use shall be deemed authorized by special permit granted by
the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of § 198-29 of this
chapter upon review by the Planning Board of the site development
plan.
(2)
The provisions of § 198-29 shall apply to a change of use, to new
construction and to the expansion of the gross floor area of a
building existing before January 1, 1998, in the Mixed Use (MU)
District as provided in § 198-27B(4).
(3)
C.
§ 198-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-15
1:134
§ 198-16. Use Regulation Schedule. [Amended 3-18-1967 STM by
Art. 6; 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 54; 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 56;
3-23-1968 ATM by Art. 58; 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56; 3-28-1970
ATM by Art. 56; 3-28-1970 ATM by Art. 57; 3-28-1970 ATM by Art.
58; 9-14-1972 STM by Art. 19; 3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 76; 3-15-1973
ATM by Art. 78; 6-20-1974 STM by Art. 7; 4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 57;
5-15-1976 ATM by Art. 69; 5-18-1976 ATM by Art. 68; 1-22-1977
STM by Art. 6; 5-14-1977 ATM by Art. 42; 5-13-1978 ATM by Art. 54;
5-13-1978 ATM by Art. 55; 5-10-1988 ATM by Art. 11; 5-9-1989 ATM
by Art. 19; 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 26; 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1;
5-1-1993 STM by Art. 7; 5-6-1995 ATM by Art. 24; 11-6-1997 STM
by Art. 20; 11-6-1997 STM by Art. 34; 11-6-1997 STM by Art. 35;
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 26; 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29; 5-6-1998 ATM
by Art. 18; 5-8-1998 ATM by Art. 19; 5-8-1998 STM by Art. 28;
11-23-1998 STM by Art. 22; 11-23-1998 STM by Art. 25; 5-1-1999
ATM by Art. 8; 5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 11; 5-1-2004 STM by Art. 11;
5-7-2005 ATM by Art. 20; 5-6-2006 ATM by Art. 8; 5-4-2013 STM by
Art. 8; 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19; 2-12-2014 STM by Art. 8; 5-6-2017
ATM by Art. 51]
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
AGRICULTURAL
USES
Farm without
livestock
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Greenhouse
With retail sales
Site under 5
acres
A A A A Y Y Y N N
Site over 5
acres
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wholesale only
Wetland Resource Protection District. [Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art.
8; amended 5-6-2006 ATM by Art. 9]
The purpose of the Wetland Resource Protection District is to:
Promote development that is compatible with the sensitive
environmental features of the designated Wetland Resource
Protection areas.
(a)
To promote increased protection for wetland resource areas in
town.
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 198-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-16
1:135
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Site under 5
acres
A A A A Y Y Y N N
Site over 5
acres
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Roadside stand
(temporary)
A A A A Y Y Y N N
Roadside stand
(permanent)
A A A N Y Y Y N N
Livestock raising***
Site under 5
acres
Y* A N N N Y Y N Na
Site over 5 acres Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Ya
COMMERCIAL
USES
Animal kennel or
hospital
N** N N N A A A N N
Business,
professional office
N N N N Y Y N Y N
Funeral home N N N N A A N A N
Auto, boat sales,
rental servicex
N N N N Y Y N N N
Printing shop N N N N Y Y N A N
Bank N N N N Y Y N Y N
Restaurant N N N N2 Y Y N Y A
Retail sales or
service,x
N N N N Y Y N Y Ab
Wholesaling
without storage
N N N N Y Y N A N
Wholesaling with
storage
N N N N A Y N N N
Nonaccessory
signs1
N N N N Y Y N N N
Launderettes N N N N Y Y N A N
Limousine service A A N N Y Y A N N
Drive-through
window
N N N N Axx Axx N N N
§ 198-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-16
1:136
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Sexually oriented
businessxxx
Adult
bookstorexxx
N N N N A A N N N
Adult
paraphernalia
storexxx
N N N N N A N N N
Adult video
storexxx
With preview
boothsxxx
N N N N N A N N N
Without
preview
boothsxxx
N N N N A A N N N
Adult motionpicture
theaterxxx
N N N N N A N N N
Adult motionpicture
arcadexxx
N N N N N A N N N
Adult cabaretxxx N N N N N A N N N
Adult motelxxx N N N N N A N N N
Adult theaterxxx N N N N N A N N N
Nude model
studioxxx
N N N N N A N N N
Sexual encounter
centerxxx
N N N N N A N N N
Museum A A A A A A A A A
Conference
meeting/facility
N N N N Y Y N A A
Body art
establishment
N N N N A19 A19 N N N
Large-scale
ground-mounted
SPEF
A20 N N N A A A N A
Wind facility -
utility-scale
A A A A A A A N A
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-16
1:137
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Medical marijuana
facilities
N N N N N A21 N N N
Recreational
marijuana
establishments and
marijuana
retailers22
N N N N N N N N N
INDUSTRIAL
USES
Manufacturing,
processing,
research
N N N N N Y N N N
Bulk storage N N N N N Y N N N
Contractor's yard N N N N A Y N N N
Earth removal A A A A A A N N N
Junkyard N N N N N A N N N
Transportation
terminal
N N N N A Y N N N
Warehouses N N N N N Y N N N
Radio transmission N N N N A Y A N N
Steam laundry or
dry-cleaning plant
N N N N A Y N N N
Water towers and
reservoirs
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N
INSTITUTIONAL
USES
Municipal use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Religious use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Nursery school/
preschool
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Other commercial
schools
A A A A Y Y A A Y
Nonprofit
corporation
Educational uses Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Religious
organization
§ 198-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-16
1:138
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Educational uses Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Other schools Y Y Y Y Y Y A Y Y
Cemetery3 Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N
Crematoria15 A A A A A A A N
Hospital A A A A N N N N N
Nursing,
convalescent, rest
home
A A A A A A N A A
Philanthropic
institutions
A A A A A A N A A
Public utility with
service area
N N N N N A A N N
Public utility
without service
area
N A A A A A A N N
Club or lodge4 A A A A Y Y N A Y
Passenger station Y Y Y Y Y Y N A N
Assisted living
residence
A A A N A N N A A
Artist studio/
gallery
N N N N Y Y N A A
Charter school for
the arts
A A A A Y Y A A A
Museum A A A A A A A A A
RECREATIONAL
USES
Boatyard N N N N Y Y N A N
Camping,
commercial10
N N N A N N N N N
Camping,
supervised
Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N
Golf course N N N Y Y Y Y N N
Indoor commercial
recreation
N N N A A A N A N
Nonprofit indoor
recreation13
A A A A A A A A N
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-16
1:139
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Outdoor
commercial
recreation5
N N N A A A N A A
Nonprofit outdoor
recreation13
A A A A A A A A A
Sportsman's club
game preserve
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
Public stables N N N Y Y Y N N Y
Bath houses,
commercial
beaches
A A A Y Y Y N A Y
Commercial picnic,
outing areas
A N N Y Y Y N A A
Marina N N N A A A N A A
Private dock or
pier11
A A A A A A A A A
RESIDENTIAL
USES
Dwelling
Single family Y Y Y N N N Y Y Y
Semidetached N Y Y N N N N N N
Two-family N Y Y N N N N Y Y
Multifamily9 N N Y N N N N A N
Nonfamily
accommodations
N A A N A A N A N
Motel or hotel N N N N A A N A A
Mobile home
(stored or
occupied) subject
to § 198-28
A A A N N N N N N
Dwelling
conversion
(subject to the
provisions
§ 198-32.1)
A A A N A A A A A
§ 198-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-16
1:140
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Accessory
apartment/inlaw
apartment
A A A N N N A Y Y
Accessory
apartment to a
business
N N N N A A N Y Y
Bed-and-breakfast
home
A A A N A12 A12 A A A
OTHER
PRINCIPAL USES
Temporary
structures
Y Y Y Y Y Y N A A
Airport, heliport N N N N N N A N N
ACCESSORY USES
Home occupation see
§ 198-23
Parking not more
than:
2 noncommercial
vehicles per
dwelling unit6
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
1 commercial
vehicle not over
1 1/2 tons
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Parking in excess
of above
N N N N N N Y N N
Taking of boarders Y Y Y N Y Y N Y Y
Signs7 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Light
manufacturing for
retail sales
primarily on
premises
A A A A Y Y N A N
Storage of camper
or utility trailer8
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N
Other customary
uses
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-16
1:141
Use Regulation Schedule
District
Activity or Use
RR &
RA RB RC P B I AG MU14 WRP16
Wireless
communications
facilities
A A A N A A A A N
Facade and roofmount
antennas
A A A N Y Y A Y N
On-site groundmounted
SPEF
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wind energy
facility - on-site
N N A A A A A N A
Wind energy
facility - small
wind energy
systems
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Wind energy
facility - building
integrated
A A A A A A A A A
NOTES:
*Except "A" in RA District.
**Except "A" in RR District.
***Any permit issued for livestock raising as defined shall be subject to approval by the Board
of Health.
XSee § 198-25.
XXThe special permit granting authority for all drive-through windows shall be the Fairhaven
Planning Board.
XXXSubject to the provisions of § 198-29.3, Sexually oriented businesses.
aAquaculture facilities allowed by special permit.
bProvided that no individual retail business unit exceeds 5,000 square feet.
1See § 198-26.
2Alcoholic beverages other than light wines and malt beverages shall not be served or sold
in any form.
3Provided it is an extension of and, except for intervening streets, contiguous to an existing
cemetery.
4Except those whose chief activity is one customarily carried on as a business.
§ 198-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-16
1:142
NOTES:
5Except that roller coasters, Ferris wheels, outdoor theaters, race tracks and similar large
and noisy structures shall not be permitted.
6Or four noncommercial vehicles accessory to a single-family house.
7Subject to the provisions of § 198-26.
8Provided that it is not stored within a required front yard, and further provided that it
is not occupied for more than 48 hours consecutively. Storage of a mobile home, whether
occupied or not, or longer term occupancy of a camper requires a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals and is not considered a customary accessory use to a residential
structure.
9Subject to § 198-29.
10See § 198-32.
11Subject to § 198-32.2.
12Provided that the home has been legally used and occupied as a residential home for a
minimum period of one year.
13In RR, RA and AG Districts, parking for 20 or more cars requires a Planning Board special
permit.
14Mixed use buildings may contain any combination of uses that are allowed [Y] or allowed
by special permit [A].
15Provided it is an extension of and contiguous to an existing cemetery; provided it is an
extension of and contiguous to an existing cemetery containing no less than 20 acres as
provided for in MGL c. 114 § 43D. All crematoria shall require a special permit of the
Planning Board only.
16Subject to the provisions of § 198-29C the Planning Board as special permit granting
authority may, by special permit, allow a use or combination of uses on a lot in the Wetland
Resource Protection District, provided that such use or combination of uses is either
permitted or authorized by special permit in either the district in which the lot was last
zoned or in the Mixed Use District.
17(Reserved)
18(Reserved)
19A body art establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an exterior property line
of a school or church as determined by the Building Inspector.
20Prohibited in the RA district.
21May only be allowed by special permit from the Planning Board only in the Medical
Marijuana Overlay District. Any alterations, additions and/or changes of an approved
medical marijuana facilities special permit shall require a new special permit.
22Subject to moratorium. See § 198-32.3.
§ 198-17. Intensity of use regulations.
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-17
1:143
All buildings hereafter erected in any district shall be located on a lot
such that all minimum requirements set forth in the following table are
conformed with, except where specifically exempted by this chapter or
General Law.
A.
No existing lot shall be changed in size or shape, except through a
public taking or except where otherwise permitted herein, so as to
result in violation of the requirements set forth below. [Amended
1-22-1977 STM by Art. 5]
B.
Exempt lots. MGL c. 40A, § 6, exempts the following lots from current
lot use, area and frontage requirements. [Amended 3-16-1974 ATM
by Art. 89; 1-22-1977 STM by Art. 5; 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 24]
Single-lot exemption for single-family and two-family use. Any
increase in area, frontage, width, yard or depth requirements of
a zoning ordinance or bylaw shall not apply to a lot for singleand
two-family residential use which, at the time of recording or
endorsement, whichever occurs sooner, was not held in common
ownership with any adjoining land, conformed to then-existing
requirements and has less than the proposed requirement but at
least 5,000 square feet of area and 50 feet of frontage.
(1)
Common lot exemption for single- and two-family use. Any increase
in area, frontage, width, yard or depth requirement of a zoning
ordinance or bylaw shall not apply for a period of five years from
its effective date to a lot for single- and two-family residential use,
provided that the plan for such a lot was recorded or endorsed
and such lot was held in common ownership with adjoining land
and conformed to the existing zoning requirements as of January
1, 1976, and contained at least 7,500 square feet of area and
75 feet of frontage, and provided that said five-year period does
not commence prior to January 1, 1976, and provided that the
provisions of this sentence shall not apply to more than three
adjoining lots held in common ownership.
(2)
Approval not required plans (ANR) exemption. ANR plans referred
to in MGL c. 41, § 81P, when submitted to the Planning Board along
with written notice to the Town Clerk and subsequently approved
by the Planning Board, the use of the land shown on such plan shall
be governed by the provisions of the zoning bylaw in effect at the
time of submission to the Planning Board and for a period of three
years from the date of endorsement by the Planning Board.
(3)
Definitive subdivision plans exemption. If a definitive plan, or a
preliminary plan followed within seven months by a definitive plan,
is submitted to a Planning Board for approval under the
Subdivision Control Law11 and written notice has been given to
the Town Clerk before the effective date of a zoning bylaw, the
(4)
C.
11.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 198-17 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-17
1:144
§ 198-18. Intensity of Use Schedule. [Amended 3-22-1969 ATM by
Art. 56; 3-28-1970 ATM by Art. 56; 3-30-1972 ATM by Art. 76;
9-14-1972 STM by Art. 20; 3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 77; 3-15-1973
ATM by Art. 78; 5-10-1988 ATM by Art. 11; 11-29-1988 STM by Art.
2; 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 19; 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1; 5-6-1995
ATM by Art. 24; 11-6-1997 STM by Art. 19; 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 26;
5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 8; 5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 1313 ; 2-11-2004 STM
by Art. 14]
Intensity of Use Schedule
Minimum Lot Requirements
RR
RA &
RB RC P B I AG MU WRP
Lot area (sq.
ft.)
30,000 15,0001 100,0002 100,000 15,000 50,000 50,000 --3 100,000
Frontage at
street (ft.)
140 100 200 200 100 140 200 100 140
Contiguous
upland
24,000 13,500 70,000 70,000 14,250 35,000 35,000 50,000
land shown on such plan shall be governed by the provisions of
the zoning bylaw in effect at the time of the first submission to
the Planning Board, and when such definitive plan is approved,
for eight years from the date of the Planning Board endorsement;
plans submitted and approved by the Planning Board before
January 1, 1976, for seven years from the date of Planning Board
endorsement.12
Not more than one single-family, semidetached or two-family dwelling
shall be erected on a lot. Not more than one principal building other
than the above shall be erected on a lot unless each such building is
served by access and utilities determined by the Building Commissioner
to be functionally equivalent to those otherwise required for separate
lots. Two or more principal buildings on a a single lot, if listed as
uses on separate rows in § 198-16, must each meet the minimum
dimensional requirements of this section without counting any lot area
twice. [Added 3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 75; amended 4-16-1975
ATM by Art. 58]
D.
12.Editor's Note: Former Section 2.4.4, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56.
13.Editor's Note: This article also provided that it shall apply to all new special permits
subject to § 198-29 applied for after January 4, 2001, as provided for in MGL c. 40A, § 6. It
shall also apply to such special permits granted prior to January 4, 2001, as provided for
in MGL c. 40A, § 6, if the building permits authorized under such special permit are not
issued prior to November 5, 2001.
§ 198-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-18
1:145
Minimum Lot Requirements
RR
RA &
RB RC P B I AG MU WRP
Percent of
minimum lot
area
80% 90% 70% 70% 95% 70% 70% 50%
NOTES:
1Increase 50% for permitted semidetached and two-family dwellings.
2Multifamily dwellings require 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit plus 500 square feet per
bedroom.
3In the Mixed Use District the minimum lot sizes shall be 15,000 square feet or that present
as of January 1, 1998, whichever is less.
Minimum Yard Requirements
RR
RA &
RB RC P B I AG MU WRP
Building
setbacks
Front
(ft.)1,6
30 20 504 50 --2 50 50 201,2 20
Side (ft.) 20 10 254 255 --3 255 30 10 10
Rear (ft.)7 30 30 504 50 --3 50 50 30 30
Maximum
building
height (ft.) 35 35 40 40 40 40 35 40 35
Maximum
lot coverage
(%)10
25% 50% 50% 50% 70% 65% 25% 70% 50%8
Maximum
building
coverage
(%)9
15% 30% 25% 25% 25% 25% 10% 25% 25%
§ 198-18 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-18
1:146
NOTES:
1No new building need provide yards greater than the average of those
existing or abutting lots on the same street. Front deck and/or porch
setbacks may conform to the average setbacks of those existing on the
same street. Corner or through lots shall observe front yard requirements
from both streets.
2Front yard requirements established by Town Meeting votes recorded on
plats on file in Town Clerk's office. Minimum of 20 feet required if none
specified.
3When abutting a residence district, 10 feet. None required elsewhere,
provided that access to the rear of the structure and space for any required
off-street loading or parking can be gained by other means.
4For multifamily dwellings, increase to not less than the building height for
any yard in which the building width parallel to the lot line exceeds 30 feet.
5When abutting a residential use or district, increase to 50 feet, which
shall contain no parking, but at least 10 feet of which shall contain densely
planted tress (at least two inches in diameter) and shrubs (at least three
feet high) unless existing vegetation is retained and provides equal
screening for the purpose.
6A noncovered porch, deck or landing not exceeding 72 square feet, nor
extending more than six feet into a required front yard, and attached to a
principal building, shall be exempt from this requirement. This exemption
applies only to zoning districts RR, RA and AG.
7A noncovered porch, deck or landing not exceeding 450 square feet, nor
extending more than 15 feet into a required rear yard, and attached to a
principal building, shall be exempt from this requirement. This exemption
only applies to zoning districts RR, RA and AG.
8Building coverage shall be a maximum of 25%, total coverage of lot shall
be 50% including building and all accessory uses such as parking etc. At
least 50% of the lot shall remain in its natural state.
9Maximum building coverage - see definitions § 198-33. [Amended
2-11-2004 ATM by Art. 14]
10Maximum lot coverage - see definitions § 198-33. [Amended 6-8-2002
ATM by Art. 5; 2-11-2004 ATM by Art. 14]
§ 198-19. Fences. [Added 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56]
Corner lots shall provide visibility unobstructed at intersections. No
sign, fence, wall, hedge or other obstruction shall be allowed to
obstruct vision between 3 1/2 feet and eight feet above the street grade
within an area formed by intersecting street lines and a straight line
joining points on said street lines two feet back from their point of
intersection.
A.
§ 198-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-19
1:147
§ 198-20. Soil removal. [Added 5-6-1989 STM by Art. 5]
No loam shall be removed from any lot area or other area of a subdivision
that is not outlined on the plan as a roadway, until specific building permits
are issued for the specific lots involved.
No boundary fence, wall or hedge shall exceed six feet in height,
and no boundary fence, wall, hedge, or other landscape feature which
obstructs vision shall exceed 42 inches in height within any required
front yard area or within 20 feet of the street, whichever is the lesser
requirement. [Amended 5-1-2010 ATM by Art. 31]
B.
All fences shall be installed so that the finished side faces the abutting
properties. [Added 5-1-2010 ATM by Art. 31]
C.
§ 198-19 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-20
1:148
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 198-21. Nonconforming uses.
The lawful use of any structure or land existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter may be continued although such structure or use does not
conform with provisions of this chapter subject to the following conditions
and exceptions:
§ 198-22. Accessory buildings and uses [Amended 3-23-1968 ATM
by Art. 58; 4-3-1971 ATM by Art.80; 2-9-1978 STM by Art. 2;
5-7-1988 STM by Art. 7; 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 19; 12-10-1992 STM
by Art.1; 2-11 2004 STM by Art. 16].
Buildings and uses, which are customarily incidental and subordinate to
the uses allowed as permitted uses in any zone are allowed as accessory
buildings and uses, except as expressly restricted or prohibited in this
Abandonment. A nonconforming use which has been abandoned or
discontinued for a period of two years shall not be reestablished and
any further use shall conform with this chapter, except in cases of land
used for agriculture, horticulture or floriculture where such nonuse
shall have existed for a period of five years.
A.
Alterations. A nonconforming structure may not in any one year be
altered except as ordered by the Building Commissioner to make it
safe, or repaired in any ten-year period to the extent that the cost
of such alterations exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
determined by the Building Commissioner at the time of the change.
B.
Extension. No increase in the area or extent of the nonconforming use
of a structure or land may be made.
C.
Restoration. No nonconforming structure damaged by fire, storm or
other causes to the extent of 75% of its replacement value as
determined by the Building Commissioner shall be repaired or rebuilt
except in conformity with this chapter, and further provided that such
restoring shall be complete within two years after such catastrophe.
D.
Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall
be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. On special permit from
the Zoning Board of Appeals, the use of the premises may be changed
from one nonconforming use to another which is no more objectionable
to the neighborhood.
E.
The construction of a building or operation of land use under a building
permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment
to the chapter adopted after the issuance of the permit unless such
construction or operation commences within a six-month period
beginning with issuance of the building permit or special permit.
F.
§ 198-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-22
1:149
chapter. Accessory buildings and uses are subject to the provisions of this
section.
Accessory buildings and uses must comply with the following
provisions:
No accessory building or use shall have no more than 700 square
feet of floor area;
(1)
No accessory building or use shall exceed 20 feet in height, or be
higher than the principle building, whichever is lower;
(2)
No accessory building or use shall be allowed in a required front
yard or in the area between two lines drawn from the principle
structure at its widest point to the lot frontage, and perpendicular
to the frontage line of the lot, except that permitted signs or
roadside stands may be located within a required front yard area;
(3)
No accessory building or use shall lie closer than five feet to any lot
line and shall not be built over an easement.
(4)
Accessory buildings shall be built in accordance with building
codes;
(5)
These provisions regarding accessory buildings shall not apply to
barns or other agricultural structures that are used for agricultural
purposes exempt under MGL c. 40A § 3.
(6)
A.
Structures for the keeping of animals. A structure, including an open
pen or other enclosure designed, intended or used for the shelter or
enclosure of one or more animals, except where such structure is an
allowed principal building, shall not be allowed except as follows:
It shall be located only in a rear yard and shall be no closer to any
boundary line constituting frontage than the most distant point of
the principal building from that boundary line.
(1)
It shall be located no closer than five feet from any property line
and 20 feet from any dwelling or occupied structure.
(2)
It shall be constructed only upon application for a permit showing
receipt of any necessary permission for the keeping of such animals
from all applicable regulatory agencies.
(3)
B.
Activities necessary in connection with scientific, research, scientific
development or related production shall be permitted as an accessory
use by special permit in any district, provided that the special permit
granting authority finds it does not substantially derogate from the
public good.
C.
Swimming pools.
Swimming pools are a permitted accessory use. If having a depth
of four feet or more and a capacity of 400 cubic feet or more,
(1)
D.
§ 198-22 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-22
1:150
§ 198-23. Home occupations. [Amended 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 55;
3-28-1970 ATM by Art. 57]
they are considered structures and must comply with regulations of
the Board of Health regarding minimum standards for residential
swimming pools.14
Every outdoor swimming pool considered to be a structure whether
or not filled with water shall be completely surrounded at all times
by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height above grade,
which wall may be the pool wall itself.
(2)
Every such fence or wall shall be so constructed as to not have
openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any diameter,
except for doors, gates and picket fences; in the latter case,
however, the gaps between pickets shall not exceed four inches.
All primary enclosures shall be securely fastened to the ground.
Such enclosures shall be constructed of either a four-inch chain
link fence or a solid stockade fence.
(3)
All gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be of not
less than four feet in height and shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device located at least four feet above
the underlying ground and inaccessible from the outside to small
children. Every such gate or door shall be kept latched at all times
when the swimming pool is not in use and any ladders removed.
(4)
All swimming pools erected after adoption of these provisions must
comply with them at the time of erection, and all existing swimming
pools must comply not latter than July 1, 1972, § 198-21
notwithstanding.
(5)
Home occupations are permitted only if conforming to the following
conditions:
The home occupation shall be accommodated within an existing
structure without extension thereof.
(1)
No more than 25% of the floor area of the residence shall be used
for the purpose of the home occupation.
(2)
Not more than one person not a member of the household shall be
employed on the premises in the home occupation.
(3)
There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials,
no outside parking of commercial vehicles and no other exterior
indication of the home occupation or other variation from the
residential character of the principal building other than an
unlighted sign not to exceed one square foot in area.
(4)
A.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 475, Swimming Pools.
§ 198-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-23
1:151
§ 198-24. Noise, litter and smoke standards.
No activity shall be permitted in any district unless it can be demonstrated
that its operation will be conducted so that the following standards will be
meet:
No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare
shall be produced. (See § 198-24.)
(5)
Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a
residential neighborhood.
(6)
The parking generated shall be accommodated off street, but not
more than two parking spaces shall be located within a required
front yard.
(7)
The following occupations are permitted as home occupations only
on a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals: [Amended
12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
(1) Barbershop.
(2) Beauty parlor.
(3) Dancing instruction.
(4) Building trades.
(5) Appliance and electronic repairs.
Bed-and-breakfast home. An allowed use with a special permit,
where required (see § 198-16) and shall be owner occupied. These
types of establishments shall be limited to three guest rooms per
dwelling and shall also be subject to § 198-27B in regard to
parking. [Added 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 26]
(6)
B.
Occupations permitted as home occupations without necessity of a
special permit include fine art studios, dressmaking, millinery, teaching
of not more than four pupils simultaneously (or, in the case of musical
instructor, of not more than a single pupil at a time), professional offices
of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect or accountant, public
stenography, arts and crafts, telephone sales, office for telephone and
correspondence of business otherwise conducted elsewhere, real estate
office, photo studio or similar occupations. [Amended 12-10-1992
STM by Art. 1]
C.
The following occupations are not allowed as home occupations: tourist
home, commercial stables or kennels, sale of articles not produced on
the premises. Any occupation not covered under Subsections B and C is
not to be considered a home occupation. [Amended 12-10-1992 STM
by Art. 1]
D.
§ 198-23 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-24
1:152
§ 198-25. Location of automobile services. [Amended 5-13-1978
ATM by Art. 55]
§ 198-26. Sign regulations. [Added 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 56;
amended 3-16-1974 by Art. 91; 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
No noise, sound from public address or other amplification systems,
vibration, odor or flashing shall be normally perceptible more than 400
feet from the premises if in an industrial district, more than 100 feet
from the premises if in a business district and more than 20 feet from
the premises if in another district.
A.
Interferences originating in an industrial district shall not normally be
perceptible more than 150 feet within a business district, nor more than
100 feet within a residential district.
B.
No portion of the front or side lines of a public garage, automobile
repair shop, greasing station, storage battery, service station or
gasoline filling station, or any of their appurtenances or accessory
uses, shall hereafter be placed within 50 feet of any residence district.
No driveway to such premises shall be in any part within 50 feet of
any residential district. No such premises shall have any driveway
entrance or exit for motor vehicles within 300 feet of the property used
by any public or private school, public library, church, playground or
institution for the sick or dependent or for children under 16 years of
age.
A.
Every filling station shall hereafter be located not less than 15 feet
inside the building line, and no filling shall be done except into cars
standing on the property of the filling station.
B.
A yard, building or other facility for the storage, display, dismantling,
junking or similar disposal or use of overage or wrecked motor vehicles
shall be classed as an industrial use. Automobile services permitted as
a commercial use shall include gasoline filling stations supplying fuel,
oil and automobile accessories to motor vehicles, lubrication and minor
repair services.
C.
Repairs requiring removal of motors, transmissions, differentials or
similar major elements are permitted if within the building interior.
Body work and painting are not allowed uses nor external storage of
more than six vehicles requiring repair. The exterior storage of any
parts, including tires and used automotive and body parts, is not a
permitted use.
D.
Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred
upon the Town by MGL c. 40A, MGL c. 93, § 29, and MGL c. 143,
§ 3. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate the town's
control under MGL c. 87, § 9, governing signs placed on shade trees
enforceable by the Tree Warden or the town's control under MGL c.
A.
§ 198-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:153
85, § 8, governing signs placed within a public way enforceable by the
Selectmen or under the Building Code.
Purpose. The sign regulations section is designed to provide standards
for the installation of signs so as to reduce traffic safety hazards,
protect property values, promote economic development and
encourage the creation of an aesthetic appearance along the street
frontages in the Town of Fairhaven. The sign regulations, as set forth
in this section, are designed to be both logical and equitable for the
various uses and identification needs. These sign standards and
regulations help to effectuate an aesthetic and safe street environment.
Restrictions on type, location and size of signs protect the public from
hazardous and distracting devices.
B.
General regulations.
Regulations. No sign permit or license shall be required for the
signs listed in Subsection C(2) of this section, provided that:
The sign is permitted in the zoning district in which the sign is
placed;
(a)
The requirements for each sign listed in Subsection C(2) of this
section are satisfied; and
(b)
The sign does not violate the provisions of Subsection C(3) of
this section.
(c)
(1)
Signs exempt from permit and license requirements.
(a) Balloons less than 24 inches in diameter.
Building markers and historic or commemorative plaques are
exempt from obtaining a permit and license.
(b)
Construction signs. One temporary freestanding construction
sign or wall sign per project construction site is exempt from
obtaining a permit and license on each street frontage of the
project, subject to the following conditions:
[1] The construction sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
The construction sign shall be a maximum of six feet in
height for residential districts or 15 feet in height for other
districts.
[2]
(c)
(d) Flags, noncommercial.
(e) Garage sale signs.
Home improvement/home construction/home remodeling signs
are exempt from obtaining a permit and license, provided that:
(f)
(2)
C.
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:154
There shall be only one such sign not exceeding 32 square
feet in total surface area and four feet in height for each
lot.
[1]
(g) Interior signs.
(h) Murals.
(i) Official signs and notices.
Political campaign signs.
Such signs shall be removed within 10 days following an
election.
[1]
(j)
(k) Political signs.
(l) Public utility signs.
Real estate signs are exempt from obtaining a permit and
license, provided that:
Real estate signs for single- or two-family residential
dwellings or lots.
There shall be one sign per street frontage up to a
maximum of two signs per lot.
[a]
[b] Such sign shall be located on the lot for sale or lease.
[c] Such sign shall not exceed six square feet.
[1]
Real estate signs for all other uses.
General provision. The real estate sign shall be
located on the site for sale or for lease.
[a]
The site may elect one of the following options, subject
to provisions of the clear view triangle area as defined
in § 198-26G(1).
Incorporate the real estate sign into the
permanent identification sign; or
[i]
One real estate sign, not exceeding six square
feet, shall be permitted per street frontage up to
a maximum of two signs per site. The maximum
height shall be six feet.
[ii]
[b]
Real estate signs shall be included as part of the
square footage calculations for permanent signs.
[c]
[2]
(m)
(n) Residential name plates are exempt from obtaining a permit.
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:155
Window signs. Signs within a retail display window or attached
thereto, provided that they do not exceed a maximum of 25%
of any retail display window.
(o)
Signs prohibited in all districts.
Signs which interfere with official signs and traffic control
devices prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to place a sign which
prevents the driver of a vehicle from having a clear and
unobstructed view, from an adequate and safe distance, of
any official sign or approaching or merging traffic.
[1]
No sign or sign structure shall be permitted which
attempts or appears to attempt to direct the movement of
traffic or which interferes with or obstructs the view of,
or can be confused with, imitates or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal or device.
[2]
No rotating beam, moving letter signs in which the letters
change more often than once per hour, except for time or
temperature, beacon or flashing illumination resembling
any emergency light shall be used in connection with any
sign display, unless the sign is a traffic control sign, a
public utility sign or a public notice.
[3]
(a)
Interference with intersections prohibited. No sign or sign
structure shall be located in such a manner as to materially
impede the view of any street or highway intersection. (See
§ 198-26G(1), Clear view triangle.)
(b)
Signs on natural features and utility poles prohibited. No sign
shall be permitted to be painted on, attached to or maintained
upon utility poles, trees, shrubs, rocks or other natural
features, except that historical or commemorative plaques may
be mounted in rocks, and that "No Trespassing," "No Hunting,"
"Property Boundary" or "Ownership" signs may be mounted on
trees, rocks, shrubs or other natural features.
(c)
Portable billboard not allowed except for grand openings and
not to exceed seven calendar days.
(d)
(e) Flashing signs prohibited. Flashing signs shall be prohibited.
Shimmering signs prohibited. Shimmering signs shall be
prohibited.
(f)
(g) Any sign emitting sound shall be prohibited.
Any off-site identification sign or advertising sign unless
otherwise herein provided shall be prohibited.
(h)
(3)
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:156
(i) Signs that exceed the requirements listed below.
Signs to which MGL c. 93 § 30, applies, displaying commercial
messages, are prohibited.
(j)
Signs not listed as permitted are prohibited. Any sign not
identified as a permitted sign in § 198-26D of this Code is
prohibited.
(k)
Freestanding signs, building identification signs, sign structures,
poles and other related equipment that have been abandoned for
more than two years shall be removed.
(4)
Illumination of signs.
Interference with traffic. No lighting shall be permitted to
be used in any way in connection with a sign unless it is
effectively shielded so as to illuminate the sign surface only
and to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at
any portion of the main-traveled way of the public roadway
or onto any residential property, or is of such low intensity or
brilliance as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the
driver of any motor vehicle, or to otherwise interfere with any
driver's operation of a motor vehicle.
(a)
Underground electrical service. All illuminated freestanding
identification signs shall have underground electrical service
unless evidence is provided that the local electric utility will
not permit such underground service.
(b)
Any sign which is externally illuminated shall be a minimum
distance of 100 feet between the leading edge of the
illuminated sign and an adjoining residential property line.
(c)
In locations where the stated setback requirements front
residential uses or districts cannot be met, then illumination of
signs must be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(d)
(5)
Design regulations for signs requiring a sign permit.
Residential, Agricultural and Park Zoning Districts (RA, RB, RC, A,
P).
Regulations for freestanding identification signs. All
freestanding identification signs shall be located on the site
of the use and are subject to any additional provisions of
§ 198-26G, Sign location and basic design elements for specific
building identification signs.
[1] Where permitted.
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:157
Residential uses. Freestanding signs shall be
permitted only for neighborhood identification signs.
[a]
Nonresidential uses. Freestanding signs shall be
permitted.
[b]
Maximum sign height.
No part of the sign face or the sign support structure
of a freestanding sign shall be more than eight feet
above the average grade of the site.
[a]
[2]
Maximum sign area and number of signs.
Residential uses (neighborhood identification). Two
freestanding signs shall be permitted with a maximum
allowable size of 40 square feet each per
neighborhood.
[a]
Nonresidential uses.
One freestanding sign shall be permitted with a
maximum allowable size of 40 square feet; or
[i]
If the nonresidential use has two public street
frontages, one freestanding sign shall be
permitted per street frontage with a maximum
size of 24 square feet per sign.
[ii]
[b]
[3]
Illumination. Only external illumination shall be permitted.
See § 198-26C(5) for additional provisions on illumination.
[4]
Regulations for building identification signs. All building
identification signs shall be located on the site of the use and
are subject to any additional provisions of § 198-26G, Sign
location and basic design elements for specific building
identification signs.
Wall signs.
Where permitted.
Residential uses. Wall signs shall be permitted for
residential nameplates only.
[i]
Nonresidential uses.
[A] Wall signs shall be permitted.
Projecting/hanging or suspended signs. One
projecting/hanging or suspended sign shall
be permitted not to exceed 10 square feet
per sign. A minimum clearance of 10 feet
[B]
[ii]
[a]
[1]
(b)
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:158
above the sidewalk shall be required for
pedestrians.
Awning signs. Awning signs shall be
permitted, provided that no awning shall
extend above the roof line and no awning sign
shall be allowed above the first floor of the
building.
[C]
Canopy signs. Canopy signs shall be
permitted, provided that the sign shall be
located on the facades of the canopy fronting
on a public street.
[D]
Maximum size and number of signs.
In addition to the permitted freestanding sign for
a public street frontage, a nonresidential use in
a residential district may elect to have a wall
sign oriented towards that public street frontage.
The maximum allowable sign surface area for the
wall sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the
elevation.
[i]
[b]
Distance from side or rear lot line. A wall sign is
allowed only on a wall facing a public street. A wall
entrance sign is not required to face a public street.
[c]
Illumination. Only external illumination shall be
permitted. Halo effect lighting shall be permitted. See
§ 198-26C(5) for additional provisions on illumination.
[d]
[2] Marquee signs. Marquee signs shall not be permitted.
[3] Suspended signs. Suspended signs shall not be permitted.
[4] Message centers. Message centers shall not be permitted.
Other signs. All other signs shall be located on the site of the
use.
(c)
(d) Prohibited signs. See § 198-26C(3).
(e) Temporary signs. See § 198-26E.
Business and Industrial Zoning Districts.
Regulations for freestanding identification signs. All
freestanding identification signs shall be located on the site
of the use and are subject to any additional provisions of
§ 198-26G, Sign location and basic design elements for specific
building identification signs.
(a)
(2)
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:159
For buildings, shopping centers or planned developments
with a gross floor area of greater than 15,000 square feet.
Freestanding signs shall be permitted. Message
centers shall be permitted as part of freestanding
signs, provided that no moving letter signs in which
the letters change more often than once per hour,
except for time or temperature, are allowed.
[a]
Maximum sign height. No part of the sign face or
the sign support structure shall be more than 22 feet
above the average grade of the site.
[b]
Maximum sign area and number of signs.
One freestanding identification sign shall be
allowed per site per public street frontage.
[i]
The maximum sign surface area for a freestanding
sign shall be 100 square feet.
[ii]
[c]
Illumination. Illumination shall be permitted. See
§ 198-26C(5) for additional provisions on illumination.
[d]
[1]
For buildings, shopping centers or planned developments
with a gross floor area of 15,000 square feet or less.
Freestanding signs shall be permitted. Message
centers shall be allowed as part of freestanding signs,
provided that no moving letter signs in which the
letters change more often than once per hour, except
for time or temperature, are allowed.
[a]
Maximum sign height. No part of the sign face or
the sign support structure shall be more than 16 feet
above the average grade of the site.
[b]
Maximum sign area and number of signs. One
freestanding identification sign shall be allowed per
site per public street frontage. The maximum sign
surface area shall be 60 square feet.
[c]
Illumination. Illumination shall be permitted. See
§ 198-26C(5) for additional provisions on illumination.
[d]
[2]
Regulations for building identification signs. All building
identification signs shall be located on the site of the use.
The following regulations apply to single tenant buildings
or to tenant spaces in multiple tenant buildings.
Any combination or number of building identification
signs may be utilized, so long as the total surface
area of signs on a particular building facade does not
[a]
[1]
(b)
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:160
exceed the percentages noted below, and subject to
any additional provisions of § 198-26G, Sign location
and basic design elements for specific building
identification signs.
Building identification signs are allowed only on
facades serving as the primary public entrance to a
building.
[b]
Building identification signs shall include:
[i] Wall signs: shall be permitted.
Projecting or suspended signs. One wall,
projecting or suspended sign, not to exceed 10
square feet per sign, shall be permitted for each
separated business unit in the development. A
minimum clearance of 10 feet above the sidewalk
shall be required for pedestrians. Exception: For
buildings, shopping centers or planned
developments with a gross floor area of less than
15,000 square feet, in lieu of a freestanding sign,
one projecting sign not to exceed 60 square feet
shall be allowed.
[ii]
Awning signs, provided that no awning shall
extend above the roof line and that no awning
sign shall be allowed above the first floor of the
building.
[iii]
Canopy signs, provided that the sign shall be
located on the facades of the canopy fronting on a
public street.
[iv]
Marquee signs. One theater marquee shall be
allowed on the premises or entrance to the
premises of a theater or group of theaters sharing
a premises. Changeable letters or symbols shall
not exceed six inches in height. A minimum
clearance of 10 feet above the sidewalk level shall
be required for pedestrians.
[v]
Roof signs and roof integral signs shall be
permitted, provided that the sign shall be located
facing a public street and that no portion of the
sign shall extend above the highest portion of the
roof line.
[vi]
Message centers shall be permitted as a part of
building identification signs, provided that no
moving letter signs in which the letters change
[vii]
[c]
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:161
more often than once per hour, except for time or
temperature, are allowed.
Maximum size and number of signs.
The maximum sign surface area for building
identification signs shall not exceed 10% of the
area of the elevation.
[i]
In addition to the above, the linear measurement
of the sign shall not exceed 80% of the linear
frontage of the applicable facade of the structure
or tenant space.
[ii]
Illumination, illumination shall be permitted. See
§ 198-26C(5) for additional provisions on
illumination.
[iii]
[d]
Additional regulations for gasoline service stations. In addition
to the regulations in Subsection D(2)(b) above:
Service area canopy sign: maximum size and number of
signs. Service area canopy signs are considered wall signs.
Sign size shall be computed as above.
[1]
Spandrel sign: maximum size and number of signs. The
maximum sign surface area shall not exceed two square
feet per dispensing station regardless of the number of
hoses. The signage allowed per dispensing station may
be combined into one sign on the spandrel. Signage is
permitted on only two sides of the spandrel.
[2]
Pump island signs. In lieu of the spandrel sign, the
gasoline service station may elect pump island signs or
pump toppers. Pump island signs of two square feet or less
are allowed without permits. Pump island signs greater
than two square feet are not allowed. Signage is permitted
on only two sides of the pump island sign.
[3]
No pennants or other similar attracting or advertising
devices shall be permitted except as noted in § 198-26E,
Temporary signs.
[4]
Signs on perimeter poles. Signs placed on perimeter poles
or other structures or that are not expressly permitted in
this section shall be strictly prohibited.
[5]
Operator identification. Operator identification signs shall
be located on the building only with a maximum dimension
of six square feet.
[6]
(c)
Other signs. All other signs shall be located on the site of the
use unless specified otherwise.
(d)
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:162
(e) Prohibited signs. See § 198-26C(3).
(f) Temporary signs. See § 198-26E.
Design regulations for temporary signs requiring a sign permit.
On-site temporary signs.
Temporary signs shall include, but not be limited to, banners,
commercial flags, balloons, stringers, movable sandwich
boards and similar devices.
(a)
Maximum size and number. One banner shall be allowed per
street frontage and shall be oriented towards that street
frontage. The maximum size per banner shall be 100 square
feet.
(b)
Maximum height and minimum setbacks. Any temporary signs
shall maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet from any street
line. No temporary sign shall be placed above the highest
outside wall.
(c)
Design. Stringers and balloons may be used with the banner
for business promotions. No balloon may be elevated higher
than the sign height restrictions applicable to the district
within which it is to be used.
(d)
Time period for signage. Temporary signs may be used for
a maximum of 15 days per permit; only one permit shall be
issued per business per year.
(e)
Window signs meeting the requirements of § 198-26C(2)(n)
shall not be considered temporary signs.
(f)
(1)
Off-site temporary signs. Off-site temporary signs shall not be
permitted.
(2)
E.
Computations.15
Computation of sign surface area of individual cabinet or panel
signs. To compute the area for a sign face: compute by means of
the smallest, rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of
the copy, representation, emblem or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background
of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed, including supporting
framework, but not including any poles, bracing or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning
ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
(1)
F.
15.Editor's Note: This subsection also includes drawings which help illustrate its provisions.
Said drawings are on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:163
Computation of sign surface area of individual signs of individually
mounted letters or symbols. When a sign is composed of
individually mounted letters or symbols, the sign surface area shall
be determined by means of the total of the smallest rectangle
that will encompass all letters, representation, emblems or other
display, including the wall area behind said letters,
representations, emblems or other displays.
(2)
Computation of sign surface area of multifaceted signs. The sign
surface area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed
by adding together the sign surface area of all sign faces visible
from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed backto-
back, or at no greater than 15° from one another, so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when
such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not
more than 42 inches apart, the sign surface area shall be computed
by the measurement of one of the faces.
(3)
Sign location and basic design elements for specific building
identification signs.16
Clear view triangle area.
No sign or sign structures shall be located within a clear view
triangle area.
(a)
On a corner lot, the clear view triangle area is formed by
the street right-of-way lines and the line connecting points
20 feet from the intersection of such street right-of-way lines
extended.
(b)
On a lot which has a driveway or is next to a lot which has
a driveway, the two clear view triangle areas are formed by
the street right-of-way tine, both sides of the surface edge
ofthe driveway, and the line connecting points 20 feet from the
intersection of the street right-of-way line and driveway.
(c)
(1)
Orientation of signs on corner lots or through lots. When more than
one sign is permitted due to multiple frontages, each permitted
sign must be oriented toward its respective frontage and set at
least 100 feet distant from signs located on additional frontages,
unless specified otherwise. It is the intent to prohibit lots with
multiple frontages from combining sign rights so as to erect larger
signs or additional signs that are oriented to only one frontage.
(2)
(3) Freestanding signs setbacks.
G.
16.Editor's Note: This subsection also includes drawings which help illustrate its provisions.
Said drawings are on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:164
Front yard setbacks. The minimum setback for all freestanding
signs shall be 14 feet from the public street line except that no
sign shall be located in the public street right-of-way.
(a)
Side and rear yard setbacks. No freestanding identification
sign shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear
property line.
(b)
Wall sign; location on building.
A wall sign shall not extend outward more than 16 inches from
the building or structure wall.
(a)
(b) A wall sign shall not extend above the roof or parapet line.
(4)
Maintenance of signs.
Maintenance required. All signs and sign structures shall be kept
in good repair and in a proper state of maintenance.
(1)
Activities considered to be maintenance. Maintenance shall include
activities such as cleaning, replacing lamps, replacing ballast in
freestanding signs, replacing transformers in building
identification signs, painting the pole of freestanding signs and the
cabinet of freestanding or building identification signs, replacing or
repairing H-bars and retainers behind the face, replacing trim, and
replacement of sign fasteners, anchor bolts and repairs to electric
utilities. A maintained sign structure shall have a sign face.
(2)
Items not considered maintenance. The following items are not
considered maintenance and shall require that the sign be brought
into conformance with all requirements with this section.
Said maintenance shall not include any changes made to the
size, height, light intensity or bulk of the sign or the temporary
or permanent removal of the sign for the repair or replacement
of the cabinet or any part thereof.
(a)
Said maintenance shall not include changes in poles, structural
supports, bases or shrouds, footings or anchor bolts that are
not in-kind; moving the sign for any reason; and change of
the interior and/or exterior cabinet frame (excluding trim) and
removal of any part of the signs for maintenance. For building
signs, maintenance shall not include change in the size of
channel letters or any change of returns or housing except
for the sign face and trim. For single-face cabinet signs,
maintenance shall not include changes or replacement of the
interior and/or exterior cabinets nor the cabinet support
structures.
(b)
(3)
Temporary removal for new face. Temporary removal of the sign
cabinet for the installation of a new sign face is not permitted and
(4)
H.
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:165
will require that the sign be brought into conformance with all
requirements of this section.
Maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs. The legal
nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this code
regarding safety, maintenance and repair. However, if the sign
suffers more than $3,000 of appraised damage or deterioration, it
must be brought into compliance with this code or be removed. If a
premises changes ownership, the nonconforming signs located on
the premises must be brought into compliance with this chapter.
The replacement of a nonconforming wall sign due to the change
in tenancy shall require that the new tenant sign conform to the
requirements of this chapter as they relate to the size of the
facade leased. The in-kind replacement of panels in nonconforming
directory signs due to changes in tenancy shall be allowed unless
such change affects more than $3,000 of appraised value of the
sign, at which point the sign must be brought into compliance with
this code or be removed.
(5)
Sign permits; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install and/or replace
any sign which requires a sign permit within the Town without first
applying for and obtaining a sign permit from the issuing authority.
(1)
A sign permit does not include electrical work; however, this
exemption shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work
to be done in violation of the provisions of any other laws or
ordinances.
(2)
I.
Sign permits; requirements.
A person is prohibited from obtaining a sign permit, except for
a temporary sign, while a nonconforming sign remains on the
property unless the permit also includes bringing the
nonconforming sign into compliance, except as allowed for in
§ 198-26H(5).
(1)
A person may obtain a sign permit subject to the above if such
person:
Completes an application form provided by the issuing
authority.
(a)
Files a plan to scale with accurate measurements of distances
showing the intended location conforming with this chapter
and showing all proposed and existing signs and from that
location the:
[1] Distance to the front, side and rear lot lines;
Distance to the nearest edge of pavement of all adjacent
roads;
[2]
(b)
(2)
J.
§ 198-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-26
1:166
§ 198-27. Parking; loading and landscaping requirements. [Added
3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56; amended 4-3-1971 ATM by Art. 82;
4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 59]
Distance to the nearest edge of pavement of all adjacent
intersections or two or more streets and/or the
intersection of all site driveways and public streets;
[3]
[4] Distance to the nearest edge of adjacent permanent signs;
[5] Distance to the nearest edge of adjacent portable signs;
Distance to the nearest edge of all traffic light standards
and directional signs; and
[6]
[7] Distance to the nearest edge of all sidewalks.
Files complete drawings and specifications drawn to scale
covering the size of the sign.
(c)
Variances. Variances shall not be granted for any sign, as ample
provision has been made for premises identification within this chapter,
and because true hardship as defined by state law cannot be
demonstrated in signage situations.
K.
Parking requirements.
It is the intent of this section that adequate off street parking
must be provided within reasonable distance to service all parking
demand created by new construction, whether through new
structures or through additions to existing ones or by change of use
creating higher parking demand.
(1)
Building, structures and land use in existence on the effective
date of these provisions are not subject to these off-street parking
requirements and may be rebuilt, altered or repaired, but not
enlarged or changed in use, without becoming subject to these
requirements.
(2)
In applying for building or occupancy permits, the applicant(s)
must demonstrate via a site plan drawn to scale that minimum
parking requirements set forth in Subsection B will be met. In
the Apartment/Multi-Family (RC), Park (P), Wetland Resource
Protection District (WRP), Business (B), Mixed Use (MU), or
Industrial (I) Districts, a special permit from the Planning Board
pursuant to § 198-29 will be necessary for the following:
[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1; 6-8-2002 ATM by Art.
6; 2-11-2004 STM by Art. 15]
New construction that would require a total of five or more
parking spaces counting existing and new demand;
(a)
(3)
A.
§ 198-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-27
1:167
Addition(s) or enlargement(s) that would require a total of five
or more parking spaces counting existing and new demand;
(b)
A change of use(s) or renovation(s) that would require the
addition of new parking space(s). If the existing parking spaces
can meet the new demand based on the change of use(s) or
renovation(s) then no special permit is required;
(c)
Re-striping of a parking lot of five or more spaces that changes
the existing site circulation, and/or number of parking spaces.
(d)
The minimums of Subsection B may be reduced on special permit
for an exception from the Planning Board, upon its determination
that special circumstances render a lesser provision adequate for
all parking needs. Examples of special circumstances include:
[Amended 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 27]
Use of a common parking lot for separate uses having peak
demands occurring at different times.
(a)
Age or other characteristic of occupants which reduce their
auto usage.
(b)
Peculiarities of the use which render usual measures of
demand invalid.17
(c)
(d) Characteristics of the structure, lot and proposed use.
(4)
Parking Schedule.
Residential.
(a) Dwelling units having two or more bedrooms: two spaces.
(b) Dwelling units having fewer than two bedrooms: one space.
Guesthouse, lodging house, other group accommodation: one
space per two occupants.
(c)
Hotel, motel: one space per guest unit. [Amended 1-17-1980
STM by Art. 12]
(d)
(1)
Nonresidential buildings. [Amended 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 7]
Industrial buildings: one space per 500 square feet gross floor
area.
(a)
Retailing: one space per 250 square feet gross leasable floor
area.
(b)
(c) Shopping malls and shopping centers.
(2)
B.
17.Editor's Note: Original Section 3.7.1(e), which immediately followed this subsection, as
added 1-22-1977 STM by Art. 7 and amended 10-7-1982 by Art. 14, was deleted
12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1.
§ 198-27 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-27
1:168
Under 100,000 square feet of gross floor area: one space
per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
[1]
Over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area: 400 spaces
plus one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area
above 100,000 square feet.
[2]
Office, banks: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
(d)
Medical, dental clinics: one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
(e)
Restaurant, theater, assembly hall: one space per 2.5 fixed
seats; if seats are not fixed, one space per 2.5 occupants as
calculated under the Building Code for maximum occupancy.
(f)
Recreation facility: 0.8 spaces per occupant as calculated
under the Building Code for maximum occupancy.
(g)
Preschool facilities: one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
(h)
(3) (Reserved)18
Other facilities. The parking requirements for uses not listed in this
section shall be determined by the Planning Board upon review
of each individual application. That determination shall take into
account: [Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
(a) Accepted industry standards, if any, for that particular use.
(b) The requirement of this section for similar use.
(c) The anticipated needs of the use of that particular property.
(d) The intent of this section as stated in Subsection A(1) above.
(4)
In the Mixed Use District a lot on which there was an existing
building before January 1, 1998, shall be required to meet the
minimum parking requirements of this section, or the parking
available on that lot on January 1, 1998, whichever is less,
regardless of use. [Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 26]
(5)
Parking area designation and location.
No off-street parking area for five or more cars shall be located
within the required front, side or rear yard setback areas. If no side
or rear yard setback is required the minimum parking setback shall
be six feet from the property line, except in the case(s) where there
(1)
C.
18.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Shopping Mall parking requirements, added
12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1, was repealed 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 7. For current provisions,
see Subsection B(2)(c).
§ 198-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-27
1:169
is a joint access or a shared parking area. [Amended 5-5-2001
ATM by Art. 13; 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 8]
All required parking areas, except those serving single-family
residences, shall be paved, unless exempted by a special permit
from the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) having
jurisdiction, for cases such as, but not limited to, seasonal or
periodic use, where unpaved surfaces will not cause dust, erosion,
or unsightly conditions. [Amended 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 9]
(2)
Parking areas for five or more cars shall not require backing onto a
public way.
(3)
Perimeter landscaping requirements. Parking lots for five or more
cars shall include the following: [Amended 5-5-2001 ATM by
Art. 13]
A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided adjacent to any
public road to visually separate parking and other uses from
the road, where feasible and without interfering with vehicular
or pedestrian safety. The buffer strip shall be equal to the
front yard setback for the zoning district within which property
lies, and planted with a combination of grass, medium-height
shrubs (approximately two feet to eight feet tall), low
decumbent creeping shrubs (shrubs less than 18 inches tall)
and shade trees (planted at least every 40 feet or less along the
road frontage) except at site driveways where the spacing may
need to be larger to accommodate safe site distance. Trees and
shrubs shall be set back at street and driveway entrances, exits
or intersections to allow adequate sight distance and ensure
vehicular and pedestrian safety while entering or exiting the
site; these site triangle areas shall be planted with grasses and
low decumbent shrubs. These trees do not count towards the
required parking lot trees.
(a)
A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided adjacent to any
adjoining uses, excluding areas providing shared access and
parking to visually separate parking and other uses from the
adjoining properties. The buffer strip shall be equal to the side
and rear yard setbacks for the zoning district within which the
property lies. If no side or rear yard setback is required the
minimum buffer width shall be six feet. The buffer strip shall
be planted with a combination of grass, medium-height shrubs
(approximately two to eight feet tall, evergreen varieties
preferred) and shade trees (planted at least every 20 feet
along the property line). These trees do not count towards
the required parking lot trees. Plantings shall include the
incorporation of evergreen and deciduous plantings and shall
be developed in consultation with planting arrangements
approved by the Planning Board. [Amended 6-8-2002 ATM
by Art. 8]
(b)
(4)
§ 198-27 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-27
1:170
Plantings shall include the incorporation of evergreen and
deciduous plantings and shall be developed in consultation
with planting arrangements approved by the Planning Board.
(c)
Parking lots for 20 or more cars shall be interrupted with
landscaped islands such that no parking surface exceeds 100 feet
in width, including the area(s) used for parking aisles/stalls. A
protective landscaped island shall be provided per 10 parking
spaces and shall contain one shade tree with the remaining area
to be planted with shrubs or groundcover. The landscape island
shall be the width and depth of a parking space. The SPGA having
jurisdiction may grant a waiver to the landscape island size
requirement if it is demonstrated that an alternate design will still
accommodate a shade tree. [Amended 5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13;
6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 8]
(5)
Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck-loading
areas, utility buildings, trash enclosures, structures and other
unsightly uses shall be screened from view from neighboring
properties and streets using plantings, a wall or tight fence
complemented with plantings or through some other means
deemed acceptable to the permit granting authority. [Amended
5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13; 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 8]
(6)
All landscaped areas shall be maintained. Shrubs and trees which
die shall be replaced within one growing season. [Amended
5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13]
(7)
Old, well-established specimen trees shall, at the discretion of
the Planning Board, be protected by siting buildings and parking
around or within the existing landscape. [Amended 5-5-2001
ATM by Art. 13]
(8)
The use of bituminous paving shall be minimized. [Amended
5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13; 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 5]
(9)
No fill shall be placed around trees that are intolerant of fill
(dogwoods, birches, conifers, oaks and sugar maples). Stockpiling
of soil shall not occur within the setback areas. Soil should remain
undisturbed in a ten-foot radius around any tree to be preserved.
[Amended 5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13]
(10)
Wherever possible, all utilities shall be provided through
underground connections. [Amended 5-5-2001 ATM by Art. 13]
(11)
Parking spaces more than 300 feet from the building entrance
they serve may not be counted toward fulfillment of parking
requirements unless by a special permit from the SPGA having
jurisdiction, determines that circumstances justify a greater
separation of parking from the use(s). [Added 6-8-2002 ATM by
Art. 9]
(12)
§ 198-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-27
1:171
§ 198-28. Floodplain and Nasketucket River Basin Districts. [Added
4-3-1971 ATM by Art. 83; amended 3-30-1972 ATM by Art. 79;
5-18-1976 ATM by Art. 73; 1-22-1977 STM by Art. 4; 5-13-1978 ATM
by Art. 54; 10-7-1982 STM by Art. 14; 5-4-1985 ATM by Art. 19;
5-4-1985 ATM by Art. 27; 1-22-1988 STM by Art. 4; 5-7-1988 ATM
by Art. 12; 5-3-1997 STM by Art. 15]
Loading requirements. Adequate off-street loading facilities and space
must be provided to service all needs created by new construction,
whether through new structures or additions to old ones, and by change
of use of existing structures. Facilities shall be so sized and arranged
that no trucks need back on to or off a public way or be parked on a
public way while loading, unloading or waiting to do so.
D.
New car dealerships. Areas for customer and employee parking shall
conform to regulations determined for retail business facilities. Areas
for storage of dealer's stock (vehicles for sale) shall be determined by
design capacity of property used for that purpose as shall be outlined
by site plan review. These shall be based on prudent practice and shall
take into account access for fire equipment and servicing as may be
determined by the site plan review. Variations in sizes and types of
vehicles (cars, trucks, etc.) make a numerical count of vehicles allowed
not feasible for this purpose. [Added 1-31-1991 STM by Art. 9]
E.
Used car dealerships. Number of vehicles and area to be occupied
by same shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen/Building
Commissioner when licenses are issued for the operation of this type of
facility. [Added 1-31-1991 STM by Art. 9]
F.
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.
The District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of
Fairhaven designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V, or VE on the
Bristol County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Bristol
County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Fairhaven
are panel numbers 25005C0391F, 25005C0392F, 25005C0393F,
25005C0394F, 25005C0411F, 25005C0413F, 25005C0425F,
25005C0482F, 25005C0501F, 25005C0502F, 25005C0503F, and
25005C0504F, dated July 7, 2009; and 25005C0391G, 25005C0393G,
25005C0394G and 25005C0482G, dated July 16, 2014. The exact
boundaries of the District may be defined by the one-hundred-year
base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the
Bristol County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report date July 16, 2014.
The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and
are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Official,
and Conservation Commission. [Amended 5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 12;
5-3-2014 STM by Art. 7]
A.
B. The purposes of the Floodplain District are to:
§ 198-27 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-28
1:172
Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and
personal injury.
(1)
(2) Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials.
Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water
quality contamination and pollution due to flooding.
(3)
Avoid the loss of utility services which, if damaged by flooding,
would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions
of the community beyond the site of flooding.
(4)
Eliminate costs associated with the response to and cleanup of
flooding conditions.
(5)
Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from
flooding waters.
(6)
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts.
All development in the district, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40 and with the
following:
Massachusetts State Building Code sections on floodplain and
coastal high-hazard areas (currently 780 CMR). [Amended
5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 12; 5-3-2014 STM by Art. 7]
(a)
Wetlands protection regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00).
(b)
Inland wetlands restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00).
[Amended 5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 12; 5-3-2014 STM by
Art. 7]
(c)
Coastal wetlands restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 12.00).
[Amended 5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 12; 5-3-2014 STM by
Art. 7]
(d)
Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary
sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
(e)
Fairhaven Wetlands Bylaw (currently Chapter 192 of the Code
of the Town of Fairhaven).
(f)
(1)
Any variance from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
(2)
C.
An order of conditions from the Conservation Commission is required
before a building permit shall be issued for construction or expansion
by 500 square feet or more of a principal building on land less than
D.
§ 198-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-28
1:173
the specified elevations above mean sea level (MSL) as provided in the
Bristol County Flood Insurance Rate Maps as supplied for the Town of
Fairhaven, MA, by the U.S. Corps of Engineers or on any barrier beach
or sand dune within 300 feet horizontally of the mean high water line.
[Amended 5-3-2014 STM by Art. 7]
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, failure or inability to
comply with the following shall be presumed hazardous to health and
safety.
E.
For all new structures or for proposed improvements which equal or
exceeds 50% of market value of the unimproved structure, or for any
proposed improvements, the cost of which, together with the cost
of improvements made in the previous five calendar years, equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before such
improvements, the lowest floor level, including that of the basement,
if provided, and structural members supporting the lowest floor must
be elevated not less than the specified elevations above mean sea level
(MSL) as provided in the Flood Insurance Rate Maps as supplied for the
Town of Fairhaven, Massachusetts, effective July 7, 2009, and July 16,
2014. [Amended 5-3-2014 STM by Art. 7]
Structural requirements for construction in flood zones are as
provided in the Massachusetts State Building Code, which code
requirements are not waived nor superseded by the provisions of
this Zoning Bylaw. In addition to those code requirements, the
following requirements shall also apply within the designated flood
zones for the Town of Fairhaven:
Structures for all uses other than dwelling units must also
conform to Subsection C(1)(a).
(a)
All new construction or substantial improvements for any use
shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
(b)
(1)
Individual sewage disposal systems shall not be subject to
inundation in the event of coastal flooding to a six-foot elevation
above mean sea level.
(2)
Water supplies shall not be subject to more than temporary
interruption or contamination, in the opinion of the Board of Health
or its agents, in the event of coastal flooding to a six-foot elevation
above mean sea level.
(3)
Unless protected by sea walls, pilings or other foundations shall
extend not less than six feet below grade in sand and not less than
four feet below grade in other materials or to such greater depth
as the Building Commissioner may require to prevent scouring
beneath foundations.
(4)
Foundations shall be designed by a registered civil engineer or
architect to withstand hydraulic pressure and shall be of reinforced
(5)
F.
§ 198-28 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-28
1:174
concrete or, if of masonry units, shall have a poured concrete cap
tied with reinforcing rods to the footings.
No vegetation on the ocean side of the crest of any primary dune
(a hill or ridge of sand piled up by the wind with no other dune
between it and the oceanfront) shall be destroyed nor the crest
height of such dune lowered. All disturbed dune areas shall be
stabilized with beach grasses or other means.
(6)
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE which would
increase potential flood damage are prohibited.
(7)
The placement of mobile homes for year-round or seasonal use is
prohibited in the Floodplain Overlay District.
(8)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(9)
In a riverine situation, the Building Commissioner shall notify the
following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
(a) Adjacent communities.
NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation.
(b)
NFIP Program Specialist, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Region I.
(c)
(10)
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(c)
(11)
Nasketucket River Basin District (NRB).
The purpose of the Nasketucket River Basin District is to preserve,
protect and maintain the quantity and especially the quality of
the surface water and groundwater of this district, which waters
comprise and/or contribute to the existing and potential sources
of water supply of the Town of Fairhaven and also to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the Town residents and
to conserve the natural resources of the town. The interpretations,
orders, decisions, permits, judgments and findings of all parties,
Town boards and departments, agents and officials in respect to all
(1)
G.
§ 198-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-28
1:175
matters pertaining to this district shall be consistent with and in
accord with the spirit and intent of the above-stated purpose of this
district. No facilities or activities hereafter listed in this section as
restricted or prohibited shall be permitted within the Nasketucket
River Basin District except by special permit from the Zoning Board
of Appeals, upon demonstration by the applicant that the economic
use of the property is infeasible under this rule and that water
supply contamination will not result from the proposed facility or
activity.
List of restricted facilities or activities:
Fuel or combustible hydrocarbon storage.
[1] Underground storage prohibited.
Aboveground storage over 55 gallons prohibited. (An
exception to this restriction is the storage of heating oil
inside the building to be heated.)
[2]
(a)
(b) Commercial laundries and cleaners.
(c) Road salt storage and application.
(d) Commercial parking lots.
Gasoline stations and commercial garages (e.g. for motor
vehicle sales, repair or service).
(e)
(f) Pesticide applications, storage or use for commercial purposes.
Fertilizer applications, storage or use for commercial
purposes.
(g)
Leaching fields, cesspools or surface or subsurface discharges
of leachable wastes. [An exception to this restriction shall
permit these facilities or activities within 300 feet westerly of
New Boston Road, provided that all applicable wetlands, Board
of Health and building permits have been previously obtained).
(h)
(i) Storage or stockpiling manure.
Storage or disposal of hazardous materials or wastes as
defined by EPA or OSHA regulations.
(j)
Gravel pits or other excavations of sand, soil, rock or ledge
for sale or commercial purposes (except normal excavations
incidental to building construction, farming operations, water
conservation, water-retaining ponds, public utilities,
installation and maintenance and highway construction).
(k)
Junk and salvage yards, dumps, disposal sites or landfills for
solid or liquid wastes.
(l)
(2)
§ 198-28 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-28
1:176
§ 198-29. Special permits for certain intensive nonresidential and
multifamily site developments. [Added 3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 78;
amended 1-17-1980 STM by Art. 13; 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 21;
5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 24]
The preceding enumerated items [Subsection D(2)(a), fuel storage,
Subsection D(2)(d), commercial parking lots, Subsection D(2)(e),
gasoline stations and commercial garages, Subsection D(2)(g),
fertilizer applications, and Subsection D(2)(i), storage or
stockpiling of manure] existing on the passage of this chapter may
be continued, repaired or maintained but without enlargement nor
addition to the existing facility, nor without changing the function
of the existing structure to a function more hazardous or
contaminating (in amount or type) to the basin aquifer or water
supply.
(3)
No person shall remove, fill, dredge or build upon any bank, marsh,
swamp or flat bordering on coastal or inland water or any other land
subject to tidal action or coastal flooding without a special permit
from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such a permit shall be issued
upon confirmation that the requirements of the Wetlands Act (MGL
c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A) will be met and granting of same will not be
hazardous to health or safety and not harmful to the shellfish and
aquatic resources of the town.19
H.
Planning Board (SPGA). The Fairhaven Planning Board Is hereby
designated as the special permit granting authority (SPGA), for the
development of all sites in the Apartment/MultiFamily (RC), Park (P),
Wetland Resource Protection District (WRP), Business (B), Mixed Use
(MU), or Industrial (I) Districts, which propose the following to be
provided for under the requirements of § 198-27 Parking, loading, and
landscaping: [Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1; 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 26; 2-11-2004 STM by Art. 14]
New construction that would require a total of five or more parking
spaces counting existing and new demand;
(1)
Addition(s) or enlargement(s) that would require a total of five or
more parking spaces counting existing and new demand;
(2)
A change of use(s) or renovation(s) that would require the addition
of new parking space(s). If the existing parking spaces can meet
the new demand based on the change of use(s) or renovation(s)
then no special permit is required;
(3)
Re-striping of a parking lot of five or more spaces that changes the
existing site circulation, and/or number of parking spaces.
(4)
A.
19.Editor's Note: Former Section 3.8.5, which immediately followed this subsection, as added
4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 60, was renumbered as Section 3.8.3.2 10-7-1982 STM by Art. 14
and then deleted 5-4-1985 ATM by Art. 27.
§ 198-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29
1:177
And in the Mixed Use (MU) District any addition of gross floor
area, or any reduction in the number of available parking spaces
on the site shall be subject to a special permit under this section
if the proposed parking does not meet the numerical minimum
required by § 198-27B.
Submittal. Application for a special permit shall require the filling of
one copy of a special permit application and 10 prints of the site plan
drawn to an adequate scale.
Such plans shall contain the following.
(a) Actual dimensions of the lot.
(b) All easements existing or proposed.
Location and size of existing and proposed structures,
including any existing structures within 100 feet of the site.
(c)
(d) Name, width and condition of all abutting streets.
All parking and driveway areas, including curbing and planted
islands.
(e)
Existing and proposed topography at two-foot minimum
contours.
(f)
Existing and proposed water, sanitary and storm drainage
facilities.
(g)
Landscaping, including sizes, types and numbers of planting
and details. All site plans involving 20 or more parking spaces
shall be required to have the site plan, or a separate
landscaping plan, signed by a registered landscape architect.
Existing trees and other unique land features shall be
preserved where feasible.
(h)
An elevation plan of all proposed buildings indicating the type
of architecture to be used and how it will conform to area
appearances.
(i)
The stamps and seal of the professional land surveyor
responsible for surveying the property. [Added 5-6-1998
ATM by Art. 20]
(j)
The stamp and signature of the professional engineer
responsible for drawing the plan. [Added 5-6-1998 ATM by
Art. 20]
(k)
The location of all wetlands on the site and within 100 feet of
the site. [Added 5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 20]
(l)
The location of the River Protection Act Riverfront Resource
Protection Area. [Added 5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 20]
(m)
(1)
B.
§ 198-29 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29
1:178
For new construction, and for additions or renovations which
increase the impervious area of a property, 10 copies of a
stormwater management plan (SMP) detailing the existing
environmental and hydrological conditions of the site,
proposed alterations of the site and all proposed components
of the drainage system and any measures for the detention,
retention or infiltration of water, for the protection of water
quality and protection from flooding, as described in
§ 198-31.1, Stormwater management. [Added 5-1-1999 ATM
by Art. 9]
(n)
Review by other departments. A copy of the above required plans
shall also be transmitted by the Planning Board, to the following
Town departments for review and comment: Department of Public
Works, Fire Department and Board of Health. If no comment is
made by such boards within 30 days of receipt, their approval shall
be assumed. Comments by other departments is for the purpose of
guidance to the Planning Board.
(2)
Public hearing. The Planning Board will hold a public hearing on all
proposed site plans/special permits within 65 days after submission to
the Board, and a decision will be rendered by the Planning Board within
90 days following the date of the hearing. All procedural requirements
for special permits will be subject to Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40A.
C.
Issuance of special permit.
No building permit shall be issued under this Article except by a
two-thirds vote of the Planning Board and only upon determination
by the Board that the proposed use is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the chapter and that the following standards
are met by the use as designed:
The design assures safety with respect to internal circulation
and egress of traffic.
(a)
The design provides adequate access to each structure for fire
and service equipment.
(b)
The design provides adequate utility services and drainage
facilities consistent with the performance standards of the
Subdivision Regulations of the Planning Board.20
(c)
Landscape and architectural design will conform to § 198-27C
of this chapter.
(d)
If a reduction in the number of available parking spaces on
the site is proposed below the minimum required in the Mixed
Use District, the Planning Board may require landscaping
(e)
(1)
D.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Subdivision of Land.
§ 198-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29
1:179
§ 198-29.1. Communications services. [Added 11-6-1997 STM by
Art. 20]
improvements, including the planting of trees of two-inch
caliper. [Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 26]
Any special permit issued pursuant to this § 198-29 may also
impose conditions and safeguards, including a requirement that
the development of the site thereunder shall be in strict compliance
with the plan submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to
Subsection B and any amendments to that plan which may have
been approved by the Board.
(2)
Issuance of building permit. No building permit shall be issued by
the Fairhaven Building Commissioner pending action by the Fairhaven
Planning Board or until 90 days have elapsed from the date of the public
hearing. If no action has been taken by the Fairhaven Planning Board at
expiration of 90 days, it shall be deemed a grant of the special permit.
All building permits shall be in conformity with conditions established
by the special permit.
E.
Multifamily zoned areas.
Site plan within an apartment/multifamily (RC) zoned area which
require a special permit shall conform to the following:
(a) There shall not be more than 20 dwellings in a single structure.
No building shall be closer than its own height to a principal
building.
(b)
Parking areas shall not be located within a required front yard
or within 10 feet of a lot line, whichever is greater.
(c)
No building shall be floodlighted. Drives and parking areas
shall be illuminated only by shielded lights not higher than 15
feet.
(d)
(1)
Special permit to modify multifamily zoning standards. The
Fairhaven Planning Board may modify, by special permit, only the
zoning standards prescribed in Subsection F(1) when the proposed
plans show that the requirements are impractical for an existing
structure to be modified for multifamily housing under such
standards.
(2)
F.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to regulate wireless communications
services so that these services may be provided with minimal harm
to the public health, safety and general welfare. Specifically, the
Wireless Communications Services Zoning has been created to
protect the general public from potential hazards associated with
the structure of wireless communications facilities and minimize
(1)
A.
§ 198-29 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.1
1:180
the visual impacts of wireless communications facilities on
residential districts within Fairhaven. This section does not apply
to satellite dishes and antennas for residential use.
Applicants for a special permit to construct wireless
communications service facilities are encouraged to explore
alternative types of systems other than systems on newly
constructed towers. Wireless communications antennas (including
panels) may be mounted on or attached to existing structures
(including, without limitations, water towers and church steeples)
by special permit, provided that they conform to applicable design
requirements as set forth in § 198-29.1B.
(2)
Design standards for allowed uses. All requirements of the underlying
zoning district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be
specifically superseded herein.
Antennas may be located on any existing guyed tower, lattice tower,
monopole, electric utility transmission tower, fire tower, church
steeple, clock tower or water tower, provided that the facility
complies with the following:
Facade-mount antennas must not extend above the top of the
building wall or parapet; not detract, based upon a written
finding from the Massachusetts Historical Commission, from
the historic significance of a structure on, or eligible for listing
on, the National or Massachusetts Registers of Historic Places;
and be painted so as to blend in with the existing structure as
much as possible.
(a)
Roof-mounted antennas must not extend more than 15 feet
above the highest point of the building; not detract, based
upon a written finding from the Massachusetts Historical
Commission, from the historic significance of a structure on or
eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places;
and be painted so as to blend in with the existing structure as
much as possible.
(b)
Wireless communication facilities placed on existing buildings,
and any equipment associated with the facility, shall be
camouflaged or screened and designed to be harmonious and
architecturally compatible with the building.
(c)
(1)
The following information must be submitted for an application to
be considered complete:
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shall
show all property lines, the exact location of the proposed
structure(s), street landscape features, dwellings and other
structures within 100 feet of the property line.
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 198-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.1
1:181
A color photograph or rendition of the facility with its antennas
and/or panels. For satellite dishes or antennas, a color
photograph or rendition illustrating the dish or antenna at
the proposed location is required. A rendition shall also be
prepared illustrating a view of the tower, dish or antenna from
the nearest street or streets.
(b)
The following information must be prepared and signed by a
registered professional engineer:
A description of the facility and the technical, economic
and other reasons for the proposed location, height and
design.
[1]
Confirmation that the facility complies with all applicable
federal and state standards.
[2]
A description of the capacity of the facility, including the
number and type of panels, antennas and/or transmitter
receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these
calculations.
[3]
If applicable, a written statement that the proposed facility
complies with, or is exempt from, applicable regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
[4]
The applicable review and advertising fees as noted in the
Zoning Bylaw.
[5]
(c)
Accessory structures housing support equipment shall be screened
from the view of persons not on the lot.
(3)
There shall be no signs, except for announcement signs, "no
trespassing" signs and a required sign giving a phone number
where the owner can be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(4)
Additional parking shall not be required for roof-mounted
antennas, facade-mounted antennas or for the addition of antennas
or panels to a tower.
(5)
All network connections from the communications site shall be
via underground land lines except to the extent that underground
land lines are not feasible in the reasonable determination of the
Planning Board.
(6)
Clearing of natural vegetation should be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the
tower.
(7)
§ 198-29.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.1
1:182
Night lighting shall be prohibited unless required by state or
federal law and shall be the minimum necessary.
(8)
Towers shall be set back from the lot lines a distance equal to the
height of the tower except that a tower shall be no closer to the
nearest lot line of a residentially zoned lot or a lot in residential use
(other than the lot on which the tower is proposed) than a distance
determined by the following formula:
(height of the tower in feet)2/40 feet
(9)
(10)One tower shall be permitted per lot.
(11)No tower shall be more than 150 feet above the natural grade.
There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each new
facility, to be used in connection with the maintenance of the
facility and the site and not to be used for the permanent storage
of vehicles.
(12)
Towers and facilities shall be painted a neutral, nonreflective color
designed to blend with the surrounding environment.
(13)
Design standards for special permits. A special permit shall be granted
by the Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 9. All of the
requirements of Subsection B above apply, except by special permit the
SPGA may:
Allow towers nearer to the property line than the height of the
tower, but no tower shall be nearer to a property line than a
distance equal to 1/2 the height of the tower and no tower may be
closer to the nearest lot line of a residentially zoned lot or a lot in
residential use (other than the lot on which the tower is proposed
than a distance determined by the following formula:
(height of the tower in feet)2/40 feet
(1)
Determine that a location is favorable to the clustering of facilities
and may allow more than one facility on a lot in that location.
(2)
Require the maintenance of all improvements to the site, including
structures, fencing, plantings and required signs; plumb and
tension tests shall be available on site to enforcement authorities;
that a facility must be removed within 90 days following failure to
obtain suitable test specifications, loss of FCC license or removal of
communications devices coupled with disconnection of utilities and
that the applicant shall be responsible for the costs to remove any
tower.
(3)
C.
Criteria for review and approval.
(1) Review of applications; approvals or denials.
D.
§ 198-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.1
1:183
The SPGA shall review all special permit applications for
wireless communication facilities, roof-mounted antennas or
facade-mounted antennas and shall issue a special permit if it
finds:
That the location of the tower or device is suitable and that
the size, height and design is the minimum necessary for
that purpose;
[1]
That any facade- or roof-mounted antenna or panel located
on a structure that is listed on or eligible for listing on
the National or Massachusetts Registers of Historic Places
shall not materially alter the character defining features,
distinctive construction methods or original historic
materials of the building. Any alteration made to a
structure that is listed on or eligible for listing on the
National or Massachusetts Registers of Historic Places to
accommodate a facade- or roof-mounted antenna shall be
fully reversible;
[2]
That the applicant for a special permit has demonstrated
a good faith effort to collocate with other carriers or to
facade- or roof-mount the wireless communication facility,
including in such good faith effort a survey of all existing
structures that may be feasible sites for mounting or
collocation; and contact with all other licensed carriers for
operating in the contiguous communities and the SPGA
finds no technically or economically equal collocation is
available; and
[3]
That the proposed tower or device is in compliance with
federal and state requirements regarding aviation safety.
[4]
(a)
The findings, including the basis for such findings, of the Board
shall be stated in the written description of approval,
conditional approval or denial of the application for special
permit.
(b)
The Board shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in the chapter, such conditions as it finds
reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise serve the purposes of this chapter, including, but not
limited to: screening, lighting, fences, modification of the exterior
appearance of the structures, limitation upon size, method of
access or traffic features, parking, removal upon cessation of use,
or other requirements. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing,
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other surety for
compliance with said conditions in any amount satisfactory to the
Board.
(2)
The special permit is granted for a period of two years and shall
lapse if substantial use or construction has not commenced by such
(3)
§ 198-29.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.1
1:184
§ 198-29.2. Assisted Living Communities Overlay District. [Added
5-8-1998 ATM by Art. 19]
a date, except for good cause shown (including, but not limited to,
appeals of the grant of the special permit or litigation enjoining
the construction under the permit), and provided further that such
construction, once begun, shall be actively and continuously
pursued to completion within a reasonable time.
The Board shall request drawings and studies which show the
ultimate appearance and operation of the personal wireless service
facility at full build-out.
(4)
The Board may require the proponent to provide or pay for
engineering services to evaluate proposals submitted; determining
flexibility of geographic location, loading capacities of structures
and architectural review of camouflage techniques.
(5)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the availability of
assisted living residences in the Town of Fairhaven; to provide services
for the elderly or elderly disabled persons; to encourage residential
settings that promote the dignity, individuality, privacy and
decisionmaking of such persons. For the purpose of this section an
assisted living residence is a building or buildings that provides living
assistance in a residential setting for people 55 years of age or older.
These facilities shall provide or arrange for the provision of the services
required in MGL c. 19D, § 10.21
A.
Special permit granting authority. The special permit granting authority
for this section shall be the Fairhaven Planning Board.
B.
Requirements.
All requirements of the underlying zoning district shall remain
in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded
herein.
(1)
The minimum size of the lot for such use in Residential Districts,
the Business and Mixed Use Districts shall be five acres.
[Amended 11-23-1998 STM by Art. 23]
(2)
C.
21.Note: a. Opportunities for socializing and access to community resources. b. For all
residents whose service plans so specify, such services, supervision of and assistance with
activities of daily living including services such as, assistance, with bathing, dressing,
medication reminders and ambulation. c. Up to three meals daily. d. Housekeeping. e. For
all residents whose service plans so specify, self-administered medication management by
personnel meeting standards for professional qualifications and training set forth in the
state assisted living act regulations. f. Ability to provide timely assistance to residents and
to respond to urgent or emergency needs, by the presence of twenty-four-hour per day onsite
staff capability, by the provision of personal emergency response devices for all
residents or similar means for the purpose of signaling such staff and by such other
means as the department may deem necessary for each assisted living residence, taking
into account the service plans of its residents. g. Laundry service at a fee if necessary.
§ 198-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.2
1:185
Each dwelling shall require 5,000 square feet of lot area in the RR,
RA and RB Zones and 3,500 square feet of lot area in RC, B and MU
Zones.
(3)
(4) A maximum of 60 dwelling units in any one building will be allowed.
(5) A maximum of three buildings will be allowed on any site.
Assisted living residences shall comply with the following
dimensional requirements: front setback 50 feet; side setback 25
feet; rear setback 50 feet. Frontage, lot coverage and maximum
building height shall conform to the requirements of the district
where such use is located.
(6)
Assisted living residences shall be served by municipal water and
sewer.
(7)
A properly screened area must be provided for storage of trash
and recyclable materials. Outside storage areas or enclosures shall
be kept clean and shall be large enough to accommodate the
storage of all garbage and refuse containers. Garbage and refuse
containers, dumpsters and compactor systems shall be stored on or
above a smooth surface of nonabsorbent material, such as concrete
or asphalt. The property owner shall be financially and
contractually responsible for waste and recyclable material
removal.
(8)
Assisted living residences may have as accessory uses within the
residential building such commercial sales and services enterprises
as may be desirable for the convenience of the residents, including,
without limitation, barbers/hairdressers, retail sales, restaurants,
snack bars, gift shops, laundry services, banking and financial
services, business and professional offices (the accessory uses)
subject to the following conditions:
Accessory uses shall be primarily for the use and convenience
of the residents and staff of an assisted living residence;
(a)
Accessory uses shall not exceed 10% of the total floor area of
the residence;
(b)
No accessory use, other than a restaurant or a comprehensive
outpatient rehabilitation facility may occupy more than 1,000
square feet of floor area;
(c)
(d) Capacity of a restaurant shall not exceed 60 seats; and
Accessory uses shall be wholly within a residential structure
and shall have no exterior advertising display.
(e)
(9)
Parking requirements for assisted living residences shall include a
minimum of one parking space for every two units.
(10)
§ 198-29.2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.2
1:186
§ 198-29.3. Sexually oriented businesses. [Added 11-23-1998 STM
by Art. 25]
Assisted living residences shall provide a passenger drop-off/pickup
area for every residential building.
(11)
Assisted living residences shall provide one off-street delivery
space for every residential building. No portion of the off-street
parking area shall be considered as an off-street delivery area.
(12)
Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to prevent problems of
blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses. It is intended that the
provisions of this amendment have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials; and, it is not the intent
nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market; and, neither is it the intent nor effect of this
section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
A.
Special permit granting authority. The Planning Board shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA) under this section in
accordance with MGL c. 40A, §§ 9 and 9A.
B.
Definitions of sexually oriented businesses. A sexually oriented business
is any place of business at which any of the following activities is
conducted:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its business sales, inventory or stock-in-trade,
books, magazines and other matter which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its business sales, inventory or
stock-in-trade, devices, objects, tools or toys which are distinguished or
characterized by their association with sexual activity, including sexual
intercourse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c.
272, § 31.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its business sales, inventory or stock-in-trade,
videos, movies or other film material which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed theater building
used for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter
C.
§ 198-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.3
1:187
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement
as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and in which a substantial portion
of the total presentation time of the images so displayed is devoted to
the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by its
emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
establishment which during a substantial portion of the total
presentation time features live performances which are distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons
with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are
distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or
relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c.
272, § 31.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which, for any form
of consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial
portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — A place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals and
is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay any form of consideration;
and such display is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement
as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
OBSCENE ENTERTAINMENT — All entertainment which is obscene
within the meaning of that term as defined by MGL c. 272, § 31, and
final adjudication of a court of competent jurisdiction.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration: (a) physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or (b) activities between
male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one
§ 198-29.3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.3
1:188
or more persons is in the state of nudity; or where the activities in
(a) or (b) are distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined
in MGL c. 272, § 31.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION — That any one of the
following apply: 33% or more of the business inventory or stock of
merchandise for sale, rental, distribution or exhibition during any
period of time; or 33% or more of the annual number of gross sales,
rentals, or other business transactions; or 33% or more of the annual
gross business revenue; or 33% or more of the hours during which the
establishment is open.
Requirements regarding the allowed locations and location restrictions
of sexually oriented businesses.
All obscene entertainment, including bookstores and motionpicture
theaters that make available obscene materials, are
prohibited within the town.
(1)
Sexually oriented businesses, as defined above, shall be permitted
only in the Industrial and Business Zones as provided for in
§ 198-16, provided that all other regulations, requirements and
restrictions for the zone in which the sexually oriented business is
to be located arc met; and, no sexually oriented business shall be
permitted within:
Five hundred feet of another existing sexually oriented
business or one for which a building permit has been applied
for. The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of each
property;
(a)
One thousand feet of any public, parochial or private school,
kindergarten or state-approved day-care center. This setback
shall include the grounds on which said public, parochial or
private school, kindergarten or state-approved day-care center
is located on. The distance between any sexually oriented
business and any public, parochial or private school,
kindergarten or state-approved day-care center shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest property line of each property;
(b)
One thousand feet from municipal and private park and
recreational facilities existing as of November 11, 1998,
including but not limited to Livesey Park, Fort Phoenix Park
and State Reservation, the Fairhaven Bicycle Path, the Little
Bay Conservation Area, Macomber Pimental Park, Bowlers
Little League Field, Fairhaven Little League Field, Cushman
Park, West Island Beach, Pease Park and West Island State
Reservation. The distance between any sexually oriented
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 198-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.3
1:189
business and park and recreational facility shall be measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the closest property line of each property;
One hundred feet of a residential district. The distance
between a residential district and a sexually oriented business
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of the
residential property to the closest exterior structural wall or
parking space associated with the sexually oriented business.
(d)
Three hundred feet of Bridge Street between Route 6 and Mill
Road;
(e)
Two hundred feet of Route 240 between Interstate 195 and
Route 6; and
(f)
(g) The bounds of Long Island.
Site development standards. Pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9A, the
following site improvements and amenities are required, in addition to
the special permit requirements found in § 198-29, Special permits for
certain intensive nonresidential and multifamily site developments, to
protect public safety and neighboring property values. The Planning
Board is empowered hereunder to review and approve permit
applications for sexually oriented businesses and impose reasonable
restrictions for buffering, outdoor lighting, parking, adequate ingress
and egress from the site off of and onto public roads, pedestrian
movement, and to provide for appropriate landscaping and building
aesthetics as the special permit granting authority and to avoid site
development layout which may result in negative environmental
impacts.
Dimensional requirements. Any building or structure containing a
sexually oriented business shall meet the setback requirements and
other dimensional controls of the appropriate district as specified
in this chapter. For any property proposed to contain a sexually
oriented business, the applicant for a special permit for such use
shall demonstrate that the entire property shall comply with these
requirements and controls following the establishment of such use
thereon.
(1)
Parking and loading requirements. On-site parking and loading
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of § 198-27
of this chapter. For any property proposed to contain a sexually
oriented business, the applicant for a special permit for such use
shall demonstrate that the entire property shall comply with these
requirements and controls following the establishment of such use
thereon.
(2)
Site screening. Rear and side property lines shall be screened from
any neighboring uses or properties. Screening shall be by a solid
(3)
E.
§ 198-29.3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.3
1:190
stockade fence that is 3 1/2 feet tall within 20 feet of the street and
six feet tall elsewhere on the property consistent with § 198-19 of
the Fairhaven Zoning Bylaw, plus a densely vegetated planting to
include evergreens as well as deciduous tree varieties.
Site lighting shall be maintained at a minimum lumen as
determined by the Fairhaven Police Department to ensure
adequate visibility on the property to ensure public safety. Light
standards may not exceed 35 feet in height.
(4)
No portion of the front, rear or side lines of a sexually oriented
business, appurtenances or accessory uses, shall hereafter be
placed within 100 feet of any residential district. No driveway to
such premises shall be in any part within 100 feet of any residential
district. No such premises shall have any driveway entrance or
exit for motor vehicles within 300 feet of the property used by any
public library or church.
(5)
Signs. All signs for any sexually oriented business must meet the
requirements of § 198-26 of this chapter except that no advertising
signs shall be located within 20 feet of a public or private way and
must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines. In
addition, no advertisement, display or other promotional material
which contains sexually explicit graphics or sexually explicit text,
as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, shall be visible to the public from
any public way, including but not limited to sidewalks, pedestrian
walkways, highways or bicycle paths. Signage for sexually oriented
businesses shall not contain any moving, flashing or animated
lights or visible moving or movable parts. No sexually oriented
business may display flashing lights visible from outside the
establishment.
(6)
Appearance of buildings for sexually oriented businesses shall be
consistent with the appearance of buildings in similar (but not
specifically adult) use in Fairhaven, not employing unusual color or
building design which would attract attention to the premises.
(7)
If the sexually oriented business allows for the showing of films or
videos within the premises, the booths in which the films or videos
are viewed shall not be closed off by curtains, doors or screens.
All booths must be able to be clearly seen from the center of the
establishment.
(8)
All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in
such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the
establishment by minors.
(9)
No sexually oriented business shall be allowed to disseminate or
offer to disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or
suffer minors to view displays or linger on the premises.
(10)
§ 198-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.3
1:191
The applicant for permission to operate any sexually oriented
business must file his application on a form approved by the special
permit granting authority with the special permit granting
authority and the Town Clerk. Such form shall contain information
as set forth in the rules and regulations established by the special
permit granting authority, but shall include as a minimum:
Name and address of the legal owner of the sexually oriented
business;
(a)
Name and address of all persons having lawful, equity or
security interests in the sexually oriented business;
(b)
(c) Name and address of the manager;
(d) The number of proposed employees;
(e) Proposed security precautions; and
Physical layout of the premises in a format established by the
special permit granting authority.
(f)
(11)
No special permit for a sexually oriented business shall be issued
to any person convicted of violating MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c.
272, § 28, or is listed on the Sex Offender Registry.
(12)
Any sexually oriented business special permit issued under this
chapter shall require that the owner of such business shall supply
on a continuing basis to the Building Commissioner any change
in the name of the record owner of address or any change in the
name of the current manager; and that failure to comply with this
provision shall result in the immediate revocation of such special
permit. If anyone so identified is or has been convicted of violating
MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28, or is listed on the Sex
Offender Registry, such special permit shall be immediately null
and void.
(13)
No sexually oriented business special permit shall be issued under
this chapter, become valid or in full force and effect until and
unless the owner of the property containing such sexually oriented
business shall supply to the Planning Board a notarized statement
agreeing to all terms and conditions of said sexually oriented
business special permit.
(14)
Procedural requirements for special permits. Special permits shall
only be issued following public hearings held within 65 days after
filing of an application with the special permit granting authority, a
copy of which shall forthwith be given to the City or Town Clerk by
the applicant.
(15)
Action within 90 days after hearing or special permit deemed
granted. Special permit granting authorities shall act within 90
days following a public hearing for which notice has been given
(16)
§ 198-29.3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.3
1:192
§ 198-29.4. Special permit for certain existing conditions in the
Wetland Resource Protection District. [Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art.
8]
by publication or posting and by mailing to all parties in interest.
Failure by a special permit granting authority to take final action
upon an application for a special permit within said 90 days
following the date of public hearing shall be deemed to be a grant
of the permit applied for.
Lapse of special permit as permitted in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, special
permit granted under this section shall lapse within two years,
including such time required to pursue or await the determination
of an appeal as referred to in MGL c. 40A, § 17, from the grant
thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced
except for good cause or, in the case of permit for construction, if
construction has not begun by such date except for good cause.
(17)
Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this section
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
F.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to relieve the owner of a lot in
the Wetland Resource Protection District from a hardship or potential
for hardship where the uses designated for that district may prove
impractical because of the nature of the property, which may include
the existence of a structure or structures on the lot.
A.
Special permit granting authority. The special permit granting authority
for this section shall be the Fairhaven Planning Board.
B.
Requirements.
The Fairhaven Planning Board may issue a special permit allowing
a lot in the Wetland Resource Protection District to be used in
conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw as they relate
to the Mixed Use District, if the Board determines that the
limitations upon use imposed by the Wetland Resource Protection
District would cause a hardship or potential for hardship because
of the nature of the lot, which may include the existence of a
structure or structures on the lot.
(1)
The condition to which the hardship or potential hardship relates
must be a structure in existence on January 1, 1999, or a condition
on the land which was in existence on January 1, 1999, and in
either event the structure or condition must not have been
substantially changed since January 1, 1999, unless the change was
beyond the control of the property owner, or if within the owner's
control, did not substantially add to the hardship or potential
hardship. The property owner must document the hardship or
potential hardship for the Planning Board; said documentation
shall include a review of the allowed and permitted uses within
(2)
C.
§ 198-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.4
1:193
§ 198-29.5. Wind energy facilities (WEF). [Added 5-1-2004 STM by
Art. 11; amended 5-5-2007 STM by Art. 18; 5-4-2013 ATM by Art.
19]
the Wetland Resource Protection District and the nature of the
conditions which were in existence on January 1, 1999, that
preclude the use of the property for the allowed and permitted uses
in the district. The presence of wetland resource areas shall not be
considered grounds for a hardship related to the condition of the
land under this section.
A special permit under this section may be allowed only when
all procedural and substantive requirements for the proposed use
under the provisions of the Mixed Use District and the
requirements of § 198-8 have been met.
(3)
Where the use proposed under this section is a use authorized by
special permit in the Mixed Use District, the application for special
permits shall be merged under this section, and the Planning Board
shall be the special permit granting authority for those permits.
(4)
A special permit under this section shall not be barred by the
discontinuance or abandonment of a prior use on the lot.
(5)
The presence of the hardship or potential for hardship shall allow
for the application of the uses in the Mixed Use District as found
in § 198-16, Use Regulation Schedule. The intensity of use
requirements for the Wetland Resource Protection District, as
found in § 193-18, Intensity Of Use Schedule, shall apply to all
development in the district regardless of the presence of or
potential for hardship.
(6)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the use of wind
energy and provide for the construction and operation of WEF and to
provide standards for the placement, design, construction, monitoring,
modification and removal of WEF that address public safety, minimize
impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources of the Town and
provide adequate financial assurance for decommissioning. The
provisions set forth in this section shall take precedence over all other
sections when considering applications related to the construction,
operation, and/or repair of WEF.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to all municipal and private utilityscale,
on-site WEF, and small wind energy systems proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this section, but not to facilities
fully constructed prior to the adoption of this section. This section
also includes building integrated WEF, and physical modifications to
existing WEF that materially alter the type, configuration, location or
size of such facilities or other equipment.
B.
§ 198-29.4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:194
Special permit granting authority. The Planning Board shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA) for WEF in all districts.
C.
Validity: The invalidity of any provision of this section shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
D.
Application for special permit. The following information must be
submitted for an application to be considered complete:
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shall show
all property lines, the exact location of the proposed structure(s),
street landscape features, dwellings and other structures within
500 feet of the wind turbine from the proposed tower location.
(1)
A color photograph or rendition of the WEF. A rendition shall also
be prepared illustrating a view of the WEF from the nearest street
or streets in all directions.
(2)
The following information must be prepared and signed by a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
A description of the WEF and the technical, economic and
other reasons for the proposed location, height and design.
(a)
Confirmation that the WEF complies with all applicable federal
and state standards, including but not limited to US Fish and
Wildlife Service, Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act
(MEPA)22 and environmental notification form (ENF) by
Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs,
access approval by Massachusetts Highway Department and
Massachusetts Historic Commission.
(b)
If applicable, a written statement that the proposed WEF
complies with, or is exempt from, applicable regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(c)
Fairhaven Conservation Commission. The applicant must file a
notice of intent if within the wetland resource areas or if within
100 feet buffer zone.
(d)
(e) An analysis of the shadow flicker of the WEF shall be provided.
A statement listing existing and maximum projected sound
levels from the WEF.
(f)
Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees,
on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet.
(g)
(3)
E.
22.Editor's Note: See 301 CMR 11.00.
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:195
Manufacturer specifications for sound and documentation for
compliance with Subsection L below.
(h)
Abutter notice additional requirements. The applicant shall
notify all abutting property owners whose property falls within
300 feet of the outermost setback area, but in no case less than
300 feet of the applicant's property line to the nearest property
owner.
(i)
Proof of liability insurance. The applicant shall be required to
provide evidence of liability insurance in an amount, and for the
duration, sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and
property occasioned by the failure of the facility.
(4)
Utility notification. No special permit and/or site plan for the
installation of a WEF shall be approved until evidence has been
given that the electric utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator, and copies of site plans showing the proposed location
have been submitted to the utility for review. An interconnection
agreement pursuant to applicable tariff and consistent with the
requirements for other generation must be executed with the utility
prior to any construction. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement, unless they are proposed to be located within
setback distance from the sideline of an existing utility right-of-way
(ROW).
(5)
Meteorological towers (METs) shall be permitted under the same
standards as a small wind system, except that the requirements
apply to a temporary structure. A permit for a temporary met
tower shall be valid for a maximum of three years, after which an
extension may be granted. Small anemometers installed directly on
buildings shall not require a building or special permit. No site plan
review shall be required for met towers. METs shall not be located
within setback distance from the sideline of any utility ROW.
(6)
Site control. At the time of its application for a special or building
permit, the applicant shall submit documentation of actual or
prospective control of the project site sufficient to allow for
installation and use of the proposed facility. Documentation shall
also include proof of control over setback areas and access roads,
if required. Control shall mean the legal authority to prevent the
use or construction of any structure for human habitation, or
inconsistent or interfering use, within the setback areas.
(7)
General siting and design standards. Unless otherwise expressly
provided by this section, requirements of the underlying zoning district
shall apply and in addition the following design standards shall apply:
Accessory structures housing support equipment shall be screened
from the view of persons not on the parcel.
(1)
F.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:196
Fencing shall be provided to control access to the site of the WEF
and accessory structures.
(2)
Signs. There shall be no signs, except announcement signs, notrespassing
signs or any signs required to warn of danger. A sign is
required that identifies the owner and operator with an emergency
telephone number where the owner and operator can be reached
on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(3)
All utility connections from the WEF site shall be underground
except to the extent that underground utilities are not feasible in
the reasonable determination of the SPGA.
(4)
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the
WEF.
(5)
Night lighting shall be prohibited unless required by state or
federal law and shall be the minimum necessary.
(6)
There shall be a minimum of one parking space to be used in
connection with the maintenance of the WEF and the site; however,
it shall not to be used for the permanent storage of vehicles.
(7)
Wind facilities shall be painted a neutral, non-reflective color
designed to blend with the surrounding environment.
(8)
Removal. The owner, his successors in interest shall remove any
WEF, the use of which has been discontinued. At the time of
removal, the WEF site shall be restored to its natural state or to
any other legally authorized use. All wind turbines and appurtenant
structures shall also be removed. The SPGA shall require that a
bond, escrow account or other suitable surety be established to
ensure adequate funds are available for removal. Municipal wind
facilities shall be exempt from the surety requirement.
(9)
Criteria for review and approval.
A special permit shall be granted under this section if the SPGA
finds in writing that each of the design standards set forth above
have been met and that the location of the WEF is suitable and
that the size, height and design are the minimum necessary for that
purpose.
(1)
The SPGA shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this section, such conditions as it finds
reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise serve the purposes of this section, including, but not
limited to: screening, lighting, fences, modification of the exterior
appearance of the structures, limitation upon size, method of
access or traffic features, parking, removal upon cessation of use
or other requirements. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing
(2)
G.
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:197
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other surety for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the
SPGA.
The special permit shall lapse if substantial use or construction has
not commenced within two years of the date of issuance, except for
good cause shown (including but not limited to appeals of the grant
of the special permit or litigation enjoining the construction under
the permit), and provided further that such construction, once
begun, shall be actively and continuously pursued to completion
within a reasonable time.
(3)
WEF - utility-scale. Requirements.
Financial surety. The SPGA may require the applicant for utility
scale wind facilities to provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal or
failure to maintain in the event the Town must remove or maintain
the facility, of an amount and form determined to be reasonable
by the special permit granting authority, but in no event to exceed
more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance with the
additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the
applicant. Such surety will not be required for municipally or stateowned
facilities. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a
qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for cost
of living adjustment.
(1)
(2) Size. The maximum nameplate rating shall not exceed 660kW.
The WEF shall be located on a parcel of land that contains a
minimum of 10 acres. The SPGA may allow more than one wind
turbine if a determination is made that the location is favorable to
the clustering of wind turbines.
(3)
Height. The WEF shall have a maximum tip height (MTH) no
greater than 265 feet above the current grade of the land.
(4)
Setbacks. The WEF shall, at all times while in operation, meet the
three required setbacks as follows:
A distance equal to 1.1 times the (MTH) of the wind turbine
from principal structures, critical infrastructure such as but
not limited to power lines, natural gas or distribution
infrastructure.
(a)
A distance equal to 4.0 times the (MTH) of the turbine from
the nearest off-site residential, commercial structure or public
way.
(b)
(5)
H.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:198
A distance equal to 1.5 times the (MTH) of the turbine from the
nearest non-participating property line and private way(s) that
are not part of the WEF.
(c)
Setback waiver. The SPGA may allow non-participating property
within the minimum required setbacks, only if the SPGA agrees to
the condition based on site-specific considerations and is provided
evidence of written consent of the all the affected abutting property
owner(s) who are in agreement.
The SPGA, in its discretion, shall be authorized to waive the
setback, sound and shadow flicker provisions of this section to
the extent these provisions affect a non-participating property,
provided that the applicant submits the request in writing,
accompanied by an affidavit signed by every non-participating
property owner(s) inside the required setback area. The
affidavit shall contain the non-participating property owner's
acknowledgement of the setback, sound or shadow flicker
requirements of this section and what is proposed in lieu
thereof, describe the impact on the non-participating property
owner(s), and state the non-participating property owner's
support for the applicant's waiver request. A non-participating
property owner's affidavit shall be made a part of the special
permit decision and shall be recorded separately with the
Bristol County Registry of Deeds (Southern District) at the
same time that the special permit decision is recorded to
provide notice to all subsequent purchasers of the nonparticipating
property of the waiver(s) granted.
(a)
(6)
Visualizations. The SPGA may select up to four sight lines,
including from the nearest building with a view of the WEF, for
pre- and post-construction view representations. Sites for the view
representations shall be selected from populated areas or public
ways within a two-mile radius of the proposed WEF. View
representations shall have the following characteristics:
View representations shall be in color and shall include actual
pre-construction photographs and accurate post-construction
simulations of the height and breadth of the WEF (e.g.,
superimpositions of the WEF on to photographs of existing
views).
(a)
All view representations will include existing, proposed
buildings or tree coverage.
(b)
Include description of the technical procedures followed in
producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens, etc.).
(c)
Site balloon test. The applicant shall arrange to fly a brightly
colored, four-foot balloon at the MTH and at the proposed
tower location. The days and hours will be agreed to by the
(d)
(7)
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:199
SPGA and the applicant beforehand. The dates and times of the
test will be advertised in the local newspaper.
Location map. The applicant shall submit, to the SPGA, a copy of
a portion of the most recent USGS quadrangle map, at a scale of
1:25,000, showing the proposed facility site and the area within at
least two miles from the facility. Zoning district designation for the
subject parcel should be included; however, a copy of a Zoning Map
with the parcel identified is suitable.
(8)
Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a plan
for maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls, as well
as detailed procedures for operational maintenance of the WEF
that are in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations for
the period of expected operation of such facility.
(9)
Annual operations and maintenance (O&M) report. A report shall
be filed annually with the Planning Board for the facilities
permitted under this section. Required report to be delivered
beginning at the end of the first 12 months facilities are placed into
operation and thereafter every year on anniversary date that the
facilities are in operation. Copies of the annual O&M report form
are available at the Planning Board's office.
(10)
Landscape plan. A plan indicating all proposed changes to the
landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads
or driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior
lighting, other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structures.
Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties
and except as required by the FAA be directed downward with full
cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(11)
Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for
a special permit, the SPGA shall be authorized to hire outside
consultants, paid for by the applicant.
(12)
(13)A WEF requiring guy wires for support shall not be permitted.
WEF - on-site. Requirements.
(1) Size. The maximum nameplate rating shall not exceed 200kW.
Height. The WEF shall have a MTH no greater than 165 feet above
the current grade of the land.
(2)
Setbacks. The WEF shall, at all times while in operation, meet the
three required setbacks as follows:
A distance no closer than 2.0 times the MTH, from the nearest
property line.
(a)
A setback area, computed as a circle with the tower at its
center and a radius equal to the MTH, shall be required from
(b)
(3)
I.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:200
building or buildings which are on the same parcel(s) and
which are served by the WEF.
A setback equal to 3.0 times the MTH from the nearest
residential structure.
(c)
Setback waiver. The SPGA may allow non-participating property
within the minimum required setbacks, only if the SPGA agrees to
the condition based on site-specific considerations and is provided
evidence of written consent of the all the affected abutting property
owner(s) who are in agreement.
The SPGA, in its discretion, shall be authorized to waive the
setback, sound and shadow flicker provisions of this section to
the extent these provisions affect a non-participating property,
provided that the applicant submits the request in writing,
accompanied by an affidavit signed by every non-participating
property owner(s) inside the required setback area. The
affidavit shall contain the non-participating property owner's
acknowledgement of the setback, sound or shadow flicker
requirements of this section and what is proposed in lieu
thereof, describe the impact on the non-participating property
owner(s), and state the non-participating property owner's
support for the applicant's waiver request. A non-participating
property owner's affidavit shall be made a part of the special
permit decision and shall be recorded separately with the
Bristol County Registry of Deeds (Southern District) at the
same time that the special permit decision is recorded to
provide notice to all subsequent purchasers of the nonparticipating
property of the waiver(s) granted.
(a)
(4)
Site plan: shall be a plan of the proposed WEF site, with existing
and proposed topography at two-foot minimum contours, at an
appropriate scale showing the following:
Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within
500 feet.
(a)
Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g.,
residence, garage, etc.), on site parcel and all adjacent parcels
within 500 feet. Include distances from the WEF to each
building shown.
(b)
Location of all roads, public and private, on the site parcel
and adjacent parcels within the setback distance of 1.2 times
the blade tip height, and proposed roads or driveways, either
temporary or permanent.
(c)
Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees,
on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within the setback
distance of 3.0 times the MTH.
(d)
(5)
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:201
Proposed location and design of WEF, including all turbines,
ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission
infrastructure, access, fencing, exterior lighting, etc.
(e)
Visualizations. The SPGA may select up to three sight lines,
including from the nearest building with a view of the WEF, for
pre- and post-construction view representations. Sites for the view
representations shall be selected from populated areas or public
ways within a two-mile radius of the proposed WEF. View
representations shall have the following characteristics:
View representations shall be in color and shall include actual
pre-construction photographs and accurate post-construction
simulations of the height and breadth of the WEF (e.g.,
superimpositions of the WEF onto photographs of existing
views).
(a)
All view representations will include existing, or proposed,
buildings or tree coverage.
(b)
Include description of the technical procedures followed in
producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens, etc.).
(c)
Site balloon test. The applicant shall arrange to fly a brightly
colored, four-foot balloon at the MTH and at the proposed
tower location. The days and hours will be agreed to by the
SPGA and the applicant beforehand. The dates and times of the
test will be advertised in the local newspaper.
(d)
(6)
Compliance documents. The applicant shall provide the following:
(a) Description of financial surety;
(b) Proof of liability insurance;
(c) Certification of height approval from the FAA;
Manufacturer specifications for sound and documentation for
compliance with Subsection L below.
(d)
(7)
Landscape plan. A plan indicating all proposed changes to the
landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads
or driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior
lighting, other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structures.
Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties
and except as required by the FAA be directed downward with full
cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(8)
Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for
a special permit, the SPGA shall be authorized to hire outside
consultants, paid for by the applicant.
(9)
(10)A WEF requiring guy wires for support shall not be permitted.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:202
Annual operations and maintenance report. A report shall be filed
annually with the Planning Board for the facilities permitted under
this section. Required report to be delivered beginning at the end
of the first 12 months facilities are placed into operation and
thereafter every year on anniversary date that the facilities are in
operation. Copies of the annual O&M report form are available at
the Planning Board's office.
(11)
WEF - small wind energy system. Requirements.
WEF shall have a MTH no greater than 75 feet and may exceed
the MTH by special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals
upon a finding that the height of the proposed structure does not
derogate from the purpose of this section as set forth in Subsection
A, Purpose, above.
(1)
WEF shall be located no closer than the MTH, from the nearest
non-accessory structure; provided that no setback shall be required
from building or buildings which are on the same parcel and which
are served by the WEF.
(2)
One or more wind facilities, which shall have a total rated
nameplate capacity not to exceed 10kW.
(3)
J.
WEF - building integrated WEF (BIWF). Requirements.
No BIWF shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified
without first obtaining a special permit from the SPGA. The
construction of a BIWF shall be allowed subject to the issuance
of a special permit and provided that the use complies with all
requirements of this subsection and Subsection E above. All such
wind facilities shall, where economically feasible, be constructed
and operated in a manner that minimizes any adverse visual, safety,
and environmental impacts.
(1)
Required supporting documentation for BIWF. The special permit
application must, at a minimum, include:
Analysis and design documents, completed by a structural
engineer registered to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, demonstrating that the proposed building is
structurally sufficient to support the permanent installation of
the proposed BIWF. At a minimum, the analysis should address
vibration, wind load, and ice load.
(a)
Elevation drawings of BIWF installed, viewed from north,
south, east, and west.
(b)
Building schematic detailing point(s) of connection and
associated supports for the BIWF.
(c)
Schematic of attachment method for connecting the BIWF to
the building.
(d)
(2)
K.
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:203
Specification sheets for wind turbine and all related
components (inverters, controllers, disconnects, etc.).
(e)
One or three line electrical diagram detailing wind turbine,
associated components, and electrical interconnection
methods, with all National Electrical Code (NEC) compliant
disconnect and over current devices.
(f)
Safety and environmental standards. Wind facilities operations shall be
required to adhere to all requirements of this section at all times the
wind facilities are in operation unless waived by the SPGA in its written
decision.
Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local
Town emergency services, as designated by the permit granting
authority, as well as the local electrical utility company. Upon
request, the applicant shall cooperate with local emergency
services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of
disconnecting the WEF shall be clearly marked and accessible.
The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
(a)
(1)
Fire protection system. The nacelle of a utility-scale WEF shall be
protected by an automatic fire suppression system. Fairhaven fire
officials will observe the system in place immediately prior to the
erection of the nacelle to the tower.
(2)
Unauthorized access. Wind turbines or other structures part of
a WEF shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access. For
instance, the tower shall be designed and installed so as to not
provide step bolts or other climbing means readily accessible to
the public for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
Electrical equipment shall be locked where possible.
(3)
Shadow/flicker. Wind facilities shall be sited in a manner that
minimizes shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the
burden of proving that this effect does not have significant adverse
impact on neighboring or adjacent uses.
(4)
Noise. The WEF and associated equipment shall conform with the
provisions of the Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP)
Division of Air Quality Noise Regulations (currently 310 CMR 7.10),
unless the DEP and the SPGA agree that those provisions shall not
be applicable. A source of sound will be considered to be violating
these regulations if the source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10 dB(A)
above ambient; or
(a)
(5)
L.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:204
Produces a pure tone condition when an octave band center
frequency sound pressure level exceeds the two adjacent
center frequency sound pressure levels by three decibels or
more. These criteria are measured both at the property line
and at the nearest inhabited structure. Ambient is defined as
the background A-weighted sound level that is exceeded 90%
of the time measured during equipment hours. The ambient
may also be established by other means with consent from
DEP. An analysis prepared by a qualified engineer shall be
presented to demonstrate compliance with these noise
standards, if required by the permit granting authority.
The SPGA, in consultation with the DEP, shall determine
whether such violations shall be measured at the property
line or at the nearest inhabited residence. The WEF owner
and operator shall make reasonable efforts to respond to
the public's inquiries and complaints.
[1]
Upon receipt of a complaint to the Fairhaven Board of
Health (BOH) regarding sound from an existing facility,
the BOH will investigate the complaint. The BOH will
follow its established complaint procedure to monitor and
analyze the sources of complaints. If the BOH determines
the complaint to be reasonable, the owner or operator
shall be required, at its expense, to have prepared, by an
independent professional acoustical engineer approved by
the Town, an acoustical study that measures sound levels
and demonstrates compliance with the sound standards in
this section.
[2]
(b)
Sound assessment. The applicant shall provide a report
estimating current ambient sound at appropriate locations and
maximum projected sound from the proposed facility,
measured in dB(A) (decibels A-weighted), including but not
limited to the following:
An estimation or measurement of the existing ambient
background sound levels.
[1]
Identification of a model for sound propagation (sound
modeling software will include a propagation model).
[2]
A prediction or measurement of sound levels from the
facility at the nearest non-participating landowner's
occupied building(s), at all participating landowner's
occupied building(s), and the nearest property line. Inputs
to the model must include specifications and expected
sound data from the actual manufacturer and model
number of the equipment proposed for the site.
[3]
(c)
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:205
A comparison of calculated sound pressure levels from
the facility with background sound pressure levels at the
locations of concern.
[4]
An estimate of the maximum total sound in the
environment after the facility is operational. A listing of all
inputs used in the sound assessment, and all sound data,
manufacturers data, power curves and sound curves used
as inputs in the sound assessment must be provided to the
Board before the assessment is considered complete.
[5]
Operational noise analysis. The applicant shall conduct with
the BOH an operational analysis of noise during the first 90
days of operation. The WEF facility shall not be allowed to
operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except
during periods when a live attendant is present and is actively
conducting a sound assessment in accordance with approved
protocol. This restriction shall remain in place until the
applicant has proven the system has operated in compliance
for at least 90 consecutive calendar days. The applicant will
need to observe weather forecasts and plan to attend highest
wind days in order to keep the system running through
increasing wind periods. The BOH shall have access to all
power and noise data recorded by the applicant's monitoring
system and shall produce reports upon written request of the
BOH. The analysis will be coordinated with the BOH and shall
contain sufficient information for a determination of whether
the facility meets Massachusetts 310 CMR 7.10, and this
section, as required above.
(d)
The applicant shall provide, at his/her own expense, two
permanently mounted sound meters, with data loggers, for the
purpose of recording sound levels at the property line of the
two abutters forecast to be impacted the most by sound from
sound emissions from the WEF. A written report explaining
how the location of the meters was determined shall be
submitted to the BOH for review prior to installation. This
equipment shall be used to establish a baseline for sound at the
location observed during commissioning/compliance testing
and will allow the BOH to determine when a significant change
in sound power has been experienced at the site (for any
reason, such as wear and tear, poor maintenance, change in
topography from storms, etc.). Metering equipment shall be
calibrated annually at the applicants' expense and no WEF
shall remain in operation without an operational sound meter
in place. Once the compliance testing is complete, the two data
loggers shall record sound levels continuously and at intervals
of 1/8 of a second per sample maximum and summary reports
shall be made available on a monthly basis (or upon request) to
the BOH.
(e)
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.5
1:206
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the WEF and is
otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances, and subject to existing easements, restrictions and
conditions of record.
(6)
Avian study and bat studies. The applicant shall submit the results
of an avian and bat species analysis to the SPGA. The applicant
shall continually monitor the injuries and fatalities to assess
compliance of the site with the recommendations as proposed in
the studies, if any.
(7)
Facility conditions. The applicant shall maintain the WEF in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, emergency braking (stopping) and
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to
a level acceptable to the Fire Chief. The project owner shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the WEF and any access
road(s), unless accepted as a public way, and the cost of repairing
any damage occurring as a result of operation and construction.
(8)
Modifications. All material modifications to a WEF made after
issuance of the special permit shall require approval by the SPGA
as provided in this section.
(9)
The WEF shall be equipped with controls to detect imbalance that
could occur for any reason, including ice and snow build-up. These
sensors shall shut down the turbine automatically in the event of
snow and ice build-up and shall not allow the equipment to restart
until a safe operating condition has been restored. The Town public
safety officials shall have access to records showing date and time
of imbalance shutdown. Calibration of the sensors shall be certified
every year, on or before October 1.
(10)
Criteria for review and approval.
A special permit shall be granted under this section if the SPGA
finds in writing that each WEF meets its designated tower
requirements listed above, and that the design, safety and
environmental standards, set forth above, have been met.
(1)
The SPGA shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this section, such conditions as it finds
reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise serve the purposes of this section, including, but not
limited to: screening, lighting, fences, modification of the exterior
appearance of the structures, limitation upon size, hours of
operation, method of access or traffic features, parking, removal
upon cessation of use or other requirements. Such conditions shall
be imposed in writing and the applicant may be required to post
(2)
M.
§ 198-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.5
1:207
§ 198-29.6. Solar photovoltaic energy facilities (SPEF). [Added
5-4-2013 STM by Art. 8]
bond or other surety for compliance with said conditions in an
amount satisfactory to the SPGA.
The special permit shall lapse if substantial use or construction has
not commenced within two years of the date of issuance, except for
good cause shown (including but not limited to appeals of the grant
of the special permit or litigation enjoining the construction under
the permit), and provided further that such construction, once
begun, shall be actively and continuously pursued to completion
within a reasonable time.
(3)
The SPGA will require the applicant to pay for outside, independent
professional services to evaluate the proposal's compliance with
this section and to determine the flexibility of geographic location,
to analyze the loading capacities of the proposed structures, and to
review camouflage and screening techniques.
(4)
The final decision of the SPGA shall contain a condition when
mitigation, turbine shutdown or removal would be imposed if a
WEF is found to become non-compliant with this section.
(5)
Purpose. The purpose of this by-law is to encourage the use of solar
photovoltaic energy and provide for the construction and operation
of ground-mounted SPEF and to provide standards for the placement,
design, construction, monitoring, modification and removal of groundmounted
SPEF that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic,
natural and historic resources of the Town and provide adequate
financial assurance for decommissioning. The provisions set forth in
this section shall take precedence over all other sections when
considering applications related to the construction, operation, and/or
repair of ground-mounted SPEF.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to all ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective
date of this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications
that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these
installations or related equipment. Roof-mounted SPEF are not
governed under this section and are permitted in all districts when
connected behind the meter.
B.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all SPEF shall be consistent with all applicable local,
state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all
applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications
requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a SPEF shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
C.
§ 198-29.5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.6
1:208
Special permit granting authority. The Planning Board shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA) for all SPEF as defined in this
section.
D.
Validity: The invalidity of any provision of this section shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E.
Application for special permit review. Submittal application for special
permit review shall require the filling of one copy of a site plan review
application and 10 prints of the site plan drawn to an adequate scale
to convey all required information. Such plan(s) shall contain the
following for an application to be considered complete.
(1) Actual dimensions of the lot.
(2) All easements existing or proposed.
Location and size of existing and proposed structures including any
existing structures within 100 feet of the site.
(3)
(4) Name, width and condition of all abutting streets.
(5) Existing and proposed topography at two-foot minimum contours.
(6) Existing and proposed water, sanitary and storm drainage facilities.
Landscape plan. Landscaping including sizes, types and numbers
of plantings and details. Existing vegetation and other unique land
features shall be preserved where feasible.
(7)
Blueprints or drawings of the SPEF signed by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any
potential shading from nearby structures.
(8)
The stamps and seal of the professional land surveyor responsible
for surveying the property.
(9)
The stamp and signature of the professional engineer responsible
for drawing the plan.
(10)
The location of all wetlands on the site and within 100 feet of the
site.
(11)
The location of the Rivers Protection Act23 riverfront resource
protection area.
(12)
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation
clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or
structures.
(13)
F.
23.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 198-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.6
1:209
A stormwater management plan (SMP) detailing the existing
environmental and hydrological conditions of the site, proposed
alterations of the site and all proposed components of the drainage
system and any measures for the detention, retention, or
infiltration of water, for the protection of water quality and
protection from flooding. As described in § 198-31.1, Stormwater
management.
(14)
A description of the solar photovoltaic facility and the technical,
economic and other reasons for the proposed location and design
shall be prepared and signed by a registered professional engineer.
(15)
Confirmation prepared and signed by a registered professional
engineer that the SPEF complies with all applicable federal and
state standards.
(16)
One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection
methods, with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects
and over current devices.
(17)
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, inverters.
(18)
Documentation of the sound generated by equipment used in the
production of electrical energy, including any proprietary
documentation. A sound study will be required by the SPGA to
determine the impact of noise on abutting residences.
(19)
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the
project.
(20)
An operation and maintenance plan. (See also § 198.29.6G(13)
below.)
(21)
General design review standards. Unless otherwise expressly provided
by this section of the bylaw all requirements of the underlying zoning
district shall apply and in addition the following standards shall apply.
Large-scale, ground-mounted SPEF shall:
Be located on a parcel of land that contains a minimum of 10
acres when in the RR, B, I, AG or WRP districts.
(a)
Be set back 75 feet for the front, 50 for side and rear yards
from abutting RA, RB, RC, RR, AG, MU, WRP and P Districts.
(b)
Be setback 50 feet from front yard in the B and I Districts, but
10 feet from side and rear yards when abutting the B and I
Districts.
(c)
(1)
(2) On-site SPEF shall:
G.
§ 198-29.6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.6
1:210
Be sized by electrical load according to the building they serve
and must be connected to the customer side, behind the
electrical service metering equipment.
(a)
(b) Be set back, at a minimum, to the district setbacks they fall in.
Not cast glare to abutting uses by providing screening
methods.
(c)
Not permit the equipment to create excessive noise to abutters
by installing inverters as far from abutting structures as
feasible.
(d)
(e) Provide fencing to prevent unauthorized access to arrays.
All appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to, equipment
shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other and shall be screened
from the view of persons not on the parcel, public rights-of-ways
and all residential districts.
(3)
Lighting of SPEF shall be consistent with state and federal law.
Lighting of appurtenant structures shall be limited to that required
for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably
shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the
solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall
incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(4)
Signs. There shall be no signs, except announcement signs, no
trespassing signs or any signs required to warn of danger. A sign is
required that identifies the owner and operator with an emergency
telephone number where the owner and operator can be reached
on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(5)
All utility connections from the SPEF site shall be underground
except to the extent that underground utilities are not feasible in
the reasonable determination of the SPGA.
(6)
Inverters shall be sited so as to minimize sound impact to abutting
residences.
(7)
Clear cutting of trees and natural vegetation, within five years,
shall be prohibited for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the solar photovoltaic facility.
(8)
There shall be a minimum of one parking space to be used in
connection with the maintenance of the SPEF and the site;
however, it shall not to be used for the permanent storage of
vehicles.
(9)
Setbacks shall provide for adequate screening of noise and glare
from abutting uses and structures. Techniques such as dense
natural vegetated plantings, earthen berms or increased setbacks
(10)
§ 198-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.6
1:211
will be required, depending upon site-specific conditions. Setbacks
shall not be disturbed by access roads, except where allowed by
the SPGA for access to the site. Setbacks shall not be used for any
purpose other than natural vegetation or other screening required
by the SPGA. Setbacks from property lines shall be as provided
above for type of SPEF.
All ground-mounted SPEF shall be fenced for security. Fencing
that is visible from right-of-way or residence shall be vinyl coated
or another decorative type of fence acceptable to the SPGA. All
fencing shall be designed to blend into the landscape.
(11)
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the ground-mounted SPEF, which shall include
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation,
stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for operational
maintenance of the installation.
(12)
The SPEF owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project
summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief.
Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local
emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All
means of shutting down the SPEF shall be clearly marked. The
owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public
inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
(13)
No ground—mounted SPEF shall be approved or constructed until
evidence has been given to the SPGA that the utility company
that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be
located has been informed of the SPEF owner or operator's intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(14)
No ground-mounted SPEF shall be constructed, installed or
modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a
building permit.
(15)
The ground-mounted SPEF owner or operator shall maintain the
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to
the local fire chief and emergency medical services. The owner or
operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the SPEF
and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
(16)
Abandonment or decommissioning: The owner, operator, his successors
in interest shall remove any ground-mounted SPEF which has reached
the end of its useful life or has been abandoned. The owner or operator
shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after
the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify
the site plan review authority by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal.
H.
§ 198-29.6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.6
1:212
Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all ground-mounted SPEF, structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the
site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The site plan review authority may allow the
owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated belowgrade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption
to vegetation.
(c)
(1)
Abandonment: Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the SPEF shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate
for more than one year without the written consent of the site
plan review authority. If the owner or operator of the groundmounted
SPEF fails to remove the installation in accordance with
the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment
or the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the
property and physically remove the installation.
(2)
Financial surety: Proponents of ground-mounted SPEF shall
provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or
otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town must
remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount
and form determined to be reasonable by the SPGA, but in no event
to exceed more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance
with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined
by the project proponent. Such surety will not be required for
municipally or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall
submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall
include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due
to inflation.
(3)
Criteria for site plan review and approval.
A special permit may be granted under this section if the SPGA
finds in writing that each of the design review standards set forth
above have been met and that the location of the ground-mounted
SPEF is suitable and that the size and design are the minimum
necessary for that purpose.
(1)
The SPGA shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this section, such conditions as it finds
reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood, public or
otherwise serve the purposes of this section, including, but not
limited to: screening, lighting, noise, fences, modification of the
(2)
I.
§ 198-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.6
1:213
§ 198-29.7. Medical marijuana facilities. [Added 2-12-2014 STM by
Art. 8]
exterior appearance of the structures, limitation upon size, method
of access or traffic features, parking, removal upon cessation of use
or other requirements. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other surety for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the
SPGA.
The special permit shall lapse if substantial use or construction has
not commenced within two years of the date of issuance, except for
good cause shown (including but not limited to appeals of the grant
of the site plan or litigation enjoining the construction under the
permit), and provided further that such construction, once begun,
shall be actively and continuously pursued to completion within a
reasonable time.
(3)
The SPGA may require the proponent to provide or pay for
professional services to evaluate the proposal.
(4)
Fairhaven Conservation Commission. The applicant must file a
notice of intent if within the wetland resource areas or if within 100
feet buffer zone.
(5)
Purposes.
To provide for the establishment of medical marijuana facilities in
appropriate places and under strict conditions in accordance with
the provisions of MGL c. 94C, as amended from time to time.
(1)
To minimize the adverse impacts of medical marijuana facilities on
adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools and other
places where children congregate, local historic districts, and other
land uses potentially incompatible with said facilities.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety,
monitoring, modification, and removal of medical marijuana
facilities.
(3)
A.
Applicability.
The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly,
packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or
dispensing of marijuana for medical use is prohibited unless
permitted as a medical marijuana facility under this chapter.
(1)
No medical marijuana facility shall be established except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede federal and
state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
(3)
B.
§ 198-29.6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.7
1:214
If any provision of this chapter or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this chapter, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other
than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby,
and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable.
(4)
Special permit granting authority. The Planning Board shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA) for all medical marijuana
facilities.
(5)
Eligible locations for medical marijuana facilities.
Medical marijuana facilities may be allowed by special permit from
the Planning Board only in the Medical Marijuana Overlay District,
provided the facility meets the requirements of this chapter.
(1)
The Medical Marijuana Overlay District shall be comprised of the
following map and lot numbers: Map 24: Lots 16, 16A, 18; Map 26:
Lots 62, 62A, 63, 71, 71A, 72; Map 30A: Lots 86A, 86C, 86D, 86H;
Map 36: Lots 13, 14, 14A, 14B, 14C, 14D, 14E, 14F, 14K, 14N, 15,
15A, 15B, 15C, 15D, 15F, 15G, 15J. A map of the overlay district
is also on file at the Town Clerk's office and the Planning Board's
office.
(2)
C.
General requirements and conditions for all medical marijuana
facilities.
All medical marijuana facilities shall be contained within a building
or structure.
(1)
A medical marijuana facility shall comply with Department of
Public Health Regulations (currently 105 CMR 725).
(2)
A medical marijuana facility shall not be located in buildings that
contain any medical doctor's offices or the offices of any other
professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use of medical
marijuana.
(3)
The hours of operation of medical marijuana facilities shall be set
by the special permit granting authority, but in no event shall said
facilities be open and/or operating between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
(4)
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing
marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the
premises of a medical marijuana facility.
(5)
No medical marijuana facility shall be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such as
motels and dormitories, or inside a movable or mobile structure
such as a van or truck.
(6)
D.
§ 198-29.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-29.7
1:215
Signage for the medical marijuana facility shall include the
following language: "Registration card issued by the MA
Department of Public Health required." The required text shall be
a minimum of two inches in height.
(7)
Medical marijuana facilities shall provide the Police Department,
Building Commissioner, Board of Health and the special permit
granting authority with the names, phone numbers and email
addresses of all management staff and keyholders to whom one can
provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the
establishment.
(8)
Special permit requirements.
A medical marijuana facility shall only be allowed by special permit
from the Fairhaven Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 40A,
§ 9, subject to the following statements, regulations, requirements,
conditions and limitations.
(1)
A special permit for a medical marijuana facility shall be limited to
one or more of the following uses that shall be prescribed by the
special permit granting authority:
(a) Cultivation of marijuana for medical use;
Processing and packaging of marijuana for medical use,
including marijuana that is in the form of smoking materials,
food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and other products;
(b)
Retail sale or distribution of marijuana for medical use to
qualifying patients;
(c)
(2)
In addition to the application requirements set forth above, a
special permit application for a medical marijuana facility shall
include the following:
(a) The name and address of each owner of the facility;
Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the
applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of
its agencies for the facility;
(b)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site for the facility,
such as a deed, or lease;
(c)
If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under
oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners,
members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of
the above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must
disclose the identity of the owners of such entities until the
disclosure contains the names of individuals;
(d)
(3)
E.
§ 198-29.7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-29.7
1:216
§ 198-30. Filling. [Added 3-15-1973 ATM by Art. 74]
Not more than 200 cubic yards of fill from off the premises shall be placed
on any parcel without written authorization from the Building
Commissioner, which shall be granted only upon demonstration that the
Proposed security measures for the medical marijuana facility
in compliance with the Department of Public Health
Regulations (currently 105 CMR 725), including lighting,
fencing, gates and alarms, etc., to ensure the safety of persons
and to protect the premises from theft.
(e)
Mandatory findings. The special permit authority shall not issue a
special permit for a medical marijuana facility unless it finds that:
The facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic
impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in
MGL c. 40A, § 11;
(1)
The facility demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting
requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state
laws and regulations; and
(2)
The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements
of this chapter;
(3)
F.
Annual reporting. Each medical marijuana facility permitted under this
section shall, as a condition of its special permit, file an annual report
to and appear before the special permit granting authority and the
Town Clerk no later than January 31, providing a copy of all current
applicable state licenses for the facility and/or its owners and
demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the special
permit and state regulations. If there is a notice of deficiencies or
violations, said notice shall be included with the annual report.
G.
A special permit granted under this chapter shall have a term limited to
the duration of the applicant's ownership and/or lease of the premises
as a medical marijuana facility. A special permit may be transferred
to a new owner only with the approval of the special permit granting
authority in the form of an amendment to the special permit with all
information required in this chapter.
H.
Abandonment or discontinuance of use.
A medical marijuana facility shall be required to remove all
materials, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia:
(a) Prior to surrendering its state-issued licenses or permits; or
Within six months of ceasing operations, whichever comes
first.
(b)
(1)
I.
§ 198-29.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-30
1:217
requirements of § 198-28 are not being violated and that reasonable care is
being taken to avoid harmful diversion of water onto adjoining properties.
§ 198-31. Earth removal regulations. [Added 3-16-1974 ATM by Art.
90]
Applicability. [Amended 5-6-1989 STM by Art. 6]
The removal from a subdivision of more than 50 cubic yards of
sand, gravel, rock, topsoil, borrow, sod, loam, peat, humus clay
or similar material within any 12 month period shall be allowed
only on a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with § 198-8.
(1)
Loam shall not be removed from any lot area of a subdivision or
any other area of a subdivision, that is not outlined on the plan
as a roadway until specific building permits are issued for the lots
involved. The soil removal shall be under the supervision of the
Building Commissioner.
(2)
A.
Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written application for a
special permit must be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a new
removal operation or for the extension of existing ones to parcels other
than those so used as of July 1, 1974. Special permits shall expire two
years from the date of issuance, unless an extension for another two
years is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, following a public
hearing. The following shall be conditions for such issuance:
The application shall be accompanied by a plan describing the
premises and the proposed operation. If involving more than two
acres or 2,000 cubic yards the plan shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor and shall show property lines; names
and addresses of all abutters, including those across any street or
way; existing grades in the area from which the above material is
to be removed and in surrounding areas; grades below which no
excavation shall take place; and the proposed cover vegetation and
trees.
(1)
A performance bond in the amount determined by the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be posted in the name of the Town assuring
satisfactory performance in the fulfillment of the requirements of
this chapter and such other conditions to the issuance of its permit
as the Board may impose.
(2)
Before granting a permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give
due consideration to the location of proposed earth removal, to the
general character of the neighborhood surrounding such location
and to the general safety of the public ways in the vicinity.
(3)
B.
C. Operation standards.
§ 198-30 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31
1:218
§ 198-31.1. Stormwater management. [Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art.
9]
This section shall apply to all new special permits subject to § 198-29 for
additions or renovations which increase the impervious area of property
applied for after January 12, 1999, as provided for in MGL c. 40A, § 6.
Further this section shall also apply to such special permits granted prior to
January 12, 1999, as provided for in MGL c. 40A, § 6, if the building permits
authorized under such special permit are not issued prior to November
1, 1999. No lot created after May 1, 1999, may be built upon without
compliance with this section. The requirements of this section may be
met for lots created after May 1, 1999, by approval of a subdivision plan
that includes a stormwater management plan, as described herein, by the
Fairhaven Planning Board.
No excavation shall be less than 200 feet from an existing public
way unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
and no excavation shall be less than 50 feet from any other
perimeter lot line. Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained
on the undisturbed land for screening and noise reduction
purposes, and surge piles and overburden piles shall be located for
similar purposes.
(1)
All trucking routes and methods will be subject to approval by the
Chief of Police.
(2)
All roads leading from the earth removal area to public ways shall
be treated with oil, stone or other suitable material to reduce
dust and mud for a distance of 200 feet from said public way.
Roads leading from earth removal areas to public ways shall be
constructed at an angle to the public way or constructed with a
curve so as to help screen the operation from public view.
(3)
No gravel shall be removed within six feet of spring high-water
table. This elevation shall be established from a test pit and the
level related to a permanent monument of the property. This
information shall show on the topographic plan.
(4)
Restoration. Forthwith following expiration or withdrawal of a permit
or upon voluntary cessation of operations, all land shall be graded
leaving no slopes in excess of one foot vertical to two feet horizontal,
providing for surface drainage. Boulders and stumps shall be buried or
disposed of and the entire area shall be covered with not less than four
inches of topsoil, planted with cover vegetation, which shall have been
established prior to release of the bond.
D.
Stockpiling. Topsoil stripped and stockpiled in preparation for
construction or for earth removal shall be restored to its original
location within 36 months of such stripping, unless a valid building
permit or earth removal permit is in force.
E.
§ 198-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:219
Standards.
Stormwater management for each development shall accomplish
the following:
Flooding. The design and construction of each subdivision or
special permit project shall be done in a manner such that
post-development runoff will not exacerbate or create flooding
conditions, or alter surface water flow paths, resulting in
impacts to adjacent properties to the site during the two-, ten-
, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm
events.
No increase will be allowed in the peak rate of runoff off of
the site for any of the above design storms.
[1]
No increase will be allowed in the volume of runoff off of
the site up to the ten-year, twenty-four-hour design storm.
[2]
(a)
Water quality. The first flush of stormwater runoff shall be
treated prior to discharge off of the site. The treatment
system(s) shall be designed to accommodate the first flush
from the entire development site.
Treatment shall be provided to achieve a minimum
removal 80% of total suspended solids (TSS) from the first
flush.
[1]
Any development in Nasketucket River Basin Zoning
Overlay District shall incorporate physical treatment
processes to remove nitrogen at an efficiency rate of 30%
or greater and remove phosphorous at a design rate of
50% or greater.
[2]
(b)
Reproduce, as nearly as possible, the hydrologic conditions in
the ground and surface waters prior to the development.
(c)
Reduce stormwater pollution to the maximum extent possible
using best management practices (BMPs).
(d)
(e) Have a long-term maintenance plan.
(1)
The Planning Board is authorized to vary from these standards due
to topographic features of the lot.
(2)
A.
Submittal requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for all subdivisions
greater than three lots and for all special permits for new
construction, and for special permits for additions or renovations
which increase the impervious area of a property requiring
approval of the Planning Board to submit 10 copies of a stormwater
management plan (SMP) detailing the existing environmental and
(1)
B.
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:220
hydrological conditions of the site, proposed alterations of the
site, and all proposed components of the drainage system and any
measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water, for
the protection of water quality and protection from flooding. The
SMP shall contain sufficient information for the Planning Board
to evaluate the effectiveness and acceptability of those measures
proposed by the applicant for controlling flooding and pollution
from stormwater runoff. The SMP shall contain maps, charts,
graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, calculations,
plans showing construction details of all systems and structures,
and citations to supporting references, as appropriate, to
communicate the information as required by this section.
The submittal of a stormwater management plan shall include an
order of conditions or a determination of nonapplicability from the
Fairhaven Conservation Commission issued under the Fairhaven
Wetlands Bylaw.
Site characteristic information to be included in the
stormwater management plan (SMP).
Predevelopment conditions shall include:
The existing watersheds on the property, as well as
upgradient areas contributing runoff to the property;
[a]
Location of all surface waters and wetlands on the site
or on lots adjacent to the site;
[b]
The delineation of the one-hundred-year flood
elevation as indicated on the Federal Emergency
Management Act (FEMA) maps. If FEMA maps do not
exist or if the waterbody or watercourse one-hundredyear
flood elevation is not indicated on the map, the
elevation shall be calculated utilizing an appropriate
methodology such as NRCS TR-55 or TR-20 or HEC2.
(Note: The floodplain location determined by the
FEMA maps are approximate. When a specific
elevation is given, the location of the floodplain shall
correspond to that elevation.);
[c]
The principal vegetation types sufficient to determine
an appropriate curve number;
[d]
The topography described at one-foot intervals; areas
of steep slopes over 15% shall be highlighted;
[e]
The soil types on the site and the hydrological soil
groups based on the most current Natural Resource
Conservation Service soils map of the site (available at
the NRCS office in Wareham);
[f]
[1]
(a)
(2)
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:221
The location of any public or private water supplies
within 150 feet of the property as well as on the
property;
[g]
Soil logs signed by a DEP certified soil evaluator for
each proposed stormwater control system site.
(Documentation should be for a minimum of four feet
below the bottom of the stormwater system and be
submitted for both flood control stormwater systems
and pollution reduction stormwater systems.);
[h]
Maximum groundwater levels as observed in the soil
at the proposed stormwater control system locations;
[i]
The flow path(s), design points for each watershed;
and
[j]
[k] Areas of ponding or swamping.
Postdevelopment conditions shall include:
[a] Changes in topography at one-foot intervals;
Areas where vegetation will be cleared or otherwise
altered. (For residential development assume 90% of
all area excepting buildings to be managed turf.);
[b]
The proposed watersheds on the property, as well as
upgradient areas contributing runoff to the property;
[c]
The proposed development layout including: locations
of roadways, common parking areas, and undisturbed
lands; and locations of drainage systems and
stormwater treatment facilities;
[d]
Areas to be utilized in overland flow, i.e., grass swales
and filter strips, showing: proposed vegetation; the
soil susceptibility to erosion (using the NRCS
classification);
[e]
The flow path(s) for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and
one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm event; and
[f]
[g] Design points for each watershed.
[2]
Water quantity/duration/quality information to be submitted in
the SMP.
Predevelopment conditions in narrative form or
calculations shall include: peak discharge rate, based on
the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year twentyfour-
hour storm event using NRCS TR-55 or TR-20; and
volume of the surface runoff for ten-year twenty-four-hour
storm event using NRCS TR-55 or TR-20.
[1]
(b)
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:222
Post development conditions in narrative form or
calculations shall include: peak discharge rate, based on
the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year twentyfour-
hour storm event using NRCS TR-55 or TR-20; volume
of the surface runoff for the ten-year twenty-four-hour
storm event using NRCS TR-55 or TR-20; design point(s)
for each watershed; detention/retention time, discharge
rate, and approximate time of concentration through the
BMP for the water quality storm; a description of and
calculations for the proposed outlet structure(s); both the
principle outlet and emergency spillway; and a discussion
regarding whether the proposed stormwater system meets
or exceeds the established performance standards as well
as an evaluation of the pollutant removal efficiency of each
proposed treatment facility or group of facilities.
[2]
Design standards. The design, construction and maintenance of the
stormwater system, and the submittal of information to evaluate the
system, shall be consistent with the standards and specifications set out
below.
Performance standards and design specifications.
Control of stormwater runoff shall meet the design criteria for
both flood (volume and peak discharge) control and nonpoint
source pollution reduction as indicated in Subsection A above.
All assumptions, methodologies and procedures used to design
stormwater systems shall accompany the design.
(a)
Stormwater design methodology considerations for
stormwater management.
Runoff calculations for flood control shall be provided
utilizing the rational formula, the NRCS TR-20 or TR-55,
as appropriate for the site. The appropriate methodology
shall be determined from the restrictions on each method
described in Basic Hydrological Calculations for
Conservation Commissioners Runoff, Land Subject to
Flooding, and Flow in Pipes and Channels, (1987). The
Rational Method cannot be used to determine volume.
[1]
The appropriate pre- and postdevelopment worksheets as
shown in Basic Hydrological Calculations for Conservation
Commissioners Runoff, Land Subject to Flooding, and
Flow in Pipes and Channels, (1987), shall be submitted
with the subdivision plan or special permit application.
[2]
The flow length for predevelopment sheet flow to
determine the time of concentration (Tc) or travel time (Tt)
shall not exceed 50 feet.
[3]
[4] Design points.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:223
The design points shall be at the:
[i] Edge of wetlands;
[ii] Property line; or
[iii] Existing storm drain system.
[a]
For each predevelopment design point there shall be a
corresponding postdevelopment design point.
[b]
General standards and specifications. The design, construction and
maintenance of stormwater systems shall be consistent with the
following:
Discharging runoff without treatment directly into rivers,
streams, watercourses or wetlands is prohibited.
(a)
Natural watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of
vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or
otherwise altered.
(b)
Land outside the parcel subject to development review shall
not be used in the stormwater management plan (i.e., the
location of the detention pond) unless a recordable easement
has been granted for such use and a copy of the easement has
been submitted to the Planning Board as part of the SMP.
(c)
The site shall be graded so that surface water shall be directed
into the stormwater management system.
(d)
(e) Intermittent watercourses such as swabs shall be vegetated.
Prior to discharging any stormwater runoff into a stormwater
system, the following conditions must also be met:
The system shall be installed according to applicable
standards and specifications of this section;
[1]
[2] All components of the system shall be stabilized; and
All upland areas contributing stormwater runoff to the
system shall be stabilized (nonerosive).
[3]
(f)
All basins/ponds designed for stormwater runoff control shall:
Be designed in accordance with current NRCS standards
and specifications unless otherwise indicated in
Subsection C(4), Specific standards and specifications
below;
[1]
Have a two-stage design when pollution reduction and
flood control are incorporated into one stormwater
management system. The upper stage shall provide
enough storage to control the postdevelopment peak
[2]
(g)
(2)
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:224
discharge rates for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm events to the
predevelopment levels; the lower stage shall provide
enough storage to meet the pollution removal efficiencies
as described Subsection C(4), Specific standards and
specifications below;
Have energy dissipaters at the outlets of all inflow and
outflow pipes;
[3]
Have outflow pipes designed to minimize clogging (i.e.,
through the use of trash racks);
[4]
Have an emergency spillway to allow for the passage of
water without damage to the water quality structure for
storms greater than their largest design capacity;
[5]
Have side slopes at a no steeper than a four horizontal
to one vertical grade unless otherwise called for by the
Fairhaven Conservation Commission to minimize a
stormwater system's impact on wetland or bordering
wetland resource areas (Side slopes must be stabilized and
planted with vegetation to prevent erosion. A ten-foot wide
bench at 0% slope shall surround any permanent pool.);
and
[6]
Except for the sediment forebay, shall have no permanent
pool depth in excess of 2 1/2 feet.
[7]
All water quality stormwater systems shall be designed in
accordance with the runoff volume indicated in Subsection
A above. Runoff greater than this design criteria shall be
controlled using the peak discharge/volume control criteria in
Subsection A above.
(h)
Infiltration basins using redundant sediment removal
techniques (i.e., sediment forebay, grassed swale and filter
fabric) may be designed and utilized to act as stormwater
systems for both water quality and volume control, provided all
other standards and specifications are met.
(i)
Volume control structures shall not be placed upgradient of
any pollution stormwater system.
[1] Volume control shall be by infiltration;
Infiltration areas designed and constructed to control the
volume of runoff shall be located in areas with a NRCS
hydrological soil group of A, B or C;
[2]
Infiltration for volume control shall be designed and
constructed with the bottom of the infiltration area at or
above the maximum high groundwater elevation; and
[3]
(j)
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:225
The calculations to determine the size of the volume
control structure shall assume the surface of the structure
to be impervious;
[4]
Forebays.
All water quality basin/ponds shall have a sediment
forebay. These forebays shall:
[a] Consist of a separate cell;
Be sized to contain 0.25 inches per impervious acre of
contributing drainage;
[b]
Be less than a twelve-foot distance from the bank to
the center of the forebay;
[c]
[d] Be four feet deep; and
Have nonerosive exit velocities for the two-year
design storm.
[e]
[1]
If the water quality basin is to be deeded to the town,
the forebay shall be constructed to meet Board of Public
Works requirements.
[2]
The forebays may have a headwall depending on the Board
of Public Works recommendations.
[3]
(k)
Where stormwater basins are designed with a permanent pool
depth, a post-and-rail fence with pressure-treated or locust
posts, with a backing of plastic coated wire fencing shall be
used when the basin is in close proximity to residential units,
and shall further inhibit access by a planting of thick shrubs
such as rugosa rose (Rosa rugosa) surrounding the basin.
(l)
All water quality stormwater systems shall be designed to
accept a return storm of 0.5 inches off the impervious area 11
days after the water quality storm.
(m)
Conveyance of stormwater:
The entire drainage system of storm drainage lines shall
be capable of conveying the twenty-five-year storm,
including catch basins, manholes and culverts.
[1]
Water velocities in pipes and gutters shall be between two
and 10 feet per second. Water velocities in nonpaved areas
(e.g., swales, ditches) shall not be more than published
values for maximum permissible velocities based on
surface cover type and soil types.
[2]
Water velocities in catch basins shall not exceed 0.5 feet
per second. Catch basins shall be designed (inlet capacity
[3]
(n)
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:226
and spacing) such that the flow in the gutter during a
twenty-five-year design storm is not more than three feet
in width as calculated utilizing methodologies described in
"Drainage of Highway Pavements, Hydraulic Engineering
Circular No. 12" as published by the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration. In any event, water shall not be allowed to
run for more than 300 feet on paved surfaces.
Catch basins shall be constructed of at least six inches
precast reinforced concrete. Catch basin grates shall be in
the gutter to facilitate snow removal.
[4]
The standard depth of catch basins shall be a minimum
2.5 feet below the invert of the outlet. Manholes shall be
constructed at each junction point of storm drain lines.
Catch basins shall not serve as manholes.
[5]
Storm drains shall be of at least 12 inches diameter inside,
with at least 24 inches of cover, and shall be of reinforced
concrete Class IV pipe if having less than 48 inches of
cover within a street right-of-way. Aluminum pipe of at
least comparable strength may be substituted in
appropriate locations if approved by the Fairhaven Board
of Public Works (BPW). All drain pipes except subdrains
shall be reinforced concrete or ADS. Waivers from these
standards shall be allowed upon recommendation of the
Board of Public Works.
[6]
Easements and provisions for vehicular access shall be
provided along the entire length of storm drain lines.
[7]
Cross culverts.
Culverts and stormwater outlet structures shall have
reinforced concrete headwalls designed in accordance
with good practice.
[1]
At cross culverts (where a roadway bisects a stream or
manmade watercourse), drainage easements shall be
established upgradient of the culvert and delineated on
the definitive plan based on the projected one-hundredyear
headwater elevation.
[2]
(o)
Selecting a water quality BMP. Three designs for water quality
BMPs, micropool extended detention basins, wet extended
detention ponds, and infiltration basins are listed in Subsection
C(4), Specific standards and specifications below. One of these
BMPs may be appropriate for the site:
Micropool extended detention basins (EDB) with a forty-eighthour
detention time will not adequately remove bacteria. No
(a)
(3)
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:227
EDB proposed within 1,000 feet of a sensitive receptor for
bacteria shall be approved. In Fairhaven, these areas are:
[1] All coastal waters excluding inner New Bedford Harbor.
Zone 2 of public water supply wells at Mill Pond pumping
station.
[2]
Due to the high failure rate of conventional infiltration
practices (including porous pavement), they are not an
accepted method of stormwater management unless
redundant pretreatment for sediment removal is utilized. No
underground infiltration practices, such as leaching catch
basins, shall be allowed.
(b)
Oil/grit separators are not needed for the type of pollutants
associated with subdivisions. They shall not be approved for
residential subdivisions. Oil/grit separators may be required
for special permits granted by the Planning Board.
(c)
Other water quality BMPs may be approved, provided that the
pollutant removal rate meets or exceeds the requirements of
Subsection A above.
(d)
Specific standards and specifications for water quality BMP's.
Micropool extended detention basin (EDB). In order to provide
an estimated removal efficiency of 80% for suspended solids,
30% total phosphorus, and 15% total nitrogen, EDBs shall
be designed in accordance with Subsection C(1), Performance
standards and design specifications, plus the specific criteria
stated below. The design of EDBs shall include:
[1] Minimum contributing watershed area of 10 acres;
A minimum of forty-eight-hour detention time for the
water quality storm;
[2]
[3] A sediment forebay at the inlet;
A micropool located near the outlet structure to reduce
resuspension of sediments;
[4]
A minimum of 3:1 length to width ratio with the inlet
structure placed a maximum distance from the outlet
structure; and
[5]
The establishment of, and the methodology with which to
maintain, wetland vegetation on the bottom of the basin.
[6]
(a)
Wet extended detention ponds/basins (WP). The minimum
design criteria below plus Subsection C(1), Performance
standards and design specifications, will provide an estimated
removal efficiency of 80% for suspended solids, 65% total
(b)
(4)
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:228
phosphorus, and 40% total nitrogen. The design of WPs shall
include:
A minimum contributing watershed of 25 acres, or
measures to maintain a permanent pool of water;
[1]
A permanent pool volume within the permanent pool equal
to 40% of the water quality (first flush) volume;
[2]
A sediment forebay volume of 13% of the water quality
(first flush) volume;
[3]
An extended detention storage volume of 47% of the water
quality (first flush) volume;
[4]
A detention time for the water quality (first flush) volume
of 48 hours;
[5]
[6] A maximum depth of 2.5 feet;
A marsh component to be established along the pond
edges;
[7]
A minimum of 3:1 length to width ratio with the inlet
structure placed at a maximum distance from the outlet
structure.
[8]
Infiltration basin (IB). A design based on both the minimum
design criteria for IBs listed below and the design criteria
in Subsection C(1), Performance standards and design
specifications, will provide an estimated removal efficiency of
80% for suspended solids and 90% for bacteria. The design of
IBs shall include:
Three redundant pretreatment mechanisms (such as a
sediment forebay or detention pond) adequate to remove
and store 80% of the TSS.
[1]
[2] Adequate volume to infiltrate the first flush of runoff.
Compliance with the specifications found in the State of
Rhode Island Stormwater Design & Installation Manual,
September 1993, when not specified elsewhere in this
section.
Section 6.3(a), (b)(1)(2)(4), Site Suitability, utilizing
the Bristol County Soil Survey, or more recent
unpublished updates available at the NRCS office in
Wareham.
[a]
[b] Section 6.4 Infiltration Rates.
[c] Section 6.6 (a through i) Design Requirements.
[3]
(c)
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31.1
1:229
[d] Section 6.7(a)(1-11) Separation Distances.
Inspection and maintenance.
After the stormwater management system has been constructed
and before the performance guaranty for the development has been
released, the applicant shall submit an "as-built" plan detailing the
actual stormwater management system as installed. The consulting
engineer for the Town shall inspect the system to confirm its asbuilt
features. This engineer shall also evaluate the effectiveness
of the system in an actual storm. If the system is found to be
inadequate by virtue of physical evidence of operational failure,
even though it was built as called for in the definitive plan, it
shall be corrected before the performance guaranty is released.
Examples of inadequacy shall be considered but not limited to:
errors in the infiltrative capability, errors in the maximum
groundwater elevation, failure to properly define or construct flow
paths, or erosive discharges from basins. The cost of having the
town's consulting engineer review and evaluate the as-built plans
and the stormwater management system shall be borne by the
developer.
(1)
All stormwater management systems shall be maintained in
accordance with the following regulations.
The applicant shall submit 10 copies of a maintenance plan for
stormwater management. Maintenance plans for each basin
include a maintenance schedule, an outline of responsible
parties and owners, all pertinent agreements to be executed
to ensure proper maintenance and an estimate of future yearly
maintenance costs.
(a)
To facilitate maintenance, each water quality basin/pond shall
be constructed with:
Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to the
forebay;
[1]
A hardened bottom in the forebay made of stone or
concrete to make sediment removal easier; and
[2]
A fixed sediment depth marker installed in the forebay to
measure sediment deposition over time.
[3]
(b)
Routine maintenance and inspections shall conform to the
following:
Stormwater management systems shall be inspected
annually and cleared of debris, sediment and vegetation
when they affect the functioning and/or design capacity of
the facility;
[1]
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 198-31.1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-31.1
1:230
§ 198-32. Commercial camping. [Added 1-22-1977 STM by Art. 6]
Where lack of maintenance is causing or contributing to a
water quality problem, immediate action shall be taken by
the property owner to correct the problem within 14 days
of written notice by the Planning Board;
[2]
All actions required to maintain the stormwater
management system for the purpose it was designed and
constructed must be performed within 30 days following
the maintenance inspection;
[3]
Accumulated sediment shall be excavated as needed or at
the request of Planing Board; and
[4]
Any vegetation uprooted by sediment removal shall be
replaced.
[5]
To ensure future maintenance and avoid undue costs to the
town:
Each basin design shall have a design life of 20 years,
as documented in a peer review publication, third party
testing or other independent means.
[1]
The applicant shall provide cost estimates per year for
future maintenance of the stormwater conveyance and
detention/infiltration system. This cost estimate shall
include semiannual sediment removal from all catch
basins and street sweeping, and cleaning of sediment
forebays and detention ponds when necessary. The Board
of Public Works shall be required to approve all cost
estimates prior to Planning Board approval.
[2]
The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board
assurances that there is in place a mechanism such as a
bond, letter of credit, escrow account or similar security
to ensure the maintenance, inspection and repair of the
stormwater system for a period of at least 20 years.
[3]
(d)
Commercial camping is allowed only on special permit from the Zoning
Board of Appeals as provided in the Use Regulation Schedule, § 198-16,
and following approval by the Board of Health, and shall conform to the
following minimum requirements:
Parcel minimum area shall be 10 acres but not less than 2,500
square feet per rental plot.
(1)
Campers shall not be placed within 200 feet of a street line or
within 80 feet of any other lot line unless dense natural vegetation
or topography provide effective screening, in which case a
reduction to as little as half the above may be allowed.
(2)
A.
§ 198-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32
1:231
§ 198-32.1. Accessory dwelling units. [Added 5-8-1998 STM by Art.
28]
Purpose. For the purpose of promoting the development of affordable rental
housing, dwelling conversions may be allowed by special permit of the
Planning Board subject to the standards and conditions listed below:
§ 198-32.2. Docks and piers. [Added 5-7-2005 ATM by Art. 20]
Accessory services, including retailing and laundry services, may be
authorized by special permit, provided that such services do not
together total more than 50 square feet per campsite and are located
and oriented to principally serve occupants of the camping area.
B.
Dwelling conversions shall not be allowed unless the lot meets the
minimum lot size in § 198-18 or 22,500 square feet, whichever is
greater.
A.
Units created through dwelling conversions shall not be less than 1,000
square feet, not including areas of the basement, attic or garage.
B.
The applicant shall illustrate to the Planning Board that the
requirements of the State Building Code are met.
C.
Site requirements.
(1) No expansion to the existing structure.
(2) Parking shall be as provided for in § 198-27B(1).
No portion of the basement, attic or garage may be used for
dwelling purposes.
(3)
Use of an existing on-site septic system to service proposed units
shall be permitted only upon approval of the Board of Health.
(4)
D.
Purpose The purpose of this section is to protect the general public
interest in, and access to, the public tidelands of the Commonwealth by
creating a review process and standards for the construction of docks
and piers.
A.
Applicability. Any application to construct a dock and/or pier shall
comply with this section. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA) in the Rural Residence
Districts (RR), Single Residence Districts (RA), General Residence (RB)
and Agricultural (AG) Districts. The Planning Board shall be the SPGA
in the Apartment/Multi-Family (RC), Park (P), Wetland Resource
Protection District (WRP), Business (B), Mixed Use (MU) and Industrial
Districts (I). [Amended 5-6-2006 ATM by Art. 9]
B.
C. Requirements:
§ 198-32 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-32.2
1:232
It shall be demonstrated that the placement of a dock and/or pier
will not have an adverse impact on coastal ecology, recreational use
of adjoining waters, or the use and enjoyment of the waterfront by
adjoining property owners.
(1)
All proposed docks and/or piers shall be designed and stamped by
a registered engineer.
(2)
Dock and/or pier length:
The maximum length of any dock and/or pier including floats
outside of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers hurricane barrier
shall be 75 feet as measured from mean high water (MHW)
mark seaward.
(a)
The maximum length of any dock and/or pier including floats
inside of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers hurricane barrier
shall be the minimum length necessary to have a minimum of
2 1/2 feet of water at mean low water (MLW) at the end of the
dock and/or pier; however, the length shall not exceed 150 feet,
whichever is less.
(b)
(3)
No dock, pier, stairs or ramp shall exceed six feet in width,
measured outside the support structure (piling, posts or railing).
(4)
Setback for any dock and/or pier, and associated floats, shall be 25
feet to side property lines as measured along the shoreline.
(5)
Access. Lateral pedestrian passage shall be provided in the
intertidal zone or along the shore for fishing and fowling purposes.
(6)
Floating docks are permitted. The total area of any and all floats
associated with a dock and/or pier shall not exceed 300 square feet.
(7)
Two boats or vessels not over 30 feet in overall length shall be the
maximum number permitted on any dock and/or pier.
(8)
Depth of water. At MLW, there shall be minimum of two and one
half feet of water or sufficient navigable water for the proposed
vessel at the end of the dock, pier and/or float system.
(9)
Shellfish on site of any proposed dock and/or pier shall be removed,
replanted or replaced under supervision of the Shellfish Warden.
(10)
Conservation Commission approvals shall be required for the
construction of all docks and/or piers.
(11)
A building permit shall be required for the construction of a dock
and/or pier.
(12)
All necessary federal and state permits shall be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
(13)
§ 198-32.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32.2
1:233
§ 198-32.3. Temporary moratoria. [Added 5-6-2017 ATM by Art. 51]
Waiver of compliance. The SPGA having jurisdiction may, in special and
appropriate cases, grant a waiver to the above requirements when in
their judgment such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent
with the purpose and intent of the zoning bylaw.
D.
Temporary moratorium on the sale and distribution of recreational
marijuana.
Purpose:
By vote at the state election on November 8, 2016, the voters
of the commonwealth approved a law regulating the
cultivation, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for
recreational purposes. The law provides that it is effective
on December 15, 2016, and the Cannabis Advisory Board is
required to issue regulations regarding implementation by
September 15, 2017.
(a)
Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers are not permitted uses
in the Town. Regulations promulgated by the State Cannabis
Advisory Board are expected to provide guidance to the Town
in regulating recreational marijuana establishments and
marijuana retailers. Further, the ballot measure establishes
two important provisions that require action by the Town prior
to the adoption of zoning. First, the Town must determine
whether, and to what extent, it will exercise local control over
recreational marijuana establishments and marijuana retailers
and second, by ballot that cannot occur prior to November
6, 2018, the next biennial state election, on whether to allow
on-site consumption of marijuana products should the Town
decide to allow licenses for such facilities.
(b)
The regulation of recreational marijuana establishments and
marijuana retailers raise novel and complex legal, planning,
and public safety issues and the Town needs time to study
and consider the regulation of recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers and address such novel
and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact
of the state regulations on local zoning and to undertake a
planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw
regarding the regulation of recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers and other uses related
to the regulation of recreational marijuana. The Town intends
to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and
structures in the Town for recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers so as to allow the Town
sufficient time to engage in a planning process to address the
effects of such structures and uses in the Town and to adopt
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 198-32.2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-32.3
1:234
provisions of the Zoning Bylaw in a manner consistent with
sound land use planning goals and objectives.
Definitions.
MANUFACTURE — To compound, blend, extract, infuse or
otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Equipment, products, devices or
materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana
into the human body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate,
process and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana
establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator,
marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer,
marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related
business.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed
to obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and
marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products
to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana and
marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not to
consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Products that have been manufactured
and contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including
concentrated forms of marijuana and projects composed of
marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or
consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical
products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to purchase and
deliver marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana
establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana
and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to
consumers.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — An entity licensed to test
marijuana and marijuana products, including certification for
potency and the presence of contaminants.
(2)
Temporary moratorium. For the reasons set forth above and
notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the
contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the
use of land or structures for recreational marijuana establishments
(3)
§ 198-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32.3
1:235
and marijuana retailers. The moratorium shall be in effect through
no later than December 31, 2018. During the moratorium period,
the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the
potential impacts of recreation marijuana in the Town, consider
the Cannabis Advisory Board regulations regarding recreational
marijuana establishments and marijuana retailers and related uses,
determine whether, and to what extent, the Town shall exercise
local control over recreational marijuana establishments and
marijuana retailers and shall consider adopting new provisions
of the Zoning Bylaw to address the impact and operation of
recreational marijuana establishments and marijuana retailers and
related uses.
Severability. The provisions of this bylaw are severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this bylaw or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this bylaw.
(4)
§ 198-32.3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-32.3
1:236
ARTICLE IV
Definitions
§ 198-33. Definitions and word use.
Words used in the present tense include the future, and the plural
includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is intended
to be mandatory; "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though
followed by the words" or intended, arranged or designed to be used
or occupied." The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual.
A.
In this chapter, the following terms, unless a contrary meaning is
required by the context or is specifically prescribed, shall have the
following meanings:
ABANDONED SIGN — Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure
which remains without a message or whose display surface remains
blank for a period of two years or more, or any sign which pertains to a
time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have
been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily
suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such
business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains
vacant for a period of two years or more. Any sign remaining after
demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Signs which are present because of being legally established
nonconforming signs or signs which have required a conditional use
permit or a variance shall also be subject to the definition of abandoned
sign.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ABANDONMENT — Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning, the facility shall be considered abandoned when the
facility fails to operate for more than one year without the written
consent of the special permit granting authority.[Added 5-4-2013
ATM by Art. 19]
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building or of the land
and which is located on the same lot with the principal buildings or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to that of the
principal building or use of land and located on the same lot as such
principal building or use.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL — The background A-weighted sound level
that is exceeded 90% of the time.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
B.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:237
ANIMAL KENNEL OR HOSPITAL — A structure used for the harboring
and/or care of more than three dogs that are more than six months old,
whether commercially or not.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A residential development subject
to certification under MGL c. 19D, which provides room and board;
provides assistance with activities of daily living for three or more adult
residents who are not related by consanguinity or affinity (i.e., by blood
or marriage) to their care provider; and collects payments or third party
reimbursement from or on behalf of residents to pay for the provision
of assistance. Dwelling units in assisted living residences shall not be
considered multifamily or garden apartment units.[Added 5-8-1998
ATM by Art. 19]
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL - dB(A) — A measurement of sound
pressure level, which has been filtered or weighted to progressively deemphasize
the importance of frequency components below 1,000 Hz
and above 5,000 Hz. This range corresponds to the human speech band
and reflects that human hearing is more sensitive to the mid-range
frequencies within this range than the frequencies below and above this
range.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
AWNING — A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass,
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a
decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of
a structure over a window, walk, door or the like.24[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
AWNING SIGN — A building sign or graphic printed on or in some
fashion attached directly to the awning material.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
BALLOON SIGN — A temporary sign consisting of a bag made of
lightweight material supported by helium, hot or pressurized air which
is greater than 24 inches in diameter.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
BANNER — Any temporary sign, painted, printed or otherwise
displayed on cloth, plastic film or similar material other than a
canopy.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
BEAUTY PARLOR — Includes hairstyling, facials, manicures nail
sculpting and similar personal grooming services.[Added 12-10-1992
STM by Art. 1]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — A private, owner-occupied house
where three or fewer rooms are let, an individual's stay is not more than
three consecutive nights and a breakfast is included in the rent.[Added
5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 26]
24.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:238
BEDROOM — Any inhabitable room in a dwelling, other than a living
room, dining room, kitchen, utility room or bathroom, if such room
exceeds 60 square feet. Any dwelling unit in which no such room exists
shall be construed to contain one "bedroom."25[Added 3-15-1973
ATM by Art. 78]
BMP's — Best management practices are structural, nonstructural and
managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective
and practical means to prevent and/or reduce nonpoint source
pollution.[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
BOAT — Any vessel or motor craft moved by oars, paddles, sails or
other power mechanism inboard or outboard, or any other vessel or
structure floating upon the water whether or not capable of selflocomotion.[
Added 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 19]
BOATYARD — Premises for construction, major repair, servicing or
onshore storage of boats.[Added 3-18-1967 STM by Art. 6]
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT —
BUILDING — Any structure, whether portable or fixed, having a roof
supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing,
or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or
materials of any kind, including, but not limited to principal buildings,
garages, sheds, porches, decks, stairways, chimneys, bulkheads, mobile
homes, trailers, storage containers and any other item designed or
used for similar purposes.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1;
2-11-2004 STM by Art. 14]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the horizontal area of a
lot measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the
ground floor of all buildings and proposed principal and accessory
buildings.[Amended 2-11-2004 STM by Art. 14]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average finished
grade of the adjacent ground to the top of the highest point of the
roof, parapet, chimney, antenna or other attached structure. Chimneys,
antenna and other normally incidental like structures to a single- or
A specified place or premises that has been granted a permit by the
Board of Health, whether public or private, where practices of body
art are performed, whether or not for profit.
(1)
"Body art" means the practice of physical body adornment by
permitted establishments and practitioners using, but not limited
to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic
tattooing, branding and scarification. This definition does not
include practices that are considered medical procedures by the
Board of Registration in Medicine, such as implants under the skin,
which procedures are prohibited.
(2)
25.Editor's Note: The former definition of "boardinghouse," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 57.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:239
two-family dwelling shall be exempt from the above
requirements.[Added 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
BUILDING MARKER — Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings
and date of erection.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached or supported by any structure
used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
BULK STORAGE — Exposed outside storage of sand, lumber, coal
or other bulk materials, and bulk storage of liquids in tanks, except
underground, as an accessory use.
BUSINESS OFFICES — Facility for the transaction of business
exclusive of the receipt, retail sale or processing of merchandise.
CAMPER — A portable dwelling eligible to be registered and insured
for highway use, designed to be used for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, but not for permanent residence; includes equipment
commonly called travel trailers, pickup coaches or campers, motorized
campers and tent trailers, but not mobile homes.[Added 3-22-1969
ATM by Art. 56]
CAMPING, COMMERCIAL — Premises used for camping, tenting or
temporary overnight facilities of any kind where a fee is charged.
CAMPING, SUPERVISED — Facilities operated on a seasonal basis for
a continuing supervised recreational, health educational, religious and/
or athletic program, with persons enrolled for periods of not less than
one week.
CANOPY — A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on
a support, which provides shelter over a doorway.26[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy,
made of fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door or
entrance. A canopy sign is not a marquee and is different from service
area canopy signs.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
CLUB — Premises or building of a nonprofit organization exclusively
servicing members and their guests for recreational, athletic or civic
purposes, but not including any vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities, except as required generally for golf clubs or
sportsman's clubs, as elsewhere defined, or "clubs" or organizations
whose chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the premises
on which construction is taking place, during the period of such
construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers,
landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and/or the
26.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:240
owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar individuals or firms
having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
CONTIGUOUS UPLAND AREA — Contiguous land other than land
classified under the Wetlands Protection Act as freshwater wetland,
coastal wetland, beach, flat, marsh or swamp and land under any water
bodies such as ocean, creek, river, stream, brook, pond or lake.[Added
11-6-1997 STM by Art. 19]
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Premises used by a building contractor or
subcontractor for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of
subassemblies and parking of wheeled equipment.
CREMATION — The technical heating process that reduces human
remains to bone fragments.[Added 5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 17]
CREMATORIUM — A building within which cremations occurs.[Added
5-6-1998 ATM by Art. 17]
DECIBEL (dB) — The measurement of a sound pressure relative to the
logarithmic conversion of the sound pressure reference level often set
as zero dB(A). In general, this means the quietest sound humans can
hear is near zero dB(A) and the loudest humans can hear without pain
is near 120 dB(A).[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
DOCK OR PIER, PRIVATE — Any structure, floating or fixed, attached
or adjacent to land, and placed in or and extending into coastal inland
waters (in the case of tidal waters, seaward of the mean high tide
line) which is restricted to waterfront owners for their private use and
is designed, or is suitable for access to vessels, for swimming or any
other similar purpose.[Added 5-9-1989 ATM by Art. 19; amended
4-7-2005 ATM by Art. 20]
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING CONVERSION — Alteration of a single-family dwelling
existing prior to January 1, 1940, to accommodate more families than
the number for which it was used or designed at the adoption of
this provision; in any event not to exceed the provisions of
§ 198-32.1.[Amended 5-8-1998 STM by Art. 28]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure occupied by three or more
families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — Two single-family dwelling units
separated by a fire-resisting division wall or partition with no openings,
constructed with noncombustible finish on both faces and with a solid
fill of noncombustible material between the structural members of the
wall or partition.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building occupied by a single family
and having no parting walls or walls in common with an adjacent
structure.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:241
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed for two
families.
DWELLING UNIT — Quarters for a single family.
EARTH REMOVAL — Extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil or other earth
for sale or for use at a site removed from the place of extraction,
exclusive of the grading of a lot preparatory to the construction of a
building for which a building permit has been issued or grading of
streets in accordance with an approved definitive plan.
ELEVATION — The view of the side, front or rear of a given
structure.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon or conduct any
physical development of the premises required for a building. To
excavate, fill, drain and like preparation for building shall also be
considered "to erect."
EXTENDED DETENTION POND — An enhanced detention pond that
provides both flood control and treatment of the first flush of
stormwater runoff. Storage time for the first flush is a minimum of 48
hours.[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
FACADE-MOUNT ANTENNAS — One or more antennas or panels
mounted on the facade of an existing building or structure, including
accessory equipment and cables, if any, which facilitate the provision or
wireless telecommunications services.[Added 11-6-1997 STM by Art.
20]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together on the
premises as a single housekeeping unit.
FARM WITHOUT LIVESTOCK — Premises containing at least five acres
which are used for gain in raising of agricultural products, including
necessary farm structures and equipment. "Without livestock" means
having no fur-bearing animals, hogs or animals for hire; no more than
one horse, cow, goat or sheep; and no more than 10 poultry.[Added
3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 57]
FIRST FLUSH — The volume generated by the first 1.25 inches of
stormwater runoff. This first 1.25 inches of runoff carries the majority
of accumulated pollutants from impervious surfaces. The first flush
treatment volume in cubic feet (Vt) is determined by the following
formula:[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
Vt = (1.25/12 inches)(Rv)(Site Area in square feet)
Where:
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I)
I = the % impervious area. Impervious area is defined as any manmade
cover that is not vegetated. In residential areas, the % impervious is
obtained from the TR-55 Table Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas,
Residential District by Average Lot Size.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:242
FLAG — Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end
of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the
material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors,
patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia or other symbolic devices.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
FLASHING SIGN — A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which
exhibits changing light or color effect by any means so as to provide
intermittent illumination which includes the illusion of intermittent
flashing light by means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which
resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling; does not include electronic
message signs displaying text.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the
several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same
lot, including the area of the basement not more than 50% below
grade, roofed porches and roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be
measured between exterior faces of the walls, with no deductions for
hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, or other
features.[Amended 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 7]
FLOOR AREA, NET — The actual occupied area not including accessory
unoccupied areas such as but not limited to hallways, stairs, atriums,
closets, or thickness of walls.[Added 6-8-2002 ATM by Art. 7]
FOREBAY — A storage area provided near a BMP inlet to trap incoming
sediments before they accumulate in a basin/pond BMP.[Added
5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not attached or part of any building,
but separate and affixed in or upon the ground.[Added 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 29]
GAME PRESERVE — Premises used for hunting for a fee.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area or other
premises or portion thereof used for the retail dispensing or sales
of vehicular fuels, whether as the principal or accessory use.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
GOLF COURSE — An unlighted area of at least 30 acres with nine
or more standard holes and customary accessory buildings. Other golf
facilities with less acreage or lighted facilities shall be considered as
outdoor commercial recreation.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art.
1]
GRADE — Construed to be the final ground elevation after construction.
Earth-mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part of
the final grade for sign height computation.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
HALO LIGHTING — Light showing from the back of or from within
a letter or graphic shape out towards the surface that the letter or
graphic is mounted on without having any light visible through the face
of the letter or graphic.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:243
HEIGHT — The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade
to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height.
This measure is also commonly referred to as the "maximum tip height
(MTH)."[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The height of the sign shall be computed as the
vertical distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top
of the highest attached component of the sign.[Added 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 29]
HISTORIC OR COMMEMORATIVE PLAQUE — Any building sign
indicating the name of a building, the date of erection and incidental
information about its construction.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
HOME IMPROVEMENT SIGN — Any temporary sign which identifies
and announces the construction company responsible for the home
improvement of the property.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or profession conducted in part or
in whole in a residence by a resident thereof.[Added 3-25-1967 ATM
by Art. 55]
HOSPITAL — Facility for the care and treatment of patients as licensed
by the Massachusetts Department of Health.27
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A soil characterization classification
system defined by the United States Soil Conservation Service. Soils
within the same group have the same runoff potential under similar
storm and cover conditions.[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign which is used to distinguish a site
as determined by the owner or agent of the site.[Added 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 29]
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which contains an element designed
to emanate artificial light internally or externally.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
IMPERVIOUS AREA — The portion of the site that is covered by
material that does not allow surface water to penetrate into the
soil.[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION — An internally illuminated graphic is one
with the light source concealed or contained within the graphic itself
and which becomes visible in darkness by shining through a
surface.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The Town of Fairhaven Building
Commissioner or other person designated by the Fairhaven Board of
Selectmen.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
JUNK — Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out,
cast off or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been
27.Editor's Note: The former definition of "hotel," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted 4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 57.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:244
collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Any article or material
which unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can
be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be
considered "junk."
JUNKYARD — The use of any lot, whether inside or outside a building
for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or scrap or discarded
materials, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobile(s) or other vehicle(s), boats or machinery, or parts thereof.
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY
FACILITIES SPEF — A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally or
ballast mounted on the ground and has a minimum nameplate capacity
of 250 kW (AC), which is designed to supply all of its electrical output
for use off site.[Added 5-4-2013 STM by Art. 8]
LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign and its
support structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this
chapter which fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter. A
sign which was erected in accordance with a variance granted prior
to the adoption of this chapter and which does not comply with this
chapter shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming sign. A sign which
was unlawfully erected shall be deemed to be an illegal sign.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — The keeping and maintenance of motor
vehicles for hire.[Added 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
LINEAL BUILDING FRONTAGE — The length of a ground level straight
line or lines parallel to and equaling the length of the building front that
includes the main public entrances, the side of the building fronting
on the principal roadway. In the case of a multi-unit development,
the frontage of each separate building is additive for the purpose of
determining permissible sign area.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
LIVESTOCK RAISING — The keeping or raising of any fur-bearing
animals, hogs or animals for hire or horses cows, goats, sheep or
poultry.[Added 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 57; amended 5-14-1977
ATM by Art. 42]
LOT — A continuous parcel of land with legally definable boundaries.
LOT, CORNER — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at
the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting a curved street shall
be considered a "corner lot" if the tangents to the curve at the point of
intersection of the front lot line and each side lot line form an interior
angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the horizontal area of a lot
which is covered or proposed to be covered, by impervious materials
(for example, concrete, bituminous asphalt, oil and stone and the like),
including but not limited to buildings, driveways, parking areas,
walkways, tennis courts, swimming pools (above or below ground),
hot tubs, uncovered patios, freestanding decks not used for access
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:245
and egress to a building or other similar surfaces, but not including
materials naturally occurring on site (for example, preexisting stone or
ledge) and not include living plant materials. All surfaces constructed of
permeable materials (for example, gravel, pea-stone and the like) shall
be excluded from the calculation of lot coverage.[Added 2-11-2004
STM by Art. 14]
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot fronting upon a street or public
way, to be measured continuously along one street line between its side
lot lines and their intersection with the street line.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
MANSARD AND PARAPET SIGNS — A sign permanently affixed to a
wall or surface designed to protect the edge of a roof.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
MANUFACTURING — Fabrication, assembly, finishing, packaging,
processing or research, including the processing or preparation of food,
but not including the processing or preparation of food for individual
service:[Amended 5-5-1990 ATM by Art. 9]
MARIJUANA — The same substance defined as "marihuana" under
the provisions of MGL c. 94C, as amended from time to time.[Added
2-12-2014 STM by Art. 8]
MARIJUANA FOR MEDICAL USE — Marijuana that is designated and
restricted for use by, and for the benefit of, qualifying patients in
the treatment of debilitating medical conditions as set forth in the
provisions of MGL c. 94C, as amended from time to time.[Added
2-12-2014 STM by Art. 8]
MARINA — Facilities and operations to accommodate as principal
use:[Added 3-18-1967 STM by Art. 6]
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond
a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a
(1) For consumption on the premises;
For sale and delivery on the premises to the consumer for
preparation or consumption off the premises; or
(2)
For sale and delivery by the processor or the preparer off the
premises to the consumer for consumption at the point of delivery.
(3)
(1) Landing, launching and mooring of boats.
Minor repairs and servicing of boats and equipment only while
afloat and to accommodate as accessory uses to the above only.
(2)
Retail sale at dockside of boat supplies and of accessories and bait
displayed and sold only within a building.
(3)
(4) Renting of boats, accessories and fishing tackle.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:246
building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection
from the weather.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign painted on, attached to or consisting of
interchangeable letters on the face of a permanent overhanging shelter
which projects from the face of a building.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY — A "medical marijuana treatment
center" to mean a not-for-profit entity, as defined by Massachusetts
law only, registered under this law, that acquires, cultivates, possesses,
processes (including development of related products such as food,
tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing
marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying
patients or their personal caregivers. These facilities shall be located
inside a structure or building.[Added 2-12-2014 STM by Art. 8]
MESSAGE CENTER — A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the
face or the surface of the sign. A message center sign may be either
electronically or manually changed, provided that no moving letter
signs in which the letters change more often than once per hour, except
for time or temperature shall be permitted.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
METEOROLOGICAL (MET) TOWER — A group of instruments
(including anemometers and wind vanes) that collectively measure
various meteorological parameters such as wind speed, wind direction,
and temperature at various heights above the ground.[Added
5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable dwelling built on a chassis,
connected to utilities and designed without necessity of a permanent
foundation for year-round living.[Added 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56]
MOTEL or HOTEL — A building or group of buildings providing
accommodations for compensation on a transient basis, but not meeting
the definition of "nonfamily accommodations." Accommodations having
individual kitchen facilities (two or more of the following: stove,
refrigerator, sink) shall be considered dwelling units.[Added
4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 57]
MULTIPLE TENANT SITE — Any site which has more than one tenant,
and each tenant has a separate ground level exterior public
entrance.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
MUNICIPAL USE — Premises used for any operation by the Town
government, except as elsewhere more specifically defined.
MURAL — A work of graphic art painted or applied to a building wall(s)
which contains no advertising or logos.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:247
NACELLE — The enclosure located at the top of a wind turbine tower
that houses the gearbox, generator and other equipment.[Added
5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 19]
NAME PLATE — Any sign which designates the name, using plates, of
the person(s) occupying the premises.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN — A permanent sign designed to identify a
residential subdivision.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND OR BUILDING — A building or land
lawfully occupied at the time of adoption of this chapter and of any
amendments thereto by a use that does not conform to the adopted
regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NONFAMILY ACCOMMODATIONS — Boardinghouses, lodging houses,
guesthouses, tourist homes, dormitories or similar accommodations.
Accommodations shall be considered hotels or motels if having a sign in
excess of two square feet or other departure from residential character
or if having a specified term of residence of less than one week, except
where there is a resident family on the premises and accommodations
for fewer than 10 nonresidents. Accommodations having individual
kitchen facilities (two or more of the following: stove, refrigerator, sink)
shall be considered dwelling units.[Added 4-16-1975 ATM by Art.
57]
NURSING, CONVALESCENT OR REST HOME — Premises for the care
of three or more persons as licensed by the Massachusetts Department
of Public Health.
OFFICIAL SIGNS AND NOTICES — A sign erected and maintained
within the public right-of-way, to indicate to the traveling public the
route and distance to public accommodations, facilities, commercial
services and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational,
educational or religious interest. Such signs shall conform to all
applicable state regulations regarding the placement of signs in public
rights-of-way, and all traffic control signs shall be consistent with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign unrelated to a business or a profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the
premises where such sign is located.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
ON-SITE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY FACILITIES SPEF — A
solar photovoltaic system that is structurally or ballast mounted on the
ground at a location where other uses of the underlying property occur
and the electrical output is primarily for use on site.[Added 5-4-2013
STM by Art. 8]
OPAQUE SIGN FACE — The nontransparent face for an internally
illuminated sign. Illumination shall be emitted only for the name,
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:248
trademark, logo, distinctive symbol or other similar device, thing or text
used to identify a particular business, institution, activity, place, person,
product or service.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
OPEN SPACE — Unoccupied space free of all structures, parking,
pavement or other conditions precluding landscaping, maintained with
grass or other plant material.
PARAPET (WALL) — That portion of a building wall that rises above the
roof level.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PARKING SPACE — Space adequate to park a standard automobile,
plus means of access. Marked spaces shall be not less than nine feet by
20 feet. Where spaces are not marked, each space shall be assumed to
require 350 square feet.[Added 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56]
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow during a storm, usually
in reference to a specific design storm event (i.e., two-year, ten-year,
twenty-five-year, one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event).[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
PERMANENT SIGN — A nontemporary sign designed and intended for
long-term use.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION — An endowed or charitably
supported nonprofit religious or nonsectarian activity maintained for
public or semipublic use.
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN — A temporary sign used in connection
with a local, state or national election or referendum.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign posted by a person or group promoting
a political issue, commenting on issues or promoting opinions.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PORCH, COVERED — Part of a structure having a roof and floor, either
with or without enclosing walls or windows.
PORTABLE BILLBOARD SIGN — Any sign which is manifestly designed
to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even
though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining
chassis or support is converted to an A- or T-frame sign or attached
temporarily or permanently to the ground since this characteristic is
based on the design of such a sign.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PRICE SIGN — A permanently mounted sign displaying the retailing
cost of gasoline on the premises of a service station.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal primary
use of the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may
have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages and
other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal
buildings.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:249
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall
in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than 16 inches
beyond the surface or such building or wall face.28[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
PROMOTIONAL SALE SIGN — A temporary banner promoting
products, goods or services.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PROPERTY OWNER — Legal owner of property as officially recorded by
Bristol County.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PUBLIC BUILDING — A nonresidential building, owned by any
governmental agency, which is primarily used for governmental
purposes.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PUBLIC NOTICES — Official notices posted by public officers,
employees or their agents in the performance of their duties, or as
directed by such officers, employees or agents.[Added 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 29]
PUBLIC STREET LINE — A line demarcated by the nearest edge of
pavement for a paved street.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way for a public
street.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
PUBLIC UTILITY — Utility licensed by the Department of Public Works.
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE AREA — An area used by a utility for bulk
storage, exposed equipment or truck parking.
PUBLIC UTILITY SIGNS — Warning signs, notices or markers which are
customarily erected and maintained by public or privately owned public
utilities as essential to their operations.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
PUMP ISLAND SIGN — Any sign either affixed directly to a gasoline
pump or otherwise attached to the pump or pump island.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY (SPEF) — The maximum rated output
of electric power production of the photovoltaic system in direct
current (AC).[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 8]
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY (WEF) — The maximum rated output of
electric power production equipment. This output is typically specified
by the manufacturer with a nameplate attached on the
equipment.[Added 5-4-2013 STM by Art. 19]
RADIO TRANSMISSION — Premises used for the commercial
transmission of radio or television, not including studios.
28.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:250
REAL ESTATE SIGN — Any temporary sign which announces the sale,
rental or lease of property by the owner or real estate company.[Added
5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
RECREATION, INDOOR COMMERCIAL — Theater, bowling alley, video/
pinball arcade, roller-skating rink, ice-skating rink or other commercial
recreation or entertainment carried on wholly in an enclosed
building.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
RECREATION, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL — Drive-in theater, golf
driving range, miniature golf course, pitch and putt, skateboard park,
bathing beach or other commercial recreation activities not more
specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter.[Amended 12-10-1992
STM by Art. 1]
REPRESENTATIONAL SIGN — A three-dimensional sign built so as to
physically represent the object advertised.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ROADSIDE STAND, PERMANENT — A structure open to the weather
left in place year round, used for seasonal sale of raw produce, the
major portion of which is raised on the premises.
ROADSIDE STAND, TEMPORARY — A structure as above, but removed
for not less than six months out of the year.
ROOF — The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top
of a building or structure, the structural make-up of which conforms to
the roof structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of the
Uniform Building Code.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ROOF LINE — The uppermost edge of the roof or, in the case of
an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost height of said
facade.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above
the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the highest portion of the roof.29[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any building sign erected or constructed as
an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any
design so that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest
portion of the roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the
rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.30[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
29.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
30.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:251
ROTATING SIGN — A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an
axis.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SCHOOL, NURSERY — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two to five years of age,
inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
SCHOOL, OTHER COMMERCIAL — An educational facility, other than
a nursery school or those covered by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
SCHOOL, OTHER — An educational institution which is religious,
sectarian, denominational or public.
SCHOOL, PRESCHOOL — Includes child-care facility, preschool and
school-age child-care facility.[Added 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
SERVICE AREA CANOPY — Any structural protective cover that is not
enclosed on any of its four sides and is provided for the service area
designated for the dispensing or installation of gasoline, oil, antifreeze,
headlights, wiper blades and other similar products and the
performance of minor services for customers as related to said
dispensing or installation.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SERVICE AREA CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is part of or attached to
the service area canopy.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SHADOW FLICKER — The moving shadows cast by rotating wind
turbine blades that cause a flickering effect.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by
Art. 19]
SHIMMERING SIGNS — A sign which reflects an oscillating, sometimes
distorted, visual image.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SIGN — Any structure, fixture, placard, announcement, declaration,
device, demonstration or insignia used for direction, information,
identification or to advertise or promote any business, product, goods,
activity, services or any interests.[Added 3-25-1967 by Art. 56;
amended 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 2931]
SIGN FACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through which
the message of the sign is exhibited.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art.
29]
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure including the supports, uprights,
bracing and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any
sign.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SIGN SURFACE AREA — As computed in § 198-26F.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
SITE — A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots
or parcels of land, which are intended, designated and/or approved to
function as an integrated unit.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
31.Editor's Note: This article also repealed the definitions of "sign, accessory," "sign, area of"
and "sign, nonaccessory" which immediately followed this definition.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:252
SPANDREL — A roof-like structure that covers the gasoline pump
dispenser below a service area canopy and which is a lighting source
for the dispensing area, serves to identify the gasoline pumps by
numerical designation and may display signage.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
SPANDREL SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to the
spandrel.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
SPORTSMAN'S CLUB — A club whose primary purpose is conservation,
hunting or fishing.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building in which two or more horses are kept
for remuneration, hire or sale.
STREET — Either a public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies
is maintained and used as public way or a way shown on a plan
therefore approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law,32
or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in Fairhaven, having in the opinion of the Planning Board
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction in relation
to the proposed use of land abutting thereon or served thereby, and
for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the
building erected or to be erected thereon. Interstate Route 195 shall
not be considered a "street" for the purpose of determining whether a
yard constitutes a front yard.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing
grade of the street shall be taken at "street grade."
STRINGER — A line of string, rope, cording or an equivalent to which
is attached a number of pennants.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground, or attached to something located on
the ground, except a boundary wall or fence.
SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE — Such evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.[Added 5-4-2013
ATM by Art. 19]
SURFACE WATER QUALITY CLASSIFICATIONS — Waters designated
for protection under 314 CMR 4.04 (2).[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art.
9]
SUSPENDED SIGN — Any building sign that is suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface and is connected to this
surface.33[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
32.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
33.Editor's Note: This definition also includes a drawing which helps illustrate its provisions.
Said drawing is on file in the Town Clerk's office and may be examined there during
regular office hours.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:253
SWIMMING POOL — Any constructed pool, located above or below the
ground, whether portable or fixed, used or capable of being used for
swimming, wading or bathing purposes. Pools having a depth of four
feet or more and having a capacity of 400 cubic feet or more in volume
shall be considered structures.[Added 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 57]
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign or sign structure which is not
permanently affixed or installed and is intended to be displayed for a
limited period only. Examples of such signs include, but are not limited
to, the following: real estate, construction, special event, political,
garage sale, home improvement/remodeling, model home and seasonal
(holiday) signs, banners and portable billboard signs.[Added 5-2-1998
STM by Art. 29]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES — An accessory tent or construction
shanty to be used for less than one year.34
TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE — The maximum permitted combined area of all
on-premise signs allowed on a specific property.[Added 5-2-1998 STM
by Art. 29]
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL — Premises for the parking and/or
servicing of commercial vehicles.
TR-20 — A NRCS hydrology procedure for complex watersheds. The
computer program calculates runoff volumes, peak discharges and
hydrographs at various locations in the watershed. Design storms and
actual rainfall events can be analyzed.[Added 5-1-1999 ATM by Art.
9]
TR-55 — Presents simplified hydrology procedures to calculate runoff
volumes and peak discharge in small watersheds. It is based on TR-20
hydrology procedures and actual TR-20 computer runs.[Added
5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 9]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
UTILITY TRAILER — A towed vehicle for transportation of goods or
animals but not intended for human occupancy.[Added 3-22-1969
ATM by Art. 56]
VISIBLE — Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity
(whether legible or not) without visual aid.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by
Art. 29]
WALL — Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts
of a building or structure and which has a slope of 60° or greater with
the horizontal plane.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
34.Editor's Note: The former definition of "tourist home," which immediately followed this
definition, as added 3-25-1967 ATM by Art. 57, was deleted 4-16-1975 ATM by Art. 57. The
former definitions of "trailer" and "trailer park" were deleted 3-22-1969 ATM by Art. 56.
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:254
WALL SIGN — Any building sign attached parallel to, but within 16
inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which
is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign
surface.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
WAREHOUSE — Indoor storage of goods for distribution but not for
sale on the premises.
WHOLESALING — Sale of commodities in quantity for resale or further
processing.
WIND ENERGY FACILTY (WEF) — All equipment, machinery and
structures utilized in connection with wind-generated energy
production and generation, including related transmission, distribution,
collection, storage or supply systems whether underground, on the
surface, or overhead and other equipment or byproducts in connection
therewith and the sale of the energy produced thereby, including, but
not limited to, wind turbine (rotor, electrical generator and tower),
anemometers (wind measuring equipment), transformers, substation,
power lines, control and maintenance facilities, site access and service
roads.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by Art. 1935]
WIND ENERGY FACILTY (WEF) - BUILDING INTEGRATED — A WEF
shall be considered to be building integrated if it is designed to be
permanently mounted on a building or other inhabitable structure. This
definition applies to wind turbines of any capacity that are designed
to be operated in direct contact with a building. This definition also
covers, for the purposes of this zoning provision, other wind energy
facilities primarily used for land-based applications which may be
permanently mounted and operated on a building.[Added 5-4-2013
ATM by Art. 19]
WIND ENERGY FACILTY (WEF) - ON-SITE — A WEF that will generate
electricity to provide for the on-site load and may be grid-tied with a
total rated nameplate capacity not to exceed 200kW.[Added 5-4-2013
ATM by Art. 19]
WIND ENERGY FACILTY (WEF) - SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM —
All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with
the conversion of kinetic energy of wind into electrical power. This
includes, but is not limited to, storage, electrical collection and supply
equipment, and one or more wind turbines, which have a total rated
nameplate capacity of not more than 10kW.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by
Art. 19]
WIND ENERGY FACILTY (WEF) - UTILITY SCALE — A commercial
WEF, where the primary use of the facility is electrical generation to
be sold to the wholesale electricity markets.[Added 5-4-2013 ATM by
Art. 19]
35.Editor's Note: This article also repealed the former definitions of "wind facility," "wind
facility, commercial," "wind facility, municipal" and "wind facility, noncommercial," added
5-1-2004 STM by Art. 11.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-33
1:255
WINDOW SIGN — Any building sign, pictures, symbol or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity,
business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a
window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the
exterior of the window.[Added 5-2-1998 STM by Art. 29]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — A freestanding tower or
monopole, or an antenna array attached to the roof or highest point
of an existing building or structure, including accessory antennas,
structures, cables and equipment, if any, which facilitate the provision
of wireless communication services.[Added 11-6-1997 STM by Art.
20]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES — The provision of the
following types of services: cellular telephone service, personal
communications and enhanced specialized mobile radio
service.[Added 11-6-1997 STM by Art. 20]
YARD — A unoccupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with the
building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — The required open unoccupied space within the lot
extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line
and the minimum district "front yard" requirement. Eaves and stairs
are exempt from this requirement.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by
Art. 1]
YARD, REAR — The required open unoccupied space within the lot
extending the full with of the lot and located between the rear line of
the lot and the minimum district "rear yard" requirement. Eaves and
stairs are exempt from this requirement.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM
by Art. 1]
YARD, SIDE — The required open unoccupied space extending from the
side lot line the full width of the minimum district side lot requirement
and located between the minimum district front and rear yard
requirement. Eaves and stairs are exempt from this
requirement.[Amended 12-10-1992 STM by Art. 1]
§ 198-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 198-33
1:256
Division 2, Board of Selectmen
Chapter 204
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 83.
§ 204-1. Applicability of rules and regulations.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
The sale and delivery of alcohol and alcoholic beverages in the Town
of Fairhaven by holders of licenses issued pursuant to MGL c. 138
is subject to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, the rules
and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission (or any
succeeding authority) and these rules and regulations, all as may be
amended from time to time. It is the responsibility of each holder of
a license issued under MGL c. 138 to be aware of the provisions of
said chapter and all other applicable law. The rules and regulations
contained herein are issued in addition to, and not in lieu of, the
provisions of said Chapter 138 and other applicable law. As such, all
provisions of applicable law and regulation shall apply. In the event
the provisions of these regulations contradict the express provisions of
any applicable general or special statute, the terms of the statute shall
prevail.
A.
Any captions or headings provided herein are done so solely for
convenience and are not of any legal effect.
B.
The following definitions, as appearing in MGL c. 138, § 1, along with
any definition contained in said section not expressly set forth below,
are hereby adopted. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein
these rules and regulations to the contrary, any amendment or
modification to the definitions appearing in said MGL c. 138, § 1, shall
be deemed an automatic amendment or modification to the following
definitions. Reference should be made to the General Laws for chapters
or sections cited in the definitions.
A.
The words listed herein shall, unless the context of these regulations
or the General Laws or the rules of the Alcoholic Beverages Control
Commission otherwise require, have the meanings as given herein this
§ 204-2.
ALCOHOL — All alcohol other than denatured alcohol or alcohol
described in MGL c. 94, § 303A.
B.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:257
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any liquid intended for human
consumption as a beverage and containing one-half of one percent (1/2
of 1%) or more of alcohol by volume at 60° F.
CLUB — A corporation chartered for any purpose described in MGL
c. 180, § 2, whether under federal or state law, including any body or
association lawfully operating under a charter granted by a parent body
so chartered, and including also any organization or unit mentioned in
MGL c. 40, § 5, cl. 12, owning, hiring or leasing a building, or space
in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members, provided that its affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body
chosen by the members at its annual meeting and that no member
or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or
indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation any
profits from the disposition or sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the
amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted annually within
two months after January 1 in each year by the members or by its
directors or other governing body and as shall in the judgment of
the local licensing authorities and the Commission be reasonable and
proper compensation for the services of such member, officer, agent or
employee. Such club shall file with the local licensing authorities and
the Commission annually within three months after January 1 in each
year a list of the names and residences of its officers, together with the
amount of salary or compensation received by each employee engaged
in the handling or selling of alcoholic beverages.
COMMISSION — The Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission
established under MGL c. 6, § 43.
HOTEL — A building or part of a building owned or leased and operated
by a person holding a duly issued and valid license as an innholder,
under the provisions of Chapter 140 and provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity for
preparing, cooking and serving suitable food for its guests, including
travelers and strangers and its other patrons and customers, and in
addition meeting and complying with all the requirements imposed
upon innholders under said Chapter 140.
LICENSING AUTHORITIES — The Commission or the local licensing
authority, or both, as the case may be.
LIQUEUR or CORDIAL — All alcoholic beverages manufactured or
produced by mixing or redistilling neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other
distilled spirits with or over fruits, flowers, plants or pure juices
therefrom, or other natural flavoring materials, or with extracts derived
from infusions, percolations or maceration of such materials and
containing no less than 2 1/2% sugar by weight.
LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Board of Selectmen.
§ 204-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 204-2
1:258
§ 204-3. Areas in which alcoholic beverages may be sold.
MALT BEVERAGES — All alcoholic beverages manufactured or
produced by the process of brewing or fermentation of malt, with or
without cereal grains or fermentable sugars, or of hops, and containing
not more than 12% of alcohol by weight.
RESTAURANT — Space, in a suitable building, leased or rented or
owned by a person holding a duly issued and valid license as a common
victualler under the provisions of said Chapter 140, and provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity
for preparing, cooking and serving suitable food for strangers, travelers
and other patrons and customers, and in addition meeting and
complying with all the requirements imposed upon common victuallers
under said Chapter 140. No advertising matter, screen, curtain or other
obstruction which, in the opinion of the licensing authorities, prevents
a clear view of the interior of a restaurant shall be maintained in or on
any window or door thereof after the said authorities have ordered the
removal of such obstruction and have afforded the licensee thereof a
reasonable opportunity to remove the same.
TAVERN — An establishment where alcoholic beverages may be sold,
as authorized by this chapter, with or without food, to be served to
and drunk by patrons in plain view of other patrons, all entrances to
which shall open directly from a public way. The business conducted
therein shall be open to public view from the sidewalk level and the
establishment shall be properly lighted. No window facing a public way
shall be obstructed by any screen or other object extending more than
five feet above the level of the sidewalk on which the establishment
abuts, but in no event shall any screen or obstruction prevent a clear
view of the interior of said "tavern."
WINES — All fermented alcoholic beverages made from fruits, flowers,
herbs or vegetables and containing not more than 24% of alcohol
by volume at 60° F., except cider containing not more than 3% or
containing more than 6% of alcohol by weight at 60° F.
A restaurant licensee shall sell alcoholic beverages only in the dining
room or dining rooms of the restaurant.
A.
A hotel licensee shall sell alcoholic beverages only in the dining room
or dining rooms and in such other public rooms or areas of a hotel as
the local licensing authorities may deem reasonable and proper and
approve in writing; provided, however, that sales may also be made by
a licensed innholder to registered guests occupying private rooms in
his or her hotel, and in the dining room or dining rooms and in such
other public rooms or areas of buildings on the same premises as the
hotel and operated as appurtenant and contiguous to and in conjunction
with such hotel, and to registered guests occupying private rooms in
such buildings and in the case of condominium accommodations that
are located appurtenant and contiguous to and also upon the same
premises as a hotel, sales may be made by the hotel licensee as the
B.
§ 204-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-3
1:259
§ 204-4. Application for license; renewal; transfer; amendment;
fees; cancellation.
licensing authority may deem reasonable and proper and approve in
writing.
A war veterans corporation licensee shall sell alcoholic beverages only
in such areas of the premises as authorized by its license.
C.
A club licensee shall sell alcoholic beverages only in such areas of the
premises as authorized by its license.
D.
It shall be the applicant's responsibility to file all applications in a
timely manner and upon such forms as prescribed by the Commission
or the local licensing authority.
A.
All applications for an original license under MGL c. 138, § 12, 15 or
30A, or for the transfer of such a license from one location to another, or
for a change in the description of a licensed premises shall be subject to
the provisions of said Chapter 138, including but not limited to § 15A of
said chapter. No action shall be taken on any such application until the
licensing authority holds a public hearing upon the same, as prescribed
by law.
B.
No license may be transferred from any individual or entity to another
without the approval of the local licensing authority. Such a transfer
may take place only after such approval has been obtained and all
requirements of applicable law have been met.
C.
No license may be transferred from one location to another without
the approval of the local licensing authority. Such a transfer may take
place only after such approval has been obtained and all requirements
of applicable law have been met.
D.
A detailed written description of the premises, along with a detailed
floor plan of the premises, shall be filed by each applicant for the
issuance of an original license or transfer of a license in which a
change of the existing floor plan, a change of address or a change of
description of the premises is contemplated. No physical renovations or
alterations affecting the floor plan of any licensed establishment shall
be made nor shall any exits or access to exits be changed until such
time as the licensee submits a plan to the local licensing authority
for approval, and such approval is given. Such a plan and approval
of such a plan shall also be required for the addition of any fixture,
amusement device, whether coin-operated or not, and any other item
to be placed within the premises which shall reduce the existing floor
space. Such a plan shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for
his or her determination as to whether any such addition will result in
a reduction of the establishment's legal occupancy limit. The Building
Commissioner shall report his or her determination to the licensing
authority with reasonable promptness.
E.
§ 204-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 204-4
1:260
§ 204-5. Sale, delivery and storage.
Renewal of restaurant license. No license to sell alcoholic beverages
issued to a restaurant shall be renewed unless and until the holder
thereof shall satisfy the licensing authority that he/she is in good faith
operating a restaurant and that such restaurant is provided with proper
equipment for the service of food to travelers and strangers. The
licensing authority may at any time make investigation on its own
initiative as to the compliance with license requirements.
F.
It is each license holder's and applicant's sole responsibility to properly
complete all forms and applications, to insure all notices and other
legal requirements are met in applying for a license, renewal, change
of location or description of premises and to provide all supporting
documentation required for any such application.
G.
No license or permit under MGL c. 138 shall be granted unless the
fee therefor has been paid into the state treasury or Town treasury, as
the case may be. Any positive action taken on such license or permit
prior to the payment of the fee or fees shall be deemed conditional
and shall be effective only upon the payment of the required fee;
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
waive the prepayment of any such fee as may be authorized by law.
The fee schedule in existence at the time of adoption of these rules and
regulations shall remain in effect until otherwise amended as provided
for by law.
H.
The local licensing authority may, after hearing or reasonable
opportunity therefor, cancel any license issued under MGL c. 138 if the
licensee ceases to conduct the licensed business. If the local licensing
authority determines that a license should be canceled as aforesaid, the
licensee shall have the right to appeal said decision as provided for in
MGL c. 138, § 77, as may be amended from time to time.
I.
A licensee shall be presumed to have ceased to conduct the licensed
business if said business has been closed for more than seven calendar
days. This presumption is rebuttable. Each licensee is required to notify
the licensing authority whenever said licensee knows, or has reason to
know, that he, she or it shall cease to conduct business for a period
of more than seven calendar days. A licensee's failure to provide such
notice may be deemed as evidence of the licensee's intent to cease to
conduct the licensed business.
J.
A licensee submitting an application for renewal of a license expiring on
December 31, 1995, and each renewal application submitted thereafter,
shall warrant and represent by the submission of said application that
the licensed business has not been closed for a period of more than
seven calendar days as of December 31, 1995, or December 31 of any
subsequent year.
K.
§ 204-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-5
1:261
§ 204-6. Hours of sale.
No licensee shall store, keep for sale, sell or deliver alcoholic beverages
in any area of the licensed premises not specified on the license and not
shown on the floor plan for the premises.
A.
The sale, delivery and consumption of alcoholic beverages must be
plainly observable by other persons on the premises. Any booth, stall or
enclosure which prevents such an observation is prohibited.
B.
The sale, delivery or consumption of alcohol may take place only in
those areas of the premises as allowed by law.
C.
No licensee shall restrict access to the premises to any individual or
refuse to sell alcoholic beverages to any individual solely on the basis
of any individual's race, color, religious creed, national origin, sex or
ancestry. It is the stated policy of the local licensing authority that
all licensees must comply with this provision, unless such licensee is
otherwise exempt under applicable law, and all licensees are required
to abide by all local, state and federal laws pertaining to their individual
establishments as to the sale to the public. Nothing contained herein
shall require a licensee to serve to a member of the general public
who has been lawfully excluded from the premises as a result of a notrespass
notice, restraining order, court order or other legal process
or order, or who is intoxicated, not a member or guest of a club
or veterans' corporation licensee or who may otherwise be lawfully
excluded from the premises. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed
as allowing the sale of alcohol or alcoholic beverages to persons who
are legally underage.
D.
No licensee required by the terms of its license to sell or deliver
alcoholic beverages to the general public may hold any private function
or party; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to prohibit a licensed establishment from maintaining private
function room(s) if otherwise permitted by law and the licensee has
obtained all other necessary licenses and permits.
E.
All hours of sale by a licensee shall be during the time periods noted
on the license. Additionally, no holder of a restaurant license shall be
entitled to serve alcoholic beverages before or beyond the posted hours
of operation of the restaurant.
A.
No sale of alcohol or alcoholic beverages shall be permitted before or
after the time periods stated on the license. When a license allows for
the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages on the premises,
within 15 minutes after closing, all bottles, glasses or containers used
for drinking purposes shall be cleared off the tables and bar, and
no alcoholic beverage shall be consumed more than 15 minutes after
closing. This prohibition applies to all persons, including but not limited
to patrons, members, guests or employees. No later than 30 minutes
after closing, all patrons, members, guests or other members of the
B.
§ 204-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 204-6
1:262
§ 204-7. Sale and delivery to underage persons; employment of such
persons.
public shall have vacated the premises. Nothing shall prevent the
licensee, his or her employees or agents from remaining in the premises
so long as in the performance of such task or tasks as authorized by law.
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or delivered on any premises
licensed under MGL c. 138 to an intoxicated person.
C.
The sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages to a person under the age
of 21 years is prohibited. No establishment licensed under MGL c.
138, § 12, shall permit a person of legal drinking age to purchase any
alcoholic beverage or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under
21 years of age. No such licensee shall allow a person under the age
of 21 to consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Each licensee under MGL c. 138 shall make sales and deliveries only to
persons as expressly provided for under the provisions of MGL c. 138.
A.
Any licensee, or agent or employee thereof, who reasonably relies on a
liquor purchase identification card as authorized by MGL c. 138, § 34B,
and issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts or a valid operator's license issued by said Registry
pursuant to MGL c. 90, § 8, or on a valid passport issued by the United
States government, or by the government, recognized by the United
States government, of a foreign country, or a valid United States issued
military identification card for proof of a person's identity and age
shall not suffer any modification, suspension, revocation or cancellation
of license for delivering or selling alcohol or alcoholic beverages to
a person under 21 years of age. Any licensee, or agent or employee
thereof, who reasonably relies on such a liquor purchase identification
card or such a valid operator's license issued by said Registry pursuant
to MGL c. 90, § 8, for proof of a person's identity and age shall be
presumed to have exercised due care in making such delivery or sale
of alcohol or alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age.
Such presumption shall be rebuttable, provided that nothing contained
herein shall affect the responsibility of the licensee not to serve any
person who is intoxicated.
B.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent a licensee from employing any
person 18 years of age or older for the direct handling and selling
of alcoholic beverages or alcohol. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Clause (14) of Section 62 of Chapter 149 of the General Laws, any
licensee may employee a person under the age of 18 who does not
directly handle, sell, mix or serve alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
C.
In the event that the legal drinking age is either increased or
decreased, or in the event that the laws regarding the age of
employment of persons are amended, these rules and regulations shall
automatically be amended to conform to applicable law.
D.
§ 204-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-8
1:263
§ 204-8. General rules and regulations.
The issuance of a license shall not be deemed a compliance by the
licensee with any other law or regulation. It is the licensee's sole
obligation to comply with any other laws or regulations. It is expressly
understood by the licensee that the local licensing authority, when
allowed by law, may take action against the licensee for failure to
comply with the provisions of other laws or regulations.
A.
By submitting any application required herein or under the provisions
of MGL c. 138, and by accepting any license granted, the licensee
or proposed licensee warrants and represents to the local licensing
authority that said licensee shall be in compliance with all rules,
regulations and laws governing the operation of their business prior to
selling any alcohol or alcoholic beverages under said license, including
but not limited to all Building Code requirements, occupancy
requirements and state and local health rules, regulations and laws,
and the licensee acknowledges and understands that the granting of
any such license is a condition precedent to the exercise of the rights
granted under said license.
B.
Nothing contained herein these regulations shall be deemed to entitle a
holder of a license to sell or deliver alcohol or alcoholic beverages other
than as provided for by the specific license granted.
C.
The issuance of licenses to persons who are not citizens of the United
States is subject to the requirements and prohibitions of the General
Laws. Corporations are advised to consult the General Laws regarding
the citizenship requirements for stockholders, directors, officers and
managers.
D.
All sales records required by law shall be maintained and made
available to the local licensing authority as provided for by law. The
licensee shall submit to the licensing authority upon its request a list of
all employees. Such list must be submitted within seven calendar days
of receipt of the request.
E.
All licenses, permits and building certificates required for the operation
of the licensee's business, club or organization shall be posted in a
conspicuous place and made available to the local licensing authority
or its agents, and the licensee shall post in a conspicuous place all
notices and postings required by law pertaining to the sale, delivery or
consumption of alcohol and alcoholic beverages.
F.
The licensee shall keep all portions of the licensed premises to which
the public is granted access illuminated to such a degree as to ensure
safe movement of the persons legally on the premises and to provide
persons the ability to observe all such areas of the premises. In no
event shall the premises be illuminated to a lesser degree than may be
otherwise required by law.
G.
H. Illegal gambling in any form is prohibited.
§ 204-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 204-8
1:264
§ 204-9. Effective date; applicability; amendments.
The licensee shall not permit or allow any person or persons to conduct
any illegal activity on the premises, whether or not such activity is in an
area to which the general public has access.
I.
The local licensing authority or its agents may at any time enter upon
the premises of any person or entity who is licensed by it to ascertain
the manner in which the licensee conducts the business carried on
under such license. All duly appointed police officers for the Town
of Fairhaven holding the rank of detective, sergeant or above shall
be deemed the authorized agents for the local licensing authority.
The Building Commissioner shall be deemed an authorized agent for
the purpose of inspecting the licensed premises to ensure compliance
with the floor plan required to be submitted by these regulations.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit any individual's
authority to enter the premises as may be otherwise provided for by
law. Additionally, the local licensing authority may appoint such other
individuals as agents as it deems fit.
J.
Any person who hinders or delays any authorized agent of the local
licensing authority in the performance of his/her duties, or who refuses
to admit or locks out any such agent from any place which such agent
is authorized to inspect, or refuses to give such agent such information
as may be required for the proper enforcement of MGL c. 138 shall be
punished as provided for under MGL c. 138, § 63A.
K.
After a hearing held in conformance with the applicable provisions of
law, if any license holder is found to be in violation of these rules and
regulations or the rules and regulations of the ABCC or any applicable
law, the licensing authority shall impose such minimum penalty or
penalties for violations of law or rules and regulations as provided for
in Appendix A of these rules and regulations, it being expressly stated
that the penalties provided for in said Appendix A shall be the minimum
penalty imposed for those violations listed, and the Board may impose
more severe penalties or take such other action as provided for by
applicable law if the Board determines the facts warrant the same.
In the event that there is found to be a violation of any said rule,
regulation or law, and no specific penalty is provided for in Appendix
A, the licensing authority will look to Appendix A as a guideline in
fashioning a penalty.
L.
These rules shall become effective January 1, 1995, and shall remain
in effect until rescinded, modified or amended by the local licensing
authority as set forth below; provided, however, that an amendment,
revision or insertion of any statute, act or resolve, or change of or
new rule of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, or vote of
Town Meeting which by its terms would rescind, amend, modify or be
applicable to these rules and regulations shall be deemed to have done
so and shall become a part of these rules and regulations without the
necessity of notice and hearing required under Subsection B.
A.
§ 204-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:265
The Board of Selectmen, or any succeeding authority acting as the
local licensing authority under the provisions of MGL c. 138, as may be
amended, may rescind, modify or amend these rules and regulations as
follows:
A public hearing shall be held on any proposal to rescind, modify or
amend these rules and regulations, in whole or in part.
(1)
If the licensing authority is the Board of Selectmen, notice of said
hearing shall be posted in the same manner as required for a
meeting of the Board of Selectmen; provided, however, that such
notice only for the purposes specifically stated herein shall be
posted no earlier than 14 days prior to the hearing. In computing
said time period, the date of the hearing shall be included but not
the date of posting.
(2)
Said notice shall include a brief statement of the intended action
and that any person may inspect a more detailed statement of the
proposed action at the office of the Board of Selectmen.
(3)
After the close of the public hearing, upon a majority vote of the
licensing authority, these rules may be so rescinded, modified or
amended.
(4)
(5) Any such action shall become effective 30 days thereafter.
B.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to delay the effective date of any
applicable statute, act or resolve, change of or new rule of the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission, or vote of Town Meeting. The same
shall become effective as provided for by applicable law.
C.
In the event of any conflict between these regulations and the General
Laws or the rules and regulations promulgated by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission (or any succeeding authority), the
following rules of interpretation shall apply: the General Laws shall
prevail over all rules and regulations; the rules and regulations of the
Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission shall prevail over the rules
and regulations of the local licensing authority, all subject, however, to
any applicable law providing otherwise.
D.
These rules shall apply to any licensee or applicant for any license
issued pursuant to MGL c. 138.
E.
The local licensing authority shall not be required to provide any notice
of any rescission, change, amendment or modification of these rules,
other than required herein or by applicable law. It is the licensee's duty
to be aware of and abide by these rules and regulations as amended
from time to time. Any notice of an approved rescission, change,
amendment or modification which may be provided by the local
licensing authority on any one or more occasions will be done
gratuitously and shall not be deemed to have imposed any such
obligation upon the authority on any such occasion, and the authority's
F.
§ 204-9 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 204-9
1:266
§ 204-10. Hearing to amend, modify, suspend or revoke license.
Any hearing to amend, modify, suspend or revoke any license for any
lawful reason, including but not limited to a violation of these rules or
any applicable law, shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
contained in MGL c. 138.
Chapter 206
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 87, Part 1. Animals, Board of Health — See Ch. 405.
failure to do so shall not be deemed a defense or mitigating factor to
any action conducted pursuant to § 204-10.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are separable, and in the
event that any one or more rule or regulation is deemed invalid, the
remaining shall have full force and effect.
G.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:267

Part 1
[Adopted 5-26-201A5n; iAmmael nCdoendtr5o-l5 F-2e0es18 ATM By Art. 38]
§ 206-1. Fee structure.
The animal control fee structure is as follows:
Type Fee
Boarding fee $25 per day
Adoption fees
Cat $200
Dog $300
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-1
1:269
Chapter 207
COUNCIL ON AGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council on Aging — See Ch. 16.
§ 207-1. Establishment.
The name of the organization shall be the "Fairhaven Council on Aging,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Council," as established by the Town Meeting
of Fairhaven, Massachusetts, on March 31, 1966, pursuant to MGL c. 40,
§ 8B.
§ 207-2. Purpose.
§ 207-3. Offices.
The principal office of the Council is located at 229 Huttleston Avenue,
Fairhaven, Massachusetts 02719.
§ 207-4. Membership.
The Council shall consist of seven regular members and four alternate/
associate members (who are appointed for a one-year term) who shall vote
for the nonattending regular seven members. Prospective Council members
shall be nominated by a majority of the existing members of the Council for
consideration by the Board of Selectmen. Council membership shall reflect
the makeup of the community-at-large and shall be composed of at least
51% of persons 60 years of age or older.
§ 207-5. Term of membership.
Council members are appointed for a term of three years with the option
of being reappointed at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen. Alternate/
associate members may also be appointed to fill the unexpired term of
A. To identify the total needs of the elderly population of the community.
To educate the community and enlist support and participation of all
citizens about their needs.
B.
To design, advocate and/or implement services to fill these needs, or to
coordinate existing services.
C.
To cooperate with the Massachusetts Executive Office of Elder Affairs
and Coastline Elderly Services, Inc. (Area Agency on Aging) and to
be cognizant of state and federal legislation and programs regarding
elders.
D.
§ 206-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 207-5
1:270
members whose positions are vacated. Council members may be removed
by the Board of Selectmen following a hearing. People in office shall serve
up to two successive terms in the same office's position. There shall be at
least a one-year hiatus prior to a previously elected position held for two
successive years.
§ 207-6. Voting rights of members.
All voting rights shall be vested in the members, and each individual
member shall be entitled to one vote with respect to any question or matters
that may come before a meeting of the Council.
§ 207-7. Meetings.
§ 207-8. Officers.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held monthly on the second
Monday of the month at 9:00 a.m. at the Council office, unless
otherwise voted by the Board.
A.
Special meetings of the Council shall be called at any time at the
request of at least four members of the Council. Notice must be sent
to each member of the Council at least three business days prior to
the special meeting date, and the Town Clerk must be appropriately
notified at the same time.
B.
Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the second Monday of
June at 9:30 a.m. after the regular meeting at the Council office for the
purpose of electing officers.
C.
At all meetings of the Council, the presence of a simple majority of
the total membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. Votes shall be cast only by voting members in attendance.
D.
E. Meetings shall be conducted with Roberts Rules of Order as a guide.
Regular attendance is expected of all members. In the event of four
absences of regular scheduled meetings during any fiscal year - July 1
through June 30 - members shall be considered to have automatically
resigned and the Board of Selectmen will be notified. Exceptions are
meetings missed due to personal illness and agreed to by the Board of
Directors as acceptable absences.
F.
The officers of the Council on Aging Board shall consist of a
Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, a Secretary and a Treasurer.
A.
Officers of the Council shall be elected at the annual meeting of the
Council and shall take office at the end of the meeting.
B.
Elections of officers to fill vacancies may take place at any regular or
special meeting and shall be for the unexpired term of the previous
incumbent; however, the office of the Chairperson, if vacated, shall
C.
§ 207-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-8
1:271
§ 207-9. Amendments.
Amendments of these bylaws may be considered at either a regular or
special meeting of the Council called for such purpose. Notification of such
meeting and its purpose shall be given at least 14 days prior to assembly.
Such notification shall contain the text of the proposed amendment. The
proposed amendment must be approved by a majority of the Council
members.
be filled by the Vice Chairperson for the unexpired term of the
Chairperson's normal term of office. The position of Vice Chairperson
will be filled by election.
Officers are elected for a term of one year to coincide with the annual
meeting subject to provision of § 207-5 (July 1 through June 30). Any
officer may succeed himself/herself according to terms described in
§ 207-5.
D.
The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council and
subject to the direction of the Council. He/she shall be in charge of the
business affairs and property of the Council in its general operations.
He/she shall prepare an agenda, with the assistance of the Director,
preside at all meetings of the members, nominate all committees and
serve as an ex officio member of those committees.
E.
The Vice Chairperson shall exercise all functions of the Chairperson
during the latter's absence or disability, and when so acting, shall
have all the powers of and be subject to all the restrictions of the
Chairperson.
F.
The Director shall see to it that:
(1) Minutes of the meeting of the Council are recorded.
Notices are given in accordance with the bylaws and as required
by state law.
(2)
The annual report of the Council is forwarded to appropriate town
and state officials.
(3)
G.
The Treasurer shall see to it that:
There is supervision over and responsibility for funds, securities,
receipts and disbursements of the Council.
(1)
Books of accounts of all the business and financial transactions of
the Council are kept up to date.
(2)
Members receive a monthly statement of the financial condition of
the Council.
(3)
(4) An annual budget is prepared.
H.
§ 207-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 207-10
1:272
§ 207-10. Staff.
The Executive Director manages the day-to-day operation for the purpose
of coordinating or carrying out programs designed to meet the needs of
the aging in coordination with the Department of Elder Affairs. As chief
administrator, the Executive Director, who serves as a professional advisor
to the Board of Directors, is the principal point of contact within the
Senior Center and has the responsibility for the overall management of
its operations and programs. The Executive Director initiates, recruits,
supervises, and provides or delegates resources, including authority to
employ clerical or other assistants subject to the authorization of Town
government. The Executive Director reports to the Town Administrator. An
evaluation of a new employee will take place every quarter for the first year,
and annually thereafter.
§ 207-11. Committees.
Committees may be appointed by the Chairperson as the need arises to
conduct the business of the Council subject to the approval of the Council.
§ 207-12. Effective date.
The effective date of these bylaws shall be the date of that meeting at which
these bylaws shall have been approved by a majority of members present.
The date on which this approval was voted is June 11, 2013.
Chapter 208
HOUSEBOATS
§ 208-1. Mooring prohibited.
The Town of Fairhaven, MA, through the office of the Harbormaster and the
duly appointed agents of the Town of Fairhaven acting as the Harbormaster
and/or the Assistant Harbormaster, prohibit the mooring of any vessel that
is, after the determination of the Harbormaster, a houseboat to be placed
on a mooring within the waters of Fairhaven, MA.
§ 208-2. Disposal of human waste.
Houseboats, as determined by the Harbormaster as described above, are
not permitted to be at a mooring in the Town of Fairhaven. The disposal of
human waste is not allowed within the waters of Fairhaven. Porta potties,
and/or any other device onboard are not considered adequate to properly
hold and allow for proper disposal of human waste. The Town does not have
the ability or system that can accurately track disposal of human waste
brought ashore for proper disposal.
§ 207-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-3
1:273
§ 208-3. Description and limitations of vessels.
Vessels considered to be houseboats are vessels that, as determined by the
Harbormaster, are of the design that indicates they are not suitable to be
used to navigate the seas most likely encountered in the area waters due to
weather conditions. Because of this, they are at a mooring, and the design of
such allows for humans to live or sleep aboard. As opposed to recreational
vessels that can traverse the local seas in normal weather conditions and
have adequate pump-out systems for human waste, houseboats at moorings
cannot be pumped out by the Town of Fairhaven's CVA boats while at
moorings per the grant the Town operates under. This presents the problem
of human waste disposal.
§ 208-4. Violations and penalties.
Vessels that are determined to be houseboats by the Harbormaster and
moor in violation of this regulation are subject to the following: After
reasonable attempts to contact the owner by telephone or U.S. Mail over a
three-day period, it may be removed at the direction of the Harbormaster at
the cost of the owner. Cost will include all towing and storage charges that
may be incurred to do so. All charges are payable to the tow company which
will hold the vessel until payments are made.
§ 208-5. Applicability.
This regulation is applicable to both privately and commercially owned
moorings.
Chapter 212
MARINE RESOURCES COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor pollution control — See Ch. 132.
Waterways, moorings and boat usage — See
Ch. 145.
Houseboats — See Ch. 208.
Shellfish regulations — See Ch. 218.
Union Wharf — See Ch. 225.
§ 212-1. Committee functions.
The Marine Resources Committee is an advisory board to the Board of
Selectmen involving matters relating to tidal waterways and associated
public facilities such as marine ramps, docks, wharves, piers and moorings.
In that capacity, the Marine Resources Committee shall perform the
following advisory functions:
Maintain and, in consultation with the Harbormaster/Shellfish Officer,
periodically make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for
A.
§ 208-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 212-1
1:274
Chapter 218
SHELLFISH REGULATIONS
revision of the Town of Fairhaven Waterways Regulations and Shellfish
Regulations.
With the assistance of the Harbormaster/Shellfish Officer and the
Director of Planning and Economic Development, be responsible for
making recommendations to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning
Board regarding long-range planning for the harbor and its resources,
including matters relating to moorings, piers and docks, land
acquisition, water sheet zoning, stormwater runoff mitigation,
protection of the harbor's resources and sea level rising as a result of
global warming.
B.
With the assistance of the Harbormaster/Shellfish Officer, advise and
make recommendation on water-related capital infrastructure
improvements such as ramps, docks, wharves and piers to the Town
Administrator and Capital Planning Committee.
C.
Annually review waterways fees, harbor fees, shellfish license fees and
other related charges or fees with the Harbormaster/Shellfish Officer
and the Town Administrator and advise the Board of Selectmen
regarding adjustments as needed.
D.
Provide guidance and recommendations to the Board of Selectmen and
Town Administrator on marine resource issues.
E.
Act as a resource and aid to the Harbormaster/Shellfish Officer, when
requested, to assist in the carrying out the responsibilities of that office.
F.
Prepare annually for inclusion in the Town Report a written summary of
the Committee's activities during the prior year.
G.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-1
1:275

ARTICLE I
Permits
§ 218-1. Types of permits; fees.
§ 218-2. Shellfish containers and gauges.
§ 218-3. Time limits for harvesting.
§ 218-4. Compliance with regulations required.
Holders of these permits must adhere to general shellfish regulations of the
Town of Fairhaven. (See Article III of this chapter.)
Recreational permit. Permits may be issued to a member of a family
who proves to the satisfaction of the licensing authorities that he or
she actually and physically resides in or owns real estate having an
assessed value in the Town of Fairhaven, such as summer residents. The
fee shall be $20.
A.
Senior citizen permit. This permit may be given to those persons that
have attained the age of 62 and can show to the satisfaction of the
licensing authorities that they are domiciled or own taxable property in
the Town of Fairhaven. There shall be no charge for this permit.
B.
Nonresident permit. This permit may be sold to any resident of the state
who can show to the satisfaction of the licensing authorities that he
or she is domiciled within the State of Massachusetts. The fee shall be
$100.
C.
Required shellfish container. Recreational, senior citizen and
nonresident permit holders shall be required to utilize a standard onepeck
wire basket while taking quahogs, clams or oysters. Only one
basket per permit holder is permitted. Shellfish limit shall be one peck
per week. (See § 218-5, Violations and penalties.)
A.
Shellfish gauges. Gauges for quahog, clam and oyster measurement
shall be used at all times while engaged in shellfishing. (See general
shellfish regulations, Article III of this chapter.)
B.
Scallops may be taken from November 1 to March 31 within seasonal
restrictions, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., limit one
bushel per week, no bags allowed. The taking of scallops from April 1
to October 31 is prohibited.
A.
Eels/seaworms may be harvested any day through the season. The
recreational permit entitles the holder to set up three eel pots for
recreational use. Pots shall be marked with the permit number, and
the flotation device must have the permit number affixed thereto. The
taking of eels less than four inches shall be prohibited. (See § 218-5,
Violations and penalties.)
B.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-5
1:277
§ 218-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of these regulations shall be subject to the following:
First offense: $25 and/or suspension of license or permit for 30
days.
(1)
Second offense: $50 and/or suspension of license or permit for 60
days.
(2)
Third offense: $100 and/or suspension of license or permit for 90
days.
(3)
A.
In the event of a fourth offense or if a licensee or permittee shows
total disregard for these rules and regulations, the Board of Selectmen
may revoke and cancel the license or permit for a period of time not to
exceed two years.
B.
§ 218-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 218-5
1:278
ARTICLE II
Commercial Licenses
§ 218-6. Seller's card.
All commercial license holders must have a state seller's card in hand before
being issued a license. A state identification number will be required on
all Town licenses before being issued. All commercial shellfishermen must
tag each bag of catch with their seller's card number while transporting
shellfish.
§ 218-7. Wire baskets; bags.
§ 218-8. Designated areas.
There shall be a limit of 1 1/2 bushels, of which one bushel may be
littleneck. All areas outside the rotation system will remain the three-bushel
limit. Persons shellfishing commercially within the designated areas will not
be allowed to take their daily limit in these areas and then proceed to fish
outside the designated areas for the remainder of the three-bushel limit.
The rule would act reverse, whereas a person shellfishing commercially will
not be allowed to take part of their limit outside the designated area and
then proceed to complete the three-bushel limit from within the designated
areas. (See § 218-18, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-9. East Cove.
The taking of shellfish from East Cove under this license is strictly
prohibited under MGL c. 130, § 52.
§ 218-10. Dry digging. [Amended 5-6-2006 STM by Art. 7]
The dry digging of shellfish is prohibited between and including January 1
to March 31. All categories of license holders included.
§ 218-11. Catch report.
A copy of a license holder's Massachusetts catch report shall be submitted
to the Selectmen's office prior to December 31 of any calender year. Names
of participating fishermen need not be made part of said report.
While engaged in shellfishing, all shellfish must be stored in a wire
basket, and no basket shall be larger than one bushel.
A.
Bags. For enforcement reasons, all shellfish shall be bagged in eightypound
clear onion bags, with proper tags for all commercial fishermen,
for transportation through or on the waters of Fairhaven (no burlap
bags).
B.
§ 218-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-12
1:279
§ 218-12. License display.
Licenses must be in the possession of license holders and in plain view on
outer clothing or posted on boat or diving flags in a visible manner while
engaged in shellfishing. (See § 218-18, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-13. Eels/seaworms.
All pots shall be identified with a styrofoam-type buoy pair with colors
assigned at time of license issuance and shall have the permit number
clearly displayed on the buoy. Wooden buoys or plastic bottles are
prohibited. Pots shall not be set in established navigable channels. Eels less
than four inches shall not be taken. Holders of commercial eel permits shall
be required to submit a report indicating the number of pounds harvested
during the previous 12 months.
§ 218-14. Issuance of license; fee.
Commercial licenses may be sold to individuals who demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the licensing authorities that the Town of Fairhaven is their
permanent place of domicile. Commercial licenses shall be valid only for the
period of the time that the holder maintains a permanent place of domicile
in the Town of Fairhaven. Permits will be issued all year, starting January 1,
and will be valid until December 31 of that year. A cap or limit of 75 licenses
only shall be issued. The fee shall be $200.
§ 218-15. Commercial dredge boats.
The fee for commercial dredge boats shall be $300.
§ 218-16. Scuba diving.
The taking of shellfish by use of scuba or snorkel equipment shall be limited
to the following conditions:
§ 218-17. Compliance with regulations required.
All shellfishermen under this license must adhere to the general rules and
regulations of the Town of Fairhaven.
Shellfish permits or licenses shall be displayed on the standard diver's
flag in a visible manner.
A.
Shellfish may be harvested by hand only, and the use of any suction
and/or air tank device for the purposes of disrupting the sea bottom to
expose shellfish shall be prohibited.
B.
Diver's flags shall be displayed on a boat or surface float and shall
extend a minimum distance of three feet from the surface of the water.
C.
Divers shall remain in an area within 100 feet of such displayed diver's
flag while at or near the surface of the water.
D.
§ 218-12 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 218-18
1:280
§ 218-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 218-19. Student commercial license; fee.
A student commercial license may be issued to students between the ages of
15 and 18. Students must show proof that they are in school and residents
of the Town of Fairhaven. Licenses will be valid from June 1 to September
30 of that year. The fee shall be $80.
Violations of these regulations shall be subject to the following:
First offense: $25 and/or suspension of license or permit for 30
days.
(1)
Second offense: $50 and/or suspension of license or permit for 60
days.
(2)
Third offense: $100 and/or suspension of license or permit for 90
days.
(3)
A.
In the event of a fourth offense or if a licensee or permittee shows
total disregard for these rules and regulations, the Board of Selectmen
may revoke and cancel the license or permit for a period of time not to
exceed two years.
B.
§ 218-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-19
1:281

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 218-20. Applicability; additional regulations.
This article applies to all shellfishing, regardless of type of permit or license.
Commercial scallop regulations and special regulations covering temporary
closings due to pollution, planting or experimental programs may be
established as needed.
§ 218-21. Statutory authority; permit required.
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by authority of MGL
c. 130, § 52, by the Board of Selectmen, Town of Fairhaven. Under the
above authority all persons are prohibited from taking eels, clams, quahogs,
oysters, scallops or seaworms from the coastal waters or flats of the Town of
Fairhaven without a current permit issued by the Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Fairhaven. Permits and licenses shall be limited to the regulations
set forth herein.
§ 218-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 218-23. Permit display.
Permits must be in the possession of the holder and in plain view on outer
clothing or posted on a boat or dive flag in a visible manner while engaged
in shellfishing. (See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-24. Age limit for permit issuance.
Any person over the age of 12 years may obtain a permit, but no child
under the age of 12 years shall take shellfish, eels or seaworms unless
accompanied by an adult holding a permit, in which case said adult will
be held responsible for all acts of said child. (See § 218-22, Violations and
penalties.)
Violations of these regulations shall be subject to the following:
First offense: $25 and/or suspension of license or permit for 30
days.
(1)
Second offense: $50 and/or suspension of license or permit for 60
days.
(2)
Third offense: $100 and/or suspension of license or permit for 90
days.
(3)
A.
In the event of a fourth offense or if a licensee or permittee shows
total disregard for these rules and regulations, the Board of Selectmen
may revoke and cancel the license or permit for a period of time not to
exceed two years.
B.
§ 218-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-25
1:283
§ 218-25. Shellfish size limits.
Quahogs must have a one-inch hinge measured by gauge. Clams shall not be
taken when they are less than two inches in the longest diameter. Oysters
shall not be taken when they are less than three inches in diameter. Scallops
shall not be taken unless they have a well-defined annual ring. The taking
or possession of seed shellfish is prohibited.
§ 218-26. Gauges and wire baskets.
§ 218-27. Seed shellfish.
All seed shellfish shall be broadcast back onto the area in which they were
taken. All seed shellfish above the waterline shall be covered before leaving
an area and holes filled. (See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-28. Closed areas.
Shellfish shall not be removed from any area closed by the Division of
Marine Fisheries of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Written
permission shall be made available for inspection upon demand by any
police officer, constable or other duly authorized officer or agent of the
Board of Selectmen. Areas within the rotation system of the Town of
Fairhaven shall be closed from time to time to allow for propagation.
Rotation areas will be clearly marked, and information on closed areas may
be obtained by contacting a shellfish constable or the Selectmen's office.
(See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-29. License and permit restrictions.
Shellfish gauges. Gauges for quahogs or clam measurement shall be
used while engaged in shellfishing. (See § 218-22, Violations and
penalties.)
A.
Wire baskets. While engaged in shellfishing, all shellfish must be stored
in wire baskets. For noncommercial purposes, a one-peck wire basket
shall be used. For commercial purposes, no basket larger than one
bushel shall be used. (See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
B.
Nontransferable. Permits are not transferable and may be suspended
or revoked by the Board of Selectmen for any violation of the shellfish
rules and regulations, MGL c. 130 or amendments thereto and subject
to rules and regulations of the Town of Fairhaven. (See § 218-22,
Violations and penalties.)
A.
No person holding a commercial license shall be granted a recreational
license, and no person holding a recreational license shall be granted a
commercial license.
B.
§ 218-25 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 218-30
1:284
§ 218-30. Shovel or spading fork.
The use of a shovel or spading fork for the harvesting of shellfish is
prohibited. (See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-31. Permit suspension and surrender.
Shellfish permits/licenses may be suspended and surrendered upon demand
to a shellfish constable, natural resource officer, police officer or any other
duly authorized officer or agent of the Board of Selectmen. Any person
required to surrender his or her permit/license may, within 48 hours of such
surrender, appeal to the Board of Selectmen, in writing, for a hearing. (See
§ 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-32. Inspections.
All persons taking or carrying away or having in their possession shellfish
of any kind, in a boat or container, shall exhibit such shellfish for inspection
upon demand of any shellfish constable, natural resource officer, police
officer or any other duly authorized officer or agent of the Board of
Selectmen. (See § 218-22, Violations and penalties.)
§ 218-33. East Cove.
East Cove is to be restricted for the exclusive use of recreational
shellfishing. Commercial fishing in this cove is prohibited.
§ 218-34. Time limits for harvesting.
§ 218-35. Annual catch reports.
All persons engaged in the harvesting of shellfish shall be required to
submit a report indicating the amount of shellfish harvested by the species
during the previous 12 months prior to December 31 annually to the Board
of Selectmen's office. Subsequent permits will not be issued until the
information is obtained. A catch report should be as accurate as possible.
Information shall be used for future propagation and transplanting
purposes. A catch report form may be obtained through the Selectmen's
office or the shellfish constable.
Clams may be taken the first seven days of each month, from April 1 to
May 7 and September 1 to December 7. (See § 218-22, Violations and
penalties.) [Amended 5-6-2006 STM by Art. 7]
A.
Scallops may be taken November 1 through March 31. (See § 218-22,
Violations and penalties.)
B.
Oysters may be taken October 1 through March 31. (See § 218-22,
Violations and penalties.)
C.
§ 218-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-35
1:285
Chapter 220
SPECIAL MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
§ 220-1. List of special municipal employees.
The following list of special municipal employees was approved by the
Board of Selectmen 1-17-1989. Amendments noted where applicable.
Board of Appeals
Planning Board
School Committee
Inspector of Wires
Sealer of Weights and Measures
Inspector of Petroleum
Tree Warden
Town Moderator
Finance Committee
Board of Health
Milk Inspector
Registrars of Voters
Safety Council
Call Firemen
Call or Spare Policemen
Board of Fire Engineers
Civil Defense
Commissioner of Trust Funds
Plumbing Inspector
Moth Superintendent
Public Weighers
Field Driver and Pound Keeper
Measurer of Wood and Bark
Shellfish Advisory Board
School Dentist
Sanitary Inspector
Natural Resource Officers
Board of Retirement
Fence Viewer
Town Forest Committee
§ 218-35 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 220-1
1:286
Library Trustees
Council on Aging members
Board of Public Works
Historical Commission
Industrial Development Financing Authority
Southeast Regional Transit Authority Advisory Board
Joint Transportation Planning Group of the Southeast Regional Planning
and Economic Development District
Delegates to the Southeast Regional Planning and Economic Development
District
Affirmative Action Officer
Civil Service Director
Conservation Commission
Data Processing Advisory Board
Lottery Arts Council
Veterans Burial Agent
New Bedford/Fairhaven Harbor Commission
Personnel Board
Recreation Commission
New Bedford/Fairhaven Harbor Master Planning Committee
Tourism Committee
Fair Housing Coordinator
Affordable Housing Committee
Mattapoisett River Water Supply Protection Advisory Committee
Consultant to the Fairhaven Conservation Commission [7-27-19896]
Director of Veterans Services [5-13-1996]
Veterans Agent [5-13-1996]
Tourism Director [5-13-1996]
Fairhaven High School Building Committee [7-11-1994]
Cable Television Committee [8-5-1996]
Greater New Bedford Regional Vocational Technical High School, School
Committee [6-6-2002]
Conservation Agent [3-3-2003]
Conservation Commission Secretary [4-7-2003]
Board of Appeals Secretary [4-7-2003]
Coalition for Buzzards Bay Attorney [Added 7-25-2005]
Planning and Economic Development Department Attorney [Added
1-18-2011]
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-1
1:287
Greater New Bedford Regional Vocational Technical High School (RVT)
Attorney [Added 4-25-2011]
Town Government Study Committee [Added 10-11-2013]
Chapter 225
UNION WHARF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor pollution control — See Ch. 132.
§ 225-1. Fees.
§ 225-2. Rules and regulations.
For active commercial fishing vessels, the wharfage rate will be $10 per
day. "Day" is defined as a twenty-four-hour period or any part thereof.
A.
Transient vessels docked for short periods of time shall be charged a
wharfage fee of $25 per day.
B.
All wharf privileges shall be assigned from time to time by the
Wharfinger, also all spaces on the wharf.
A.
If any person fails to obey orders of the Wharfinger, he/she shall notify
the Board of Selectmen, and then the Wharfinger shall notify the
offending person that all wharfage rights are suspended.
B.
If any person shall refuse or neglect to move his/her vessel or material
on the wharf property when and as directed by the Wharfinger, he/she
or the Board of Selectmen may remove same at the expense of such
party. Only one boat at any one time is allowed at the south end of the
wharf.
C.
Boat owners repairing boats at the wharf shall clean the immediate
area at the end of each day.
D.
Vessels to be docked at the wharf for more than five days due to repairs
must tie up at the most northerly end of the wharf.
E.
No heavy or long-term repairing, such as removal of engines,
construction of drags or removal of winches, etc. The Wharfinger will
make the final determination.
F.
Parking in areas where prohibited is cause for a citation. All parking
regulations will be strictly enforced by the Police Department.
G.
All bills for wharfage not paid within 30 days of billing will result in loss
of wharfage privileges.
H.
§ 220-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 225-2
1:288
Division 3, Planning Board
Chapter 306
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
Planning Board procedural rules — See Ch.
316.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
§ 306-1. Fee schedule of Planning Board charges.
All fees due at time of application unless so noted. All expenses for
advertising and notice to abutters by certified mail, return receipt, shall be
borne by the applicant.
No boats over 40 feet in length are allowed to tie in the basin area. The
basin area is for use of Fairhaven residents only.
I.
In the event of any matter arising not covered by these rules and
regulations, the Board of Selectmen shall decide the question, and the
decision shall be binding until the rules are changed or amended.
J.
If the Wharfinger has to tie up a vessel at the wharf, a fee of $100 will
be charged. [Added 11-13-1989]
K.
Form A, Approval of a plan not requiring approval.
One hundred dollars for adjusting existing lot lines without
creating new lots.
(1)
One hundred fifty dollars plus $50 per lot, for the creation of
new lots, plus a $40 per lot geographic information system (GIS)
mapping fee.
(2)
A.
Form B, Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
(1) Five hundred dollars.
B.
Form C, Definitive Subdivision Plan.
Five hundred dollars plus $100 per lot (if a preliminary plan was
filed), an engineering fee of $2,500 and a GIS mapping fee of $40
per lot.
(1)
One thousand dollars plus $100 per lot (if no preliminary plan was
filed), an engineering fee of $2,500 and a GIS mapping fee of $40
per lot.
(2)
C.
§ 225-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-1
1:289
Chapter 316
PROCEDURAL RULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 65.
Street acceptances — See Ch. 169, Part 3.
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
Fees — See Ch. 306.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
Plan revision: one revision allowed with original application fee;
50% of original fee paid due for second and additional revisions at
the time revision is submitted.
(3)
Special permit fees.
Two hundred fifty dollars for plans of less than 2,500 square feet
new or renovated floor space, plus an engineering fee of $2,500.
(1)
For plans of more than 2,500 square feet $250, plus:
For new floor space: $0.10 per square foot for the first 30,000
square feet of new floor space and $0.01 per square foot for
new floor space above 30,000 square feet, plus an engineering
fee of $2,500.
(a)
For renovated floor space: $0.025 per square foot for the first
30,000 square feet and $0.01 per square foot for floor space
above 30,000 square feet, plus an engineering fee of $2,500.
(b)
For plans creating new floor space and renovating: apply the
new floor space calculation first, followed by the renovation
calculation up to a combined 30,000 square feet, then $0.01
per square foot for all space above 30,000 square feet, plus an
engineering fee of $2,500.
(c)
(2)
Plan revision: one revision allowed with original application fee;
revision fee of $0.01 per square foot due for second and additional
revisions at the time revision is submitted.
(3)
D.
E. Rezoning application fee: $250.
F. Repetitive petition fee: $250.
G. Street discontinuance fee: $250.
H. Zoning regulation books: $10.
I. Subdivision regulation books: $10.
J. Zoning maps: $5.
§ 306-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 306-1
1:290
§ 316-1. General provisions.
§ 316-2. Rezoning applications.
§ 316-3. Plans not requiring subdivision approval.
Officers. The Planning Board shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair, and Clerk
annually at the first Board meeting following Town elections. The Board
shall at the same organizational meeting elect a delegate to the
Southeastern Regional Planning and Economic Development District
and select a representative to such other committees or organizations
as may call for Planning Board appointments. [Amended 8-23-2011]
A.
Except in emergencies, persons wishing to meet with the Planning
Board shall make appointment to do so through the Chair or the Board's
agent no later than seven days prior to the meeting informing of the
subject matter to be presented. Said request shall be in writing.
[Amended 8-23-2011]
B.
In procedural matters not covered by these rules or by Town bylaw
or statute, the Board shall be guided by Robert's Rules of Order, as
revised.
C.
The Planning Board will hold a public hearing on all zoning
amendments inserted in the warrant for a Town Meeting or on any
additional zoning amendments it may elect to hear. In order to ensure
that a public hearing and the Planning Board report required by statute
will be timeful, petitioned articles for zoning amendments should be
submitted to the Planning Board by the Board of Selectmen not less 60
days prior to the date of the Town Meeting action.
A.
Petitioners for zoning amendments need not own or have interests in
the property affected.
B.
Requests for Zoning Map amendments shall be accompanied by 10
prints of a plan to scale, clearly showing the proposed amendment
referenced for location on the Town Zoning Map and relevant district
and property bounds, structures and natural features. The request shall
also be accompanied by a written description of the proposed change,
suitable for legal advertisement, plus a check made out to the Town
of Fairhaven to cover the appropriate fees found in the fee schedule.
[Amended 9-22-1998]
C.
Parties directly affected by a proposed zoning amendment or Zoning
Map change will be notified by card or letter of the date of the public
hearing.
D.
Petitioners have the responsibility of ensuring insertion in the warrant
by the Board of Selectmen.
E.
§ 306-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-3
1:291
§ 316-4. Subdivision plans.
Original Myler must meet Registry of Deeds and Land Court
requirements. [Amended 8-23-2011]
A.
The mylar, six prints, two copies of application Form A36 and required
fee (See Chapter 306, Fees.) shall be filed with the Planning Board's
agent. The date of the next regular Planning Board meeting thereafter
shall be the date of submission. [Amended 8-23-2011]
B.
A copy of Form A shall be filed with the Town Clerk noting the date of
submittal.
C.
Developer procedure. The following are the steps a developer must
follow in having a subdivision made:
To save costly alterations to expensive detailed plans a relatively
undetailed preliminary plan should first be prepared and reviewed
with the Planning Board, Board of Health, and Board of Public
Works. (See § 322-13 of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land). An
engineer or surveyor will be best able to prepare this. The plan
should include the items listed in § 322-13 of Chapter 322,
Subdivision of Land, and be designed consistent with the standards
in Part 7, Design Standards, of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land.
(For statute, see MGL c. 41, § 81S.) [Amended 8-23-2011]
(1)
This preliminary plan should be submitted to the Planning Board
for approval. This means filing 10 sets of plans, the application
Form B37 and required fee (See Chapter 306 Fees.) with the
Planning Board's agent, a print of the plan with the Board of Health
and a notice stating the date of submission and a copy of Form
B with the Town Clerk (MGL c. 41, § 81S). The filing with the
Town Clerk may be by delivery or by registered mail. The day
of the next regular Planning Board meeting after filing with the
Planning Board's agent will be the date of submission. [Amended
8-23-2011]
(2)
The preliminary plan will be reviewed by the Planning Board, Board
of Health and Board of Public Works, and you can discuss with
them their suggestions for the definitive plan. The Planning Board
will take formal action on the plan and notify you of its action. (See
MGL c. 41, § 81S.)
(3)
You then should have your definitive plan drawn by an engineer
following requirements of § 322-14 of Chapter 322, Subdivision of
Land. [Amended 8-23-2011]
(4)
When it is ready, the plan is submitted to the Planning Board for
approval. This means filing with the Planning Board's agent the
(5)
A.
36.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
37.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
§ 316-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-4
1:292
original Mylar, 10 prints of each, a copy of application Form C,38
and required fee (See Chapter 306, Fees.) to pay for the hearing
notices and a list of all abutters taken from the latest tax lists. A
copy of Form C must be filed by delivery or by registered mail with
the Town Clerk. (See MGL c. 41, 81T.) One print of the plan is
also to be filed with the Board of Health. (See MGL c. 41, § 81U.)
[Amended 8-23-2011]
The Planning Board will then hold a public hearing on the plan
in accordance with § 322-14G of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land
(MGL c. 41, § 81T), which you or your representative should attend.
[Amended 8-23-2011]
(6)
Following the hearing, the Planning Board will act on the plan.
(Section 322-14I of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land, covers this.)
The security is either a covenant agreement (See Form D.39)
prohibiting building permits or the sale of any lots until the
improvements serving that lot are complete or a bond covering
the cost of improvements not yet made allowing the Town to use
the bond to complete improvements if the developer should fail to
do so or fail to do so quickly as agreed upon (MGL c. 41, § 81U.)
After it has security and after a twenty-day appeal period following
approval, the Planning Board will sign the plan. You must then give
them 10 prints of it (MGL c. 41, § 81V). [Amended 8-23-2011]
(7)
The required land improvements are then made in accordance
with your plan and consistent with Part 8, Required Improvements
for a Approved Subdivision, of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land.
[Amended 8-23-2011]
(8)
When improvements are completed or completed for any
substantial part of the subdivision, you may request a release of
your security. (See Form E.40) Release is requested in writing by
registered mail to the Planning Board with a copy by registered
mail to the Town Clerk (MGL c. 41, § 81U).
(9)
Release of all security discharges your obligation to the Town
under the Subdivision Control Law.41 However, it does not mean
that roads have been accepted by the Town, which is an entirely
separate procedure.
(10)
Application review fees; special municipal account pursuant to
MGL c. 44, § 53G. [Amended 8-23-2011]
When a Subdivision application (Form B) and preliminary plans
are submitted to the Planning Board or, in the absence of
(a)
(11)
38.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
39.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
40.Editor’s Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
41.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 316-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-4
1:293
preliminary plans, when a subdivision application (Form C) and
definitive plans are submitted to the Planning Board, a review
fee for the use of outside consultants will be required. (See
Chapter 306, Fees.)
In hiring outside consultants, the Planning Board may engage
engineers, planners, lawyers, urban designers or other
appropriate professionals who can assist the Board in
analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all state laws
and Town regulations.
(b)
Funds received by the Planning Board pursuant to this section
shall be deposited with the Fairhaven Treasurer who shall
establish a special account for the purpose. Expenditures from
this special account may be made at the direction of the Board
without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special
account shall be made only in connection with the review
of a subdivision application for which a review fee has been
collected from the applicant. Failure of an applicant to pay
a review fee shall be grounds for denial of the subdivision
application by the Planning Board.
(c)
Review fees may only be spent by the Planning Board for
services rendered in connection with the subdivision project
from which they were collected. Accrued interest may also be
spent for this purpose. At the completion of the Board's review
of a project, any excess amount in the account, attributable to
a subdivision application, shall be repaid to the applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest. A final report of said account
shall be made available to the applicant's successor in interest.
For the purpose of regulation, any person or entity claiming to
be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board
with documentation establishing such succession in interest.
(d)
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal to the Board
of Selectmen concerning the Planning Board's selection of an
outside consultant. The grounds for such an appeal shall be
limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict
of interest or does not possess the minimum required
qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist either
of an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or
three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field. The required time limit for action upon the application
by the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration of the
administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by
the Board of Selectmen within one month following the filing
of the appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shall
stand.
(e)
Planning Board procedure. The following are the steps the Planning
Board must follow in dealing with a subdivision:
B.
§ 316-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-4
1:294
§ 316-5. Street acceptances. [Amended 8-23-2011]
When a preliminary plan is submitted, it must be carefully reviewed
for completeness (§ 322-13 of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land)
and conformity with your standards (Part 7, Design Standards,
Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land). It is a good idea at this stage
to discuss the plan with the Board of Public Works and any others
who will get involved. [Amended 8-23-2011]
(1)
Within 45 days of submission you must notify both the applicant
and the Town Clerk by certified mail of action on the plan. (MGL c.
41, § 81S)
(2)
Upon receipt of a definitive plan, the Planning Board must set up a
public hearing (§ 322-14 of Chapter 322, Subdivision of Land). The
Planning Board shall determine the date and advertise the notice of
hearing in each of two weeks, the first at least 14 days prior to the
hearing. The Planning Board will mail a copy of the advertisement,
certified mail, to the applicant and to each abutter within 300 feet
(See § 322-4 of Chapter 322, Part 2, Definitions.), as taken from the
most recent tax list. (MGL c. 41, § 81T) [Amended 8-23-2011]
(3)
Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Board or
Planning Board's agent will distribute plans to the Board of Health,
Board of Public Works, Fire Department, Police Department,
Building Department, Conservation Agent, Board of Assessors and
any other interested group. [Amended 8-23-2011]
(4)
Following the hearing, the Board must act on the plan then notify
the applicant of your action by registered mail and file a copy
of your action with the Town Clerk (§ 322-14I(1) of Chapter 322,
Subdivision of Land). The definitive plan is approved by default if
not acted on by the Planning Board within 135 days of submission
where no preliminary plan was submitted or within 90 days of
submission where a preliminary plan was acted on by the Planning
Board (MGL c. 41, § 81U). [Amended 8-23-2011]
(5)
Before signing the plan, you must wait the twenty-day appeal
period and receive security from the developer. If security is a
bond, the Town Counsel and Town Treasurer should check it. (The
amount should be agreed upon by the Board of Public Works.) If
security is a covenant, the Town Counsel should approve its form.
(MGL c. 41, § 81V)
(6)
When the developer requests release of the security you must act
within 45 days of his/her request, or it is automatically granted.
The work done should be carefully inspected before action. If you
approve the release, you send the applicant a notice suitable for
recording, signed by a majority of the Board, to that effect. If you
disapprove the release, you must notify both the applicant and the
Town Clerk by registered mail. (MGL c. 41, § 81U)
(7)
§ 316-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-5
1:295
The following is the procedure for street acceptance of an existing
private way.
A petition to the Board of Selectmen requesting that a particular
street be accepted as a "Town street." Each street shall have its
own petition, and each petition shall be signed by at least 10
residents of the Town of Fairhaven for an Annual Town Meeting and
100 residents of the Town of Fairhaven for a Special Town Meeting.
(1)
Street layout plans and legal descriptions prepared by a registered
land surveyor meeting all Registry of Deeds recording
requirements must be submitted to the Selectmen.
(2)
A public hearing will be called by the Selectmen with notice to
all abutters. Petitioners prior to that hearing shall have obtained
necessary documentation concerning release of fee in the street,
and shall have obtained reports from the Board of Public Works
and Planning Board relative to the condition of road and their
respective recommendations for acceptance.
(3)
In recommending acceptance or not, the Planning Board will be
guided by whether ways created subsequent to February 24, 1966,
meet the current subdivision regulations requirements regarding
design and construction; whether ways created between March
18, 1926, and February 24, 1966, meet subdivisions then in effect,
requiring a forty-foot width; and whether ways created prior to
March 18, 1926, are 40 feet in width and meet current Board of
Public Works requirements of adequacy.
(4)
A.
The following is the procedure for street acceptance of roads approved
through Subdivision Control Law.42
A petition to the Board of Selectmen requesting that a particular
street be accepted as a "Town street." Each street shall have its
own petition, and each petition shall be signed by at least 10
residents of the Town of Fairhaven for an Annual Town Meeting and
100 residents of the Town of Fairhaven for a Special Town Meeting.
(1)
The Board of Selectmen will then forward the request to the
Planning Board and Board of Public Works for review and comment
to determine if the street(s) was constructed in compliance with all
approvals.
(2)
When the review has been completed and all subdivision approvals
have been met, the Board of Selectmen will then advertise a
hearing and notify all abutters within the subdivision, at the
applicant's expense, of the proposed street acceptance.
(3)
If the Board of Selectmen vote to approve the request, a warrant
article will he submitted for Town Meeting.
(4)
B.
42.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 316-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-5
1:296
If Town Meeting votes to accept the street(s), the Town will then
record the necessary plans and documents with the Registry of
Deeds. All recording fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
(5)
The following plans and information will be required to be
submitted for Planning Board and Board of Public Works review
and approval:
A title search showing that the property is free of all liens and
encumbrances.
(a)
Plans and documents which shall include the following:
[1] One set of originals and 10 sets of prints.
[2] Plan(s) to be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
[3] Size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
Rules of Registry of Deeds to be followed (borders, size
lettering, scale, reserved boxes, etc.).
[4]
[5] Only one proposed street to be shown per sheet.
Match lines to be used if a street is to be shown on more
than one sheet.
[6]
Title block to be: "THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS STREET ACCEPTANCE PLAN OF _____
PREPARED FOR THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN, BRISTOL
COUNTY."
[7]
[8] Date plan was prepared.
Reserve spaces for:
Town Clerk's endorsements: "(Name of Street)
accepted by vote of Town Meeting; passed (date),
attest: _________, Town Clerk."
[a]
Statement that: "(Name of Street) is part of the (name)
Subdivision approved by the Fairhaven Planning
Board, tiled with the Town Clerk, (date) and recorded
at the Bristol County S. D. Registry of Deeds (book and
page)."
[b]
Planning Board's endorsement block with eight
signature lines and a date line.
[c]
Board of Selectmen's endorsement block with three
signature lines and a date line.
[d]
[9]
(b)
(6)
§ 316-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-5
1:297
§ 316-6. Mandatory referrals.
Street line to be shown in metes and bounds. Tie courses
so that street can he mathematically closed. Chord
bearings and distances for all curves to be shown.
[10]
Street to be tied to Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate
System. Every plan shall have at least four survey-quality
points on each sheet tied into the Massachusetts State
Plane Coordinate System (NAD 1983 datum), using said
published control points or the global positioning system.
The plan shall note the coordinates of the four tie-in
points, the datum, and the source and location of
monuments used for data.
All street line monuments to be shown and identified
and their exact coordinates shown, in accordance with
the requirements in the above subsection.
[a]
At least 100 feet of lot property lines shown with
metes and bounds.
[b]
Ownership of lots (including Registry Book and page)
at the time the subdivision was approved by the
Planning Board.
[c]
Land court case numbers, whenever appropriate,
must appear on plans.
[d]
Full legal document (including complete descriptions)
suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds,
deeding each proposed street to the Town of
Fairhaven.
[e]
Necessary prints, forms and fee for approval-notrequired
endorsement.
[f]
All plans must be accompanied by a CD-ROM or DVD
containing geographic data in accordance with the
Standard for Digital Plan Submittals to Municipalities
(Version 1.0) issued by the Office of Geographic and
Environmental Information (MassGIS).
[g]
[11]
As-built plans of all roads and utilities within the subdivision must
he submitted and approved by the Board of Public Works before a
street can be accepted.
(7)
All plans for parks, monuments or public works buildings must be
submitted to the Planning Board for review at least two weeks prior to
action by the Selectmen in inserting an article regarding them in the
Town Warrant (§§ 65-3 and 65-4).
A.
§ 316-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-6
1:298
§ 316-7. Special permit required.
Persons or departments requesting such review should submit two
copies of a plan of the site drawn to scale, showing proposed structures,
parking, landscaping, drainage and the ground floor plan elevations of
all proposed buildings and utilities.
B.
Persons or departments making submissions for review are urged to
appear at a Planning Board meeting at the time of submission to explain
their proposal.
C.
A special permit from the Planning Board will be required in
accordance with § 198-29A of Chapter 198, Zoning. A copy of the
application shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
A.
The application is to be accompanied by:
A fee as set forth in Chapter 306, Fees, to cover the costs of public
hearing notices and related costs.
(1)
Ten copies of the plans and specifications needed for the decision
by the special permit granting authority (SPGA), if any. [Amended
8-23-2011]
(2)
B.
The Board will schedule a public hearing at the earliest possible date,
but no later than 65 days after filing the application depending on the
availability of needed information and response from other interested
boards and agencies and publication time as required by MGL c. 40A,
§ 11.
C.
The notice of the public hearing shall include:
(1) The name of the applicant.
The location of the area or premises, including a street address, if
any.
(2)
(3) The subject matter of the hearing.
(4) The date, time and place of the hearing.
D.
Notice of public hearing shall be:
Published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Town once
in each of two successive weeks. The first publication may not be
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(1)
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(2)
Mailed, certified return receipt to parties in interest which shall
include the applicant, abutters, owners of land directly opposite on
any public or private street or way, the owners of the land within
300 feet of the property line, Planning Board of every abutting city
(3)
E.
§ 316-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-7
1:299
or town. (The Assessors shall certify the names and addresses of
parties in interest.) [Amended 8-23-2011]
Mailed to other individuals, boards or agencies as deemed
advisable by this Board.
(4)
If this Board has requested a review of special permit application
by other boards or agencies, they shall make recommendations, if so
desired, and send them to the special permit granting authority within
35 days after they receive the application. Failure of a board to report
within 35 days shall be deemed no opposition.
F.
Within 90 days following the date of the public hearing the SPGA shall
take final action. If the Board fails to take final action within the ninetyday
time limit, the special permit shall be deemed granted. NOTE: The
issuance of a special permit requires a two-thirds vote of the Board with
more than five members, a vote of a least four members of the fivemember
Board and a unanimous vote of a three-member Board.
G.
Before granting a special permit, this Board shall find that the proposed
use or activity is in compliance with all provisions and requirements
of Chapter 198, Zoning, and in harmony with the general purpose
and intent, and shall include a plan of all landscaping details, and
shall be signed by a landscape architect when a site plan exceeds the
twenty-parking-space requirement, to be in compliance with Chapter
198, Zoning, and the Board requirement. (See § 198-8 of Chapter 198,
Zoning.) [Amended 8-23-2011]
H.
Special permits may be issued subject to such conditions, safeguards
or other limitations on time or use as the Board may impose for the
protection of the neighboring uses or otherwise serving the purpose of
Chapter 198, Zoning. Such conditions, safeguards and limitations shall
be imposed in writing.
I.
The Board will keep a detailed record of its proceedings which will
indicate:
The vote of each member upon each question, including whether
the member was absent or failed to vote;
(1)
(2) The reason or reasons for the Board's decision; and
(3) The official action taken.
J.
Upon granting a special permit, this Board shall:
File a copy of the decision with the record of its proceedings and
plans, if any, with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk;
(1)
Mail a certified copy of the decision to the owner and to the
applicant if other than the owner; and
(2)
K.
§ 316-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-7
1:300
§ 316-8. Unaccepted street discontinuance. [Added 8-23-2011]
Send a notice of the decision to the parties in interest and to
persons who requested a notice at the public hearing.
(3)
A special permit shall not take effect until:
The Town Clerk certifies on a copy of the decision issued by this
Board to the owner that 20 days have elapsed without filing of an
appeal or that any appeal filed has been dismissed or denied; and
(1)
The certified copy of the decision has been recorded at the owner's
expense in the Registry of Deeds, indexed in the grantor index
under the name of the record owner and noted on the owner's
certificate of title.
(2)
L.
If the application is unfavorably acted upon, the applicant may not
reapply within two years except by:
(1) First requesting the Planning Board consent to such action.
The Planning Board, before voting on whether to give such consent,
shall notify all parties in interest of the time and place when the
question of such consent will be considered.
(2)
A nine-tenths vote of the members of the Planning Board must shall
be required for a consent. [Amended 8-23-2011]
(3)
This Board may allow reapplication after making findings of
specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the
unfavorable action was based and must describe such changes in
the record of its proceedings.
(4)
M.
Any application for a special permit may be withdrawn without
prejudice by the petitioner prior to the publication of the first public
hearing notice. Once the notice has been published, a withdrawal
without prejudice may only be with the approval of the Board.
N.
Street discontinuance application, filed with the Town Clerk and the
Planning Board. The next regularly scheduled Planning Board Meeting
shall be the date of submission to the Planning Board.
A.
Application.
The application is to be accompanied by:
A fee as set forth in Chapter 306, Fees, to cover the costs of
public hearing notices and related costs.
(a)
Ten prints of the survey of the street to be discontinued and
legal description. A marked-up copy of the Assessors Map is
acceptable. Please note that if a survey is not submitted and
the discontinuance is approved, than a survey will be required
as a condition of approval.
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 316-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-8
1:301
§ 316-9. Accepted street discontinuance. [Added 8-23-2011]
(c) A detailed narrative describing the proposal.
The applicant shall provide documentation that the street to be
discontinued was originally part of the subject lot. Documentation
may include deeds and copies of recorded plans and/or plats.
(2)
A public hearing before the Planning Board is required for all street
discontinuance applications.
C.
Notice of public hearing.
Published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Town once
in each of two successive weeks. The first publication may not be
less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing.
(1)
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(2)
Mailed, certified return receipt, to parties in interest which shall
include the applicant, abutters, owners of land directly opposite
on any public or private street or way and the owners of the
land within 300 feet from the exterior bounds of the proposed
street discontinuance. (The Assessors shall certify the names and
addresses of parties in interest.)
(3)
Mailed to other individuals, boards or agencies as deemed
advisable by this Board.
(4)
D.
After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall take final
action. The granting of the street discontinuance requires a two-thirds
vote of the eight-member Board.
E.
A copy of the decision on the street discontinuance shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and mailed to the owner/applicant.
F.
After the twenty-day appeal period has expired, a Form A43
consolidating the discontinued street into the adjacent lots will need to
be filed with the Planning Board.
G.
Street discontinuance application, filed with the Selectmen, Town Clerk
and the Planning Board. The next regularly scheduled Planning Board
Meeting, shall be the date of submission to the Planning Board.
A.
Application.
The application is to be accompanied by:
A fee as set forth in Chapter 306, Fees, to cover the costs of
public hearing notices and related costs.
(a)
(1)
B.
43.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Town offices.
§ 316-8 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-9
1:302
§ 316-10. Repetitive petition. [Added 8-23-2011]
Ten prints of the survey of the street to be discontinued and
legal description.
(b)
(c) A detailed narrative describing the proposal.
The applicant shall provide documentation that the street to be
discontinued was originally part of the subject lot. Documentation
may include deeds and copies of recorded plans and/or plats.
(2)
A public hearing before the Planning Board is required for all street
discontinuance applications.
C.
Notice of public hearing.
Published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Town once
in each of two successive weeks. The first publication may not be
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(1)
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(2)
Mailed, certified return receipt, to parties in interest which shall
include the applicant, abutters, owners of land directly opposite
on any public or private street or way and the owners of the land
within 300 feet radius from the exterior bounds of the proposed
street discontinuance. (The Assessors shall certify the names and
addresses of parties in interest.)
(3)
Mailed to other individuals, boards or agencies as deemed
advisable by this Board.
(4)
D.
After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board will vote on a
recommendation, which will be forwarded on to Town Meeting. A copy
of the recommendation on the street discontinuance shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and mailed to the owner/applicant.
E.
If approved by Town Meeting, a Form A consolidating the discontinued
street into the adjacent lots will need to be filed with the Planning
Board.
F.
Repetitive petition application, filed with the Town Clerk and the
Planning Board. The next regularly scheduled Planning Board Meeting
shall be the date of submission to the Planning Board.
A.
Application.
The application is to be accompanied by a fee as set forth in
Chapter 306, Fees, to cover the costs of public hearing notices and
related costs.
(1)
The request for a repetitive petition shall include a plan of the
site, a copy of the Board of Appeals decision and documentation
(2)
B.
§ 316-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-10
1:303
Chapter 322
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 65.
Street acceptances — See Ch. 169, Part 3.
Wetlands — See Ch. 192.
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
Subdivision fees — See Ch. 306.
Subdivision procedural rules — See Ch. 322.
illustrating how the request is materially different from the request
denied by the Board of Appeals.
A public hearing before the Planning Board is required for all repetitive
petition applications.
C.
Notice of public hearing.
Published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Town once
in each of two successive weeks. The first publication may not be
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(1)
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not
less than 14 days before the day of the hearing.
(2)
Mailed, certified return receipt, to parties in interest which shall
include the applicant, abutters, owners of land directly opposite
on any public or private street or way and the owners of the land
within 300 feet of the property line. (The Assessors shall certify the
names and addresses of parties in interest.)
(3)
Mailed to other individuals, boards or agencies as deemed
advisable by this Board.
(4)
D.
After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall take
final action. An affirmative vote by seven of the eight Planning Board
members is required to grant a repetitive petition request.
E.
A copy of the decision on the repetitive petition shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and mailed to the owner/applicant and shall not be final
until the twenty-day appeal period has expired.
F.
§ 316-10 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 316-10
1:304
PART 1
Title, Purpose and Authority
§ 322-1. Title.
These rules and regulations of the Fairhaven Planning Board shall be known
and may be cited as the "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision
of Land, Town of Fairhaven, Massachusetts," which herein are called "Rules
and Regulations."
§ 322-2. Purpose.
§ 322-3. Statutory authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Fairhaven
by MGL c. 41, § 81Q, said Board hereby adopts these rules and regulations
governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Fairhaven. Such rules
and regulations shall be effective upon transmittal to the Town Clerk, the
Register of Deeds, and the Recorder of the Land Court.
The purpose of the establishment of subdivision control procedures in
the Town of Fairhaven is to secure for the Town benefits and protection
authorized by MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive (the Subdivision
Control Law), as well as the protection and treatment of surface and
groundwater and the treatment and control of drainage, erosion and
sedimentation. The purpose of these rules and regulations is to specify
and make clear the procedures to be followed and the responsibilities
to be discharged in operations under the Subdivision Control Law. The
powers of the Planning Board under these rules and regulations shall
be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to
all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient
for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent
public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of
motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and
other emergencies; for ensuring compliance with the Fairhaven Zoning
Bylaw; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage,
utility services, fire, police, streetlighting, and other similar municipal
equipment, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision;
and for coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and
with the public ways in the Town and with the ways in neighboring
subdivisions.
A.
It is the intent of these rules and regulations that any subdivision plan
filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such Board
if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of Health and
to these rules and regulations; provided, however, that the Planning
Board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in § 322-11, such
portions of these rules and regulations as is deemed advisable.
B.
§ 322-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:305

PART 2
Definitions
§ 322-4. Word usage; terms defined.
For the purposes of these rules and regulations, the following words
and terms used herein are hereby defined or the meanings thereof
explained, extended, or limited as stated in MGL c. 41, as amended.
Where a term is defined in the Subdivision Control Law or the
Fairhaven Zoning Bylaw and not herein, such definition shall be
incorporated by reference herein. Other terms or words or phrases
shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language, but technical words and phrases and such other terms or
phrases as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in
law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
A.
The following terms and words shall have the following meanings:
AASHTO — A policy on geometric design of highways and streets
developed by AASHTO for highway materials and methods of sampling
testing adopted by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
ABUTTERS — The owners of land sharing a common property line
with the owner of land referred to in a subdivision application and the
owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way,
and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of
land referred to in the application as they appear on the most recent
applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any such owner is
located in another city/town.
ACI — Manual of Concrete Practice published by the American
Concrete Institute.
APPLICANT — All owners of the land referred to in an application filed
with the Planning Board, or the owner's duly authorized representative.
Such representatives shall submit a letter of authorization from the
record owner(s) of the land.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of saturated, permeable
material that contains significant amounts of potable groundwater
capable of being withdrawn for public use.
BMPs — Best management practices are structural, nonstructural and
managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and
practical means to prevent and/or reduce nonpoint source pollution.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Fairhaven.
BPW — The Board of Public Works or the Board of Public Work's
authorized designee.
BUFFER STRIP — A dense planting of trees and shrubs and/or plants,
which shall provide a year-round barrier that is sight impervious
B.
§ 322-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-4
1:307
between the lot and the adjacent premises and provides for the proper
treatment of drainage and surface water flows.
CERTIFIED BY (OR ENDORSED BY) A PLANNING BOARD — As
applied to a plan or other instrument required or authorized by the
Subdivision Control Law to be recorded, bearing a certification or
endorsement signed by a majority of the members of the Planning
Board or any other person authorized by the Planning Board to certify
or endorse its approval or other action and named in a written
statement to the Register of Deeds and Recorder of the Land Court,
signed by a majority of the Planning Board.
DEAD-END STREET — Any street or series of streets which must be
entered and exited from the same point, said point being the junction
with the nearest through street.
DIGITAL FILE STANDARDS — For ANR, subdivision and as-built plans,
the applicant shall submit a CD-ROM or DVD containing geographic
data in accordance with the Standard for Digital Plan Submittals to
Municipalities (Version 1.0) issued by the Office of Geographic and
Environmental Information (MassGIS) in 2006, or the most recent
edition of this publication. This publication, or any succeeding edition
of this publication, is hereby incorporated as part of these regulations.
The publication may be accessed via the MassGIS website:
(http://www.mass.gov/mgis/standards.htm).
DRAINAGE — The outflow of water and other fluids from a site,
whether by natural or artificial means.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All facilities, channels and areas that serve to
convey, filter, store and/or receive stormwater, either on a temporary or
permanent basis.
ENGINEER — Any person who is registered or otherwise legally
authorized by the State of Massachusetts to perform professional civil
engineering services.
EROSION — The process of wearing away the soil by either natural
and/or man-made forces to other locations for desirable or undesirable
reasons by means of wind, water, ice, gravity, and glaciers or by
artificial means. Conditions usually, but do not always, create
unvegetated and/or unstable soil conditions.
EROSION/SEDIMENTATION CONTROL — The implementation of
controls which prevent erosion, restrict sedimentation movement and
stabilize exposed soils during land disturbance and construction. (See
the "Massachusetts Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for
Urban and Suburban Areas," Massachusetts Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs.)
EXTENDED DETENTION POND — An enhanced detention pond that
provides both flood control and treatment of the first flush of
stormwater runoff. Storage time for the first flush is a minimum of 48
hours.
§ 322-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-4
1:308
FIRST FLUSH — The volume generated by the first 1.25 inches of
stormwater runoff. This first 1.25 inches of runoff carries the majority
of accumulated pollutants from impervious surfaces. The first flush
treatment volume in cubic feet (Vt) is determined by the following
formula:
Vt = (1.25/12 inches)(Rv)(Site Area in square feet)
where,
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) and I = the percent impervious area. "Impervious
area" is defined as any man-made cover that is not vegetated. In
residential areas, the percent impervious area is obtained from the
TR-55 table "Runoff Curve Numbers for Urban Areas, Residential
District by Average Lot Size."
FOREBAY — A storage area provided near a BMP inlet to trap incoming
sediments before they accumulate in a basin/pond BMP.
FRONTAGE — A lot boundary line, which abuts a public or private way
and across which line there is legal and physical access.
GROUNDWATER — All the water found beneath the surface of the
ground. The term refers to the slowly moving subsurface water present
in aquifers and recharge areas.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or combination of
substances, including any liquid petroleum product, that, because of
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to water
supplies or human health if generated or disposed of into or on any land
or water in this Town. Any substance deemed a "hazardous waste" in
MGL c. 21C, as amended, shall also be deemed a hazardous material
for the purposes of these rules and regulations.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A soil characterization classification
system defined by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Soils within the
same group have the same runoff potential under similar storm and
cover conditions.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE/AREA — Impermeable surface, such as
pavement or rooftop, which prevents the infiltration of water into the
soil.
LEACHABLE WASTES — Waste material, including solid wastes,
sewage, sludge and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing
waterborne contaminants to the surrounding environment.
LOT — An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries,
used, or available for use, as the site of one or more buildings
complying with the area, frontage and other requirements of the Zoning
Bylaws of the Town of Fairhaven.
OWNER — The owner of record as shown by the records in the Bristol
County S. D. Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry or the most
recent Assessors' records.
§ 322-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-4
1:309
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow during a storm, usually
in reference to a specific design storm event (i.e., two-year, ten-year,
twenty-five-year, one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm event).
PERVIOUS SURFACE/AREA — Surfaces or soils which are permeable,
allowing water to pass or migrate downward.
PLAN, DEFINITIVE — A proposed, detailed plan of a subdivision
submitted by the applicant to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or
Land Court when approved by the Planning Board.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A plan of a subdivision submitted by the
applicant showing sufficient information to form a clear basis for
discussion and clarification of its general contents and for the
preparation of a definitive plan.
RECHARGE — The return of water to an underground aquifer by
natural or artificial means.
RECHARGE AREA — Any area of porous, permeable geologic deposits,
especially, but not exclusively, deposits of sand and gravel, through
which water from any source will recharge an aquifer.
RESERVE STRIP — A piece of land between the boundary of the
subdivision street or way that would be used to prohibit the extension
of the street to an adjacent street or subdivision.
SEDIMENT — Soil material, such as, but not limited to, organic matter,
rock, sand, silt, or gravel and transported or deposited by erosion, the
movement of wind, water, ice, gravity, glaciers or by artificial means.
STREET —
An improved public way laid out by the Town of Fairhaven, or
the Bristol County Commissioners, or the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts; or
(1)
A way which the Fairhaven Town Clerk certifies is maintained by
public authority and used as a public way; or
(2)
A public or private way, improved in accordance with a plan
approved and endorsed by the Planning Board under the Fairhaven
Subdivision Rules and Regulations and the Subdivision Control
Law; or
(3)
A way in existence as of January 1, 1957, having in the opinion of
the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to accommodate the vehicular traffic anticipated by
reason of the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served
thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such
land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. A public or
private way shall not be deemed to be a street as to any lot of land
that does not have rights of access to and passage over said way.
(4)
§ 322-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-4
1:310
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which collects, or may reasonably be
expected to collect, traffic from several minor streets, or which handles
traffic equivalent to that generated by 50 homes or more, or which
serves nonresidential fronting property.
STREET, LANE — A street which, by its location and design, may not
reasonably be expected to service nonresidential property, or serve as
a means of access to more than 10 homes.
STREET, MINOR — A street which cannot qualify as a lane, but which
can be expected to handle less traffic than a collector street.
STREET, PAPER — A street shown on a recorded plan but never built
on the ground.
SUBDIVIDER — See "applicant."
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots
and shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory
subdivided; provided, however, that the division of a tract of land into
two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within
the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is
made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on a public
way or a way which the Clerk of the Town certifies is maintained and
used as a public way, or a way shown on a plan theretofore approved
and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or a
way in existence on January 1, 1957, when the Subdivision Control Law
became effective in the Town, having, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to
provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use
of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation
of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or
to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance
as is then required by zoning or other ordinance or bylaw, if any, of
said Town for erection of a building on such lot, and if no distance is
so required, such frontage shall be of at least 20 feet. Conveyances
or other instruments adding to, taking away from or changing the size
and shape of a lot in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected
without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on
which two or more buildings were standing on January 1, 1957, when
the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town, into separate
lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing shall not
constitute a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive,
entitled "Subdivision Control," as last amended.
SURFACE WATER — Water on the earth's surface, exposed to the
atmosphere, such as rivers, lakes, streams and creeks.
SURFACE WATER QUALITY CLASSIFICATIONS — Waters designated
for protection under 314 CMR 4.04 (2).
§ 322-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-4
1:311
SURVEYOR — Any person who is registered or otherwise legally
authorized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to perform landsurveying
services.
TR-20 — A NRCS hydrology procedure for complex watersheds. The
computer program calculates runoff volumes, peak discharges and
hydrographs at various locations in the watershed. Design storms and
actual rainfall events can be analyzed.
TR-55 — Presents simplified hydrology procedures to calculate runoff
volumes and peak discharge in small watersheds. It is based on TR-20
hydrology procedures and actual TR-20 computer runs.
VERNAL POOL HABITAT — Confined basin depressions which, at least
in most years, hold water for a minimum of two continuous months
during the spring and/or summer, and which are free of adult fish
populations, as well as the area within 100 feet of the mean annual
boundaries of such depressions, to the extent that such habitat is within
an area subject to protection under MGL. c. 131, § 40, as specified
in 310 CMR 10.02(1). These areas are essential breeding habitat, and
provide other extremely important wildlife habitat functions during
nonbreeding seasons as well, for a variety of amphibian species such
as wood frog (Rana sylvatica) and the spotted salamander (Ambystoma
macultum), and are important habitat for other wildlife species.
Vt = (1.25/12 inches)(Rv)(Site Area in square feet) where, Rv = 0.05 +
0.009(I) I = the % impervious area. Impervious area is defined as any
man-made cover that is not vegetated. In residential areas, the percent
impervious is obtained from the TR-55 table "Runoff Curve Numbers
for Urban Areas, Residential District by Average Lot Size."
WETLANDS — As defined in MGL c. 131, § 40, as may be amended.
WETLANDS BUFFER — Areas that surround and protect a wetland
from adverse impacts to its function and values.
WETLAND RESOURCE AREA — Those resource areas subject to the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, enumerated in 310 CMR 10,
as may be amended, and those resource areas subject to the Town of
Fairhaven Wetlands Bylaw, as may be amended.
§ 322-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-4
1:312
PART 3
General and Administration
§ 322-5. Applicability of statute.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive.
§ 322-6. Validity.
If, in any respect, any provision of these rules and regulations, in whole or in
part, shall prove to be invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall only affect
the part of such provision which shall be invalid, and in all other respects
these rules and regulations shall stand as if such invalid provision of these
rules and regulations shall be invalidated, impaired, or affected thereby.
§ 322-7. Compliance with Zoning Bylaw required.
No plan of a subdivision shall be approved unless all of the building lots
shown on the plan comply with the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Fairhaven,
Massachusetts.
§ 322-8. Amendments.
These rules and regulations or any portion thereof may be amended from
time to time in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 322-9. Definitive plan approval required.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement
or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the
installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a definitive plan
of such subdivision has been submitted to, approved and endorsed by the
Planning Board as hereinafter provided, and recorded at the Bristol County
S. D. Registry of Deeds.
§ 322-10. Requirements for more stringent standards.
The Planning Board may, in special and appropriate cases, require the
developer to follow more stringent standards than the ones mentioned in
these rules and regulations. In doing so, the Planning Board shall notify the
developer, in writing, of said standards and the reason they are required.
§ 322-11. Waiver of compliance.
The Planning Board may, in special and appropriate cases, waive strict
compliance with such portions of these rules and regulations, as
provided for in MGL c. 41, § 81R, where such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the
Subdivision Control Law.
A.
§ 322-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-11
1:313
A request for a waiver of a requirement, rule, or regulation shall be
made, in writing, by the applicant, and submitted, whenever feasible,
with the submission of the preliminary plan.
B.
If the Planning Board approves the request for a waiver, it shall endorse
conditions of such waiver (if any) on the plan or set them forth in
a separate instrument attached to and referenced to the plan, which
shall be deemed a part of the plan. The Planning Board shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of its approval, disapproval, or approval with
conditions.
C.
§ 322-11 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-11
1:314
PART 4
Procedure for Submission and Endorsement of Non-Subdivision
Plans
(Plans
Believed
Not
To
Require
Approval)
§ 322-12. Submission; contents; action.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Bristol County S.
D. Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land
and who believes that his/her plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law shall file his/her plan as hereinafter provided
with the Planning Board for such determination.
A.
The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board's agent a Mylar and/or
the original reproducible plan and six prints of the plans accompanied
by two copies of a completed application Form A44 and the appropriate
fee, together with any necessary evidence to show that the plan does
not require approval.
B.
The applicant shall file, by delivery or registered or certified mail,
a notice with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission and
accompanied by a copy of the completed application (Form A). The
day of the next regular Planning Board meeting after filing with the
Planning Board's agent shall be considered to be the date of
submission.
C.
Contents of plan; sheet size requirements.
The plan submitted shall be suitable for recording in the Bristol
County S. D. Registry of Deeds, and shall include at least the
following:
(a) Title: Approval Not Required Plan drawn for (name of owners).
(b) Date, scale and North arrow.
A locus at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet sufficient to
identify where in the Town of Fairhaven the property is located
and indicating the boundary lines of proposed lots.
(c)
The name, seal and signature of the registered professional
land surveyor who prepared the plan.
(d)
(1)
D.
44.Editor's Note: Copies of Form A are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-12
1:315
The inscription "Fairhaven Planning Board Approval under the
Subdivision Control Law Not Required" followed by eight
signature lines and a place to record the date.
(e)
Boundaries of the entire original tract in a shaded heavy line,
if the lots or parcels to be recorded were divided from a larger
tract.
(f)
The frontage and area in square feet shall be shown for every
lot or parcel. All lots and parcels shall be designated
numerically or alphabetically in sequence. The names and
widths of all abutting streets shall be shown.
(g)
(h) All existing and proposed easement(s) shall be shown.
Sheet size shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, but shall be at
least 8.5 inches by 11 inches.
(2)
The applicant shall submit a CD-ROM or DVD containing geographic
data in accordance with the Standard for Digital Plan Submittals to
Municipalities (Version 1.0) issued by the Office of Geographic and
Environmental Information (MassGIS).
E.
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it
shall forthwith, without a public hearing, endorse on the plan the
words "Planning Board Approval under Subdivision Control Law not
required." Said plan shall be returned to the applicant and the Board
shall notify the Town Clerk of its action.
F.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall, within 21 days of submission of said
plan, so inform the applicant and return the plan. The Board shall also
notify the Town Clerk of its determination.
G.
All plans submitted for approval not required endorsement shall
contain the following plat note: "Planning Board endorsement under
the Subdivision Control Law should not be construed as either an
endorsement or an approval of compliance with the Fairhaven Zoning
Bylaw."
H.
§ 322-12 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-12
1:316
PART 5
Procedures for Submission of Preliminary Plans
§ 322-13. Submission; contents; approval.
General.
In the case of a subdivision showing lots in a residential zone, a
preliminary plan is not required but is highly encouraged. In the
case of a nonresidential subdivision a preliminary plan is required.
A preliminary plan of a residential subdivision may be submitted by
the applicant to the Board of Health and to the Planning Board for
discussion and approval by the Planning Board. Preliminary plans
are required for nonresidential subdivisions and must be submitted
by the applicant to the Board of Health and to the Planning Board
for discussion and approval by the Planning Board. The submission
of such a preliminary plan will enable the subdivider, the Planning
Board and other municipal agencies to discuss and clarify the
problems of such subdivision before a definitive plan is prepared.
The degree of review and effectiveness of a Planning Board's
comments shall be in direct proportion to the accuracy and amount
of information provided by the applicant on the preliminary plan.
(1)
Staking of a subdivision. In order to facilitate on-site review by the
various reviewing agencies, the applicant shall, at the time of filing
of the preliminary plan, stake and brush cut to a minimum of five
feet of the center line of all proposed ways in the subdivision and
shall stake all points where lot lines intersect rights-of-way.
(2)
A.
Submission. Preliminary plans shall include the following information
and shall be filed with the Planning Board's agent.
The applicant shall submit 10 prints of the plans, accompanied by
two copies of a completed application Form B45 and the appropriate
fee.
(1)
The applicant must also file a print of the plan with the Board of
Health, and must file with the Town Clerk a notice of the date of
submission and a copy of the completed application Form B.
(2)
B.
Contents. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet or greater on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets.
Said plan shall show sufficient information about the subdivision to
form a clear basis for discussion and for the preparation of the
definitive plan. In addition, the plan shall show at least the following
information:
The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend
and title, "Preliminary Plan."
(1)
C.
45.Editor's Note: Copies of Form B are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-13
1:317
A locus plan of the subdivision showing its relation to the
surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals 600 feet.
(2)
The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of
the designer, engineer, or surveyor shall appear on the lower righthand
corner.
(3)
The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent local
tax list.
(4)
(5) The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets.
Zoning classification and location of any zoning district boundaries
that may lie within the locus of the plan.
(6)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate
areas and dimensions.
(7)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and
any public areas within the subdivision in a general manner.
(8)
The proposed system of water supply, sewage disposal and
drainage control, including adjacent existing natural waterways, in
a general manner.
(9)
Major features of the land such as, but not limited to, existing walls,
fences, monuments, structures, underground structures, utilities,
wells, septic systems, large trees, wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, wetlands, water bodies, natural waterways and
drainage ditches.
(10)
The existing and proposed topography of the land in five-foot
contours.
(11)
(12)Elevation and limits of the base flood elevation.
In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land owned
by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision, a plan showing in
a general manner the proposed overall development of all of said
land.
(13)
(14)Vacant adjacent land buildout plan.
Approval.
Within 45 days after submission of the preliminary plan, the
Planning Board shall approve, or approve with modifications, or
disapprove said preliminary plan, and in the case of disapproval,
the Board shall state, in detail, the reasons for its disapproval.
(1)
The Planning Board shall file its decision with the Town Clerk, and
shall send a copy of said decision to the applicant.
(2)
D.
§ 322-13 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-13
1:318
Approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning Board does not
constitute approval of a subdivision, but does facilitate the
procedure in securing approval of the definitive plan. In addition,
such approval does not in any way authorize the owner to proceed
with construction of roadways and/or other work in the subdivision.
(3)
The Planning Board will not approve plans until issues relating
to road layout, road alignment, intersections with existing streets,
vehicular and nonvehicular connections to adjoining properties,
and general project issues have been satisfactorily addressed.
Other strictly engineering issues, such as detailed drainage, water
and sewer engineering, may be addressed at the definitive stage.
If the applicant does not provide engineering analysis at the
preliminary stage, however, the Planning Board will not be able
to provide feedback, and any approval is based on the applicant
being able to satisfactorily address these issues at the definitive
plan stage.
(4)
§ 322-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-13
1:319

PART 6
Procedures for Submission of Definitive Plans
§ 322-14. Submission; contents; approval procedures; guarantees.
General.
A definitive plan of a subdivision must be submitted to the Planning
Board. Said plan shall be governed by the Subdivision and Zoning
Regulations in effect at the time of submission of such plan, or the
regulations in effect at the time of submission of a preliminary plan,
provided that the definitive plan, which evolved, is submitted to the
Planning Board within seven months from the date of submission of
the preliminary plan.
(1)
A definitive plan of a subdivision must be submitted for the
improvement of a paper street.
(2)
A.
Submission.
Any person who submits a definitive plan of a subdivision to the
Planning Board for approval shall either file with the Planning
Board agent, or send by registered mail to the Planning Board, care
of the Town Clerk, the following:
The applicant shall submit 10 prints of the plans, accompanied
by two copies of a completed application Form C46 and the
appropriate fee.
(a)
Form G,47 Subdivision Plan Checklist, shall be filled out and
submitted with the application.
(b)
A narrative describing how and why the proposal meets the
criteria for a subdivision.
(c)
A list of abutters, taken from the most recent tax list, and
certified by the Assessor's Office.
(d)
(1)
The applicant must also file a print of the plan with the Board of
Health, and must file with the Town Clerk a notice of the date of
submission and a copy of the completed application Form C.
(2)
B.
Contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered civil
engineer and registered land surveyor, and shall be clearly and legibly
drawn in black India ink upon Mylar film/sheets. The plan shall be at
the scale of one-inch equals 40 feet, or such scale as the Board may
accept to show details clearly and adequately. Sheet sizes shall be 24
inches by 36 inches minimum and shall conform to Registry of Deeds
C.
46.Editor's Note: Copies of Form C are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
47.Editor's Note: Copies of Form G are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:321
requirements in overall dimensions, with proper margins for filing. If
multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision. The definitive plan shall contain the
following information:
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, benchmark at U.S.G.S.
datum, date and scale, legend and title, "Definitive Plan."
(1)
A locus plan of the subdivision showing relationship of the
subdivision to the surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals
600 feet.
(2)
Suitable space to record the action of the Board, including eight
signature lines, a date line and the Town Clerk's certification as
defined in MGL c.41, § 81X.
(3)
Name and address of the record owner, subdivider, engineer and
surveyor.
(4)
Location and names of all abutters as they appear in the most
recent tax list.
(5)
Zoning classification and location of any zoning district boundaries
that may lie within the locus of the plan. Dimensional regulations
currently in effect shall also be listed, including any conflicts. All
lots must conform to all zoning requirements.
(6)
Location of all wetland resource areas per local and state
regulations, and River Protection Act resource areas, per state
regulations.
(7)
Indication of all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to
the land and their purposes, including any decision on appeal or
variances made by the Zoning Board of Appeals applicable to the
subdivision of land or any building thereon.
(8)
(9) Location of any monument and/or subdivision entrance sign(s).
If waivers are proposed, a separate letter requesting all waivers of
the subdivision rules and regulations.
(10)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements and
public or common areas within the subdivision. The Assessor's
Office shall approve all proposed street names.
(11)
Lot line and boundary lines, areas in square feet, and dimensions
of all proposed lots, with all lots designated numerically and in
sequence. Lot numbers are to be enclosed in circles; street
numbers are to be enclosed in squares.
(12)
Show on each lot the approximate anticipated location for the
house and driveway, and suggested grading and spot elevations.
(13)
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:322
This information will be used to ascertain whether the lot can
comply with applicable sections of the Fairhaven Zoning Bylaw.
Curb cut widths shall meet BPW standards. Curb openings shall
be graded in such a way as to prevent normal runoff water from
entering the driveway from the street right-of-way. For corner lots,
driveways shall be provided on the lesser-classified street. The
distance between the driveway and the beginning of the corner
shall be noted on corner lots. Curb cuts shall also be provided
where sidewalks connect to the street so that wheeled access is
provided.
(14)
Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed, and identified according to the
Massachusetts State Plane coordinate system (NAD 1983 Datum).
At least two permanent concrete or granite monuments must be
placed on site and shown in the plans prior to construction. Bounds
are required at all intersections of street lines, angle points and
changes of curvature of street lines. All control points shall be
tied to and employ NAVD 1988 and the Massachusetts State Plane
Coordinate System (NAD 1983 Horizontal Datum), with horizontal
control using said published control points or the global positioning
system (with horizontal coordinates provided in metric). Vertical
benchmarks separate from horizontal control points may be
provided, provided these points are also tied to permanent
concrete or granite monuments.
(15)
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable (300 feet) proximity of the
subdivision, showing both roadway and right-of-way widths.
(16)
Existing watercourses, water bodies, wetlands and existing and
proposed topography at two-foot contour interval, or as required by
the Planning Board.
(17)
Location and species of proposed street trees shall be shown,
including those trees to be retained as determined in the field by
the Planning Board agent.
(18)
Major features of the land, such as, but not limited to, existing
walls, fences, monuments, structures, underground structures,
utilities, wells, septic systems, large trees, wooded areas, rock
outcroppings, wetlands, water bodies, natural waterways and
drainage ditches.
(19)
(20)Elevation and limits of the base flood.
Cross-sections typical of each street, roadway and sidewalk to be
constructed.
(21)
Separate plan and profiles of every street, showing the following
data:
(22)
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:323
Exterior lines of the way, with sufficient data to determine the
location, direction and length.
(a)
Existing center line profile to be shown as black full line, right
side line as dashed black, left side line as black dots.
(b)
Finished designed center line profile to be full line, with
elevations shown every 50 feet, except on vertical curves,
where the elevations shall be shown every 25 feet.
(c)
All drainage facilities to be shown on plan and profiles,
showing invert elevations, slopes, capacity and velocity.
(d)
All sanitary sewer facilities to be shown on plan and profiles,
showing invert elevations and slopes.
(e)
Water system to be shown, including pipe sizes, shutoff
locations and hydrants.
(f)
Scales shall be horizontal one inch equals 40 feet; vertical one
inch equals four inches.
(g)
(h) Elevations shall refer to mean sea level.
All design work shall be done in accordance with accepted
good engineering practice.
(i)
Additional subdivision submittal requirements. In addition to the above
plans, submission of definitive plans may be required to include the
following:
Environmental impact analysis: required for all subdivisions over
10 acres and all subdivisions within the Naskatucket Overlay
District (NRB). In order to insure the protection of the general
public against any possible undesirable impact of the development
on natural resources, the developer shall submit an analysis of any
such matters of environmental concern, such as preservation of
wetlands, surface water and groundwater quality and air quality.
Said analysis shall be conducted by a qualified professional and
include a summary table of the impacts and proposed mitigation.
Items to be addressed shall be wetlands, floodplains, open space
and recreation, historical archeological features, fisheries and
wildlife, water pollution, water supplies.
(1)
Development impact statements: required for subdivisions 20 acres
or greater. The developer shall submit an analysis of the impact of
the proposed development by qualified professionals. Each of the
sections of said analysis (water, sewer, etc.) shall be presented as
a separate document so that it can be forwarded by the Planning
Board to the appropriate Town department for review. The purpose
of said analysis is to assist the Town in assessing the cumulative
impact of development of the Town. Regardless of the above, the
(2)
D.
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:324
Planning Board's decision shall be based on criteria set in these
regulations:
Water and sewer:
Projected generation of sewage based on standards in 314
CMR by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
[1]
Projected consumption of water based on standards in
"DESIGN," latest edition, Elwyn E. Seelye, or other
respected reference source.
[2]
[3] Fire flow standards cited in these regulations.
Explain impacts of project on sewerage facilities, public
water facilities (including impacts on fire flow
requirements), and on private facilities.
[4]
(a)
Public works:
Additional costs for future plowing and sanding per lane
mile (costs based upon average of past five years for BPW).
[1]
Cost of annual cleaning services (street sweeping and
catch basin cleaning) for the new street.
[2]
[3] Miles of additional pavement added by the subdivision.
(b)
Municipal services such as public works, police, fire, libraries,
recreation.
(c)
Schools.
For purposes of future planning, to provide leeway for
expected changes in school enrollment, the school
enrollment impact analysis should utilize the following
ratios adjusted to housing type:
[a] Single-family detached homes: 0.75 child per unit.
Single-family attached homes (townhouse/rowhouse):
0.5 child per unit.
[b]
[c] Multifamily structures (per unit): 0.375 child per unit.
[1]
The standards used in calculating impacts should be
carefully documented and fully referenced.
[2]
(d)
Traffic study: traffic analysis and mitigation: required for
subdivisions 20 acres or greater. The applicant shall submit traffic
analysis using "Trip Generation Standards" by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers: explain traffic impacts, types of streets,
opportunity for public transit access, impacts on vehicle,
pedestrian, and bicycle circulation.
(3)
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:325
Estimated daily and peak hour vehicle trips generated by the
proposed use, traffic patterns for vehicles and pedestrians
showing adequate access to and from the site, and adequate
vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the site. Previously
generated data may be used; however, it cannot be more than
two years old.
(a)
Traffic flow patterns at the site, including entrances and
egresses and curb cuts on site and within 200 feet of the site.
(b)
A detailed assessment of the traffic safety impacts of the
proposed project or use on the carrying capacity of any
adjacent highway or road, including the projected number of
motor vehicle trips to enter or depart from the site for daily
hour and peak hour traffic levels, road capacities, and impacts
on intersections. Said assessment may be based on the
proposed mitigation [in the plan required by Subsection D(2)
above]. Such analysis shall include incremental impacts at all
significant or constrained intersections where such impacts
may be measurable. Such analysis shall also include a
mitigation plan, as necessary, to mitigate such impacts,
including construction of improvements, payment in lieu of the
project's proportional share of such improvements, or other
soft solutions.
(c)
An overall network analysis showing how the project
distributes traffic and enhances the flow of the existing
network.
(d)
An interior traffic and pedestrian circulation plan designed to
minimize conflicts and safety problems.
(e)
Adequate pedestrian access, including provisions for sidewalks
to provide access to adjacent properties and between
individual businesses within a development.
(f)
Safe provision for school bus stops and, when appropriate,
public transit stops.
(g)
Demonstrate that the project, including any concurrent road
improvements, will not decrease the level of service (LOS) of
all area roads or intersections affected by the project below
the existing conditions when the project is proposed and shall
consider the incremental nature of development and
cumulative impacts on the LOS. The project proponent must
demonstrate that he/she mitigated all cumulative and
incremental traffic impacts. If requested by the applicant, the
Planning Board may accept in-lieu-of payments to fund a
project's proportional share of necessary improvements to
mitigate off-site traffic impacts, including provision of public
transit and pedestrian or bicycle paths, in lieu of requiring
off-site improvements, when it finds that such payments, in
(h)
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:326
conjunction with funds from other projects or sources, will be
used to fund improvements to mitigate traffic impacts. The
Board may, in its discretion, allow minor drops in LOS when
roads have surplus capacity (For example, an A LOS might
drop to a B without mitigation.), but shall still consider
incremental and cumulative impacts of traffic impacts. The
Board may exempt residential projects that would have equal
traffic impacts if they were developed as an as-of-right
development without site plan approval and subdivision
approval. The applicant shall provide for mitigation of all
incremental traffic impacts to ensure that facilities are
adequate to accommodate such traffic on area roads.
Easements. Prior to the final plan endorsement, all easements to
be granted by the developer to the Town of Fairhaven shall be
shown on the subdivision plans with bearings and distances, and
their purpose shall be clearly stated. In addition, the applicant shall
submit easement documents, suitable for recording, deeding said
easements to the Town. The easements shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and to the Board of Public Works.
(4)
Restrictive covenants. The applicant shall submit all documents,
including, but not limited to, master deeds, restrictive covenants,
deed restrictions, shared land, detention pond, open space, and
recreation areas. A homeowners' association must be established
to maintain streets and infrastructure until and unless the streets
are accepted by the Town. Covenants must include the requirement
that the homeowners'/landowners' association or other entity
accept all responsibility under Town bylaws to keep all sidewalks in
front of open space associated with the project free of snow. This
requirement shall apply even if omitted from a covenant.
(5)
Wetlands protection. In accordance with MGL c. 131, § 40, and
the Fairhaven Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Chapter 192, Wetlands,
no person shall remove, fill, dredge, or alter any bank, beach,
dune, flat, marsh or swamp bordering on any existing creek, river,
stream, pond, lake or any land under said waters or subject to
flooding without receiving a negative determination of applicability
or an order or conditions from the local Conservation Commission
and/or Department of Environmental Protection.
(6)
Construction costs. The applicant shall submit a detailed estimate
for all construction within the proposed roadway layout and/or
public utility easements, certified by the project's registered
professional engineer. Said estimate shall be based on the
"Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges," 1988 Edition,
as amended, of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and shall
include:
Quantity, item number, unit price and total amount for each
construction item.
(a)
(7)
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:327
(b) Total amount for cost of completion of project.
(c) Costs adjusted to account for municipal prevailing wage rates.
(d) Costs adjusted to add an inflation/safety factor of 20%.
Engineering inspection, materials testing, legal and other soft
costs.
(e)
Street-lighting. The applicant shall include a street-lighting plan
for the proposed street in the definitive plans. Said system shall
be in conformance with existing systems in the Town, as well as
with the local electric company street-lighting specifications. The
applicant is responsible for purchasing and installing all equipment
for said system, as well as ensuring that the system is the most
energy efficient. The street-lighting system will not be accepted by
the Town unless Town Meeting accepts the street. The applicant
shall include a complete street-lighting system for the proposed
street in the definitive plans prior to endorsement of those plans.
Said system shall be in conformance with existing systems in the
Town, as supplied by the local electric company.
(8)
Erosion/sedimentation control plan. In order to ensure, mitigate
and prevent erosion/sedimentation of disturbed areas during and
after construction activities, the developer shall submit a plan
showing, in detail, what and when such measures will be
implemented, on both a temporary and permanent basis, including
land disturbances for house construction. Any site disturbing more
than one acre must have a detailed stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) and an erosion control plan submitted
to and approved by the EPA or its designee in accordance with
EPA's NPDES Phase II regulations, the Town of Fairhaven's bylaws
governing such and § 322-26, Stormwater management,
Subsection E, erosion and sediment control plan.
(9)
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land. When a
definitive plan of a subdivision is filed with the Planning Board, the
applicant shall also file a complete copy of the submittal with the
Board of Health. The Board of Health shall, within 45 days after the
definitive plan has been submitted, report to the Planning Board, in
writing, with a copy to the person submitting the plan, approval or
disapproval of said plan, and in the event of disapproval shall make
specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such plan
cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public health and
include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in such report,
and where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment
thereof. Failure to report shall be deemed approval by the Board of
Health.
E.
Staking of a subdivision. In order to facilitate on-site review by the
various reviewing agencies, the applicant shall, at the time of filing of
the definitive plan, stake and brush cut to a minimum of five feet of the
F.
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:328
center line of all proposed ways in the subdivision and shall stake all
points where lot lines intersect rights-of-way.
Public hearing. Before approval, modification and approval, or
disapproval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall be
held by the Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81T. The
Board may extend the period permitted by statute between submission
of a definitive plan and action thereon upon written request of the
applicant. The applicant or representative shall be present at the
hearing, unless a written request is submitted.
G.
Review by other officials. Before Planning Board action is taken on a
definitive plan, the Board shall have submitted copies of the plan to the
Board of Public Works, Board of Health, Fire and Police Departments,
Conservation Commission and any other interested Town official for
their comments and recommendations. It is recommended that the
applicant meet with the Fire Department and Board of Public Works
prior to submitting a definitive plan.
H.
Certification of approval.
The action of the Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote,
copies of which shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and
sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his/her address
as stated on the application. If the Board modifies or disapproves
such plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons for its action. Final
approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the Mylar and/or the
original reproducible of the definitive plan by the signatures of a
majority of the Board (or by the signature of the person officially
authorized by the Board) but not until the statutory twenty-day
appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate
of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk and said Clerk
has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed, or if appeal
has been taken, not until the entry of a final decree of the court
sustaining the approval of such plan. After the definitive plan has
been approved and endorsed, the applicant shall furnish the Board
with five prints thereof.
(1)
Final approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the laying
out or acceptance by the Town of streets within a subdivision. Such
laying out or acceptance shall be by action of the Town Meeting
upon recommendation of the Planning Board, Board of Selectmen
and the Board of Public Works.
(2)
Any amended plans, which are resubmitted for approval, shall
follow the same procedures as the original submission (filing fee,
public hearing, etc.). Any amended plans submitted later than
three months following the date of the expiration of the appeal
period or appeal(s) on the disapproval of the originally submitted
plan must conform to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and
(3)
I.
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:329
procedures (filing fee, public hearing, etc.) that are in effect at the
time of the amended plan's filing.
Failure of the developer to record the definitive plan within six months
of its endorsement, or to either initiate construction of improvements
or sell lots in a subdivision or major portion thereof within seven years
of the approval of the definitive plan, shall constitute sufficient reason
for the rescission of such approval for the plan or major portion thereof,
in accordance with the requirements of MGL c. 41, § 81W.
J.
After endorsement, the applicant shall submit a CD-ROM or DVD
containing geographic data in accordance with the Standard for Digital
Plan Submittals to Municipalities (Version 1.0) issued by the Office of
Geographic and Environmental Information (MassGIS).
K.
Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of the Planning Board's
approval of a definitive plan of a subdivision, the applicant shall agree
to complete the required improvements specified in Parts 7 and 8 for all
lots in the subdivision, such construction and installation to be secured
in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81U of the Subdivision Control Law by
one, or in part by the other, of the following methods which may from
time to time be varied with the applicant.
Approval with financial performance guarantees (surety bonds,
money, three-party lender agreement, or letters of credit). The
applicant shall either file a surety company performance bond
or provide a deposit of money or negotiable securities, including
letters of credit, in an amount determined by the Planning Board,
in consultation with the Board of Public Works, to be sufficient to
cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements specified in
these regulations at state (or, if applicable, federal) prevailing wage
rates not covered by a covenant, Form D, and to cover the costs of
inspections, record plans, street acceptance plans, and legal work,
and a contingency/inflation factor of 20%. Warranty principal shall
be not less than 15% of the estimated cost of those components of
the entire project, which shall be dedicated for public use and shall
cover workmanship and materials.
(1)
Letters of credit, three-party agreement for lender retention of
funds, surety bonds and other financial performance guarantees
must be drafted so that the only requirement that must be met for
the Planning Board to draw on the letter is to notify the financial
institution (grantor) that:
(2)
L.
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:330
"We have incurred liability by reason of the failure of the
applicant/developer/owner, within 90 days of the expiration of
this letter, to complete the construction of their project, (insert
name of subdivision and plans), in accordance with the definitive
subdivision plans and submittal, the subdivision approval, the
Fairhaven Zoning Bylaw, and the Rules and Regulations Governing
the Subdivision of Land in Fairhaven. The amount drawn, which
may be more than required to complete the project, will be held in
a segregated bank account until the work can be bid competitively
and the bid awarded and paid for or until the contract for the work
is otherwise let and the work paid for. Any excess over the cost of
completing the work will be returned to the grantor."
Such bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities shall be
approved as to form, the surety or financial institution, and manner
of execution by the Planning Board. For any surety bond:
The surety must agree that any litigation stemming out of the
bond will take place in Massachusetts.
(a)
The bond must include the name and address of the person to
be served for any legal action.
(b)
(c) The bond must specifically include the terms above.
No expiration date may be allowed on the bond, or, in the
alternative, the applicant must provide the Board with
adequate financial assurance that the bond will be renewed
and kept current until the project and warranty performance
period has been completed. The determination of whether or
not the financial assurance is adequate shall be in the sole
discretion of the Board.
(d)
(3)
Approval with covenant.
Instead of filing a bond or depositing money, the applicant
may fulfill a covenant Form D,48 executed and duly recorded
concurrent with recording the subdivision approval by the
owner of record, running with the land, that no lot in the
subdivision shall be sold and no building erected thereon until
such ways, services and, whenever applicable, temporary
turnarounds are constructed and installed, and until record
plans, street acceptance plans, and other required work are
accepted by the Planning Board in accordance with these rules
and regulations so as to adequately serve the lots.
(a)
Such covenant shall be a separate document referred to on the
plan and delivered to the Planning Board. Upon approval of
the covenant by the Planning Board, the applicant shall note
(b)
(4)
48.Editor's Note: Copies of Form D are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:331
the Planning Board's action on the definitive plan, and the
applicant shall record the covenant, endorsed definitive plan,
and other appropriate documents at the Bristol County S. D.
Registry of Deeds.
Completion time schedule.
The performance guarantee, whether by bond, deposit of
money, letter of credit, or covenant, as previously described
herein, shall be contingent upon the completion of such
improvements, and the required one-year warranty as required
in these rules and regulations within a maximum period of
two years of the date of such bond, deposit of money, or
covenant. There shall be at least a three-month period between
the completion date of all improvements and one-year
warranty period and the expiration date of any bond, deposit
of money, or letter of credit. Said three-month period shall give
the Town the opportunity to collect the financial performance
guarantee so that it will be able to complete the necessary
improvements in case a) the developer is unable to do so; and/
or b) the Planning Board denies any requests for an extension
of time. "Warranty" shall include all workmanship and
materials.
(a)
Upon written request from the applicant, the Planning Board
may, at its discretion, grant an extension of time, and such
agreement shall be executed and affixed to the financial
performance guarantee or covenant.
(b)
In the case of a surety company bond, such an agreement for
an extension shall not be effective until the surety delivers to
the Planning Board a written statement that the surety agrees
to the proposed alteration of the completion schedule and that
such alteration shall not relieve or affect the liability of the
surety company.
(c)
Failure to complete all improvements as required by these
rules and regulations within the time allotted shall cause the
Planning Board a) to draw upon the performance guarantee
(surety bond, deposit of money, letter of credit) in order to
complete said improvements; and/or b) schedule a public
hearing in order to rescind approval of the subdivision in
accordance with appropriate sections of MGL c. 41, § 81.
(d)
(5)
Surety extensions.
When a subdivision is not able to meet the above requirement
of two years, then the security must be extended to a future
date certain. If requesting a subdivision security extension,
the developer of the subdivision shall be required to notify,
by certified mail, all residents, property owners and parties of
interest within the affected subdivision of the date, time and
(a)
(6)
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:332
place of the Planning Board meeting at which the extension
request will be reviewed. The Planning Board will take all
parties' concerns in the review of such request, and a majority
of the Board will be needed to obtain approval.
All securities requests will be scrutinized at this time for their
financial stability, and more appropriate forms of securities
may be necessary. The surety company must be listed as
licensed to transact business in Massachusetts and shall
appear on the most recent list as published by the
Massachusetts Division of Insurance.
(b)
The Planning Board reserves the right to consult other
resources, such as but not limited to, state insurance
department, insurance agents, brokers, or other sources of
such information in determining solvency or financial strength
of surety companies. Requests for extensions of surety bonds
will trigger further proof of the above requirements to
determine continued solvency and financial strength.
(c)
Release of performance guarantee.
Procedures for partial release. The subdivider may, upon partial
completion and installation of required improvements in a
subdivision, as specified in these rules and regulations, request
the security for the performance of which was given by bond,
deposit of money, letter of credit, or covenant and make a formal
application, in writing, to the Planning Board for partial release of
his/her performance guarantee, in accordance with the procedures
set forth herein:
Financial performance guarantee. The amount of such bond, or
deposit of money, or letter of credit or three-party agreement
for lender fund retention, held may, from time to time, be
reduced by the Planning Board. The applicant shall present to
the Planning Board a list of all construction items performed
and/or completed, said list to be based on the subdivision
approval, and the subdivision regulations in their entirety. The
amount to be reduced by the Planning Board, after
consultation with the Board of Public Works, shall be based
upon federal or state prevailing wage construction costs at
the time the application for reduction is made. The Planning
Board shall withhold adequate funds to complete the project,
as approved, but shall withhold no less than 20% of the original
approved cost estimate. At the completion of the project (based
on a written acceptance from the Planning Board that the
project has been completed) and a one-year warranty period,
the amount withheld shall be released.
(a)
(b) Covenant.
(1)
M.
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:333
The subdivider may request a release of conditions, Form
E,49 for lots where the required improvements have been
completed for that section of roadway beginning at any
intersection with a Town road and abutting lots up through
the last lot to be released. Lots may only be released if they
abut the completed portion of the road. No partial release
from the covenants will be approved if the total length of
roadway, including a temporary turnaround, abutting said
designated lots, exceeds the Town's maximum allowable
length for dead-end streets, as mentioned in § 322-16,
unless the Planning Board has already approved within the
limits of the development a dead-end street exceeding said
limits.
[1]
In the absence of financial performance guarantees,
adequate covenants will be held to insure completion of
the project, including record plans, street acceptance
plans, site inspections, and legal work. In addition, a
covenant on two lots, which can be built on, will be held
until all work in the subdivision, including the signing of
all necessary legal documents, has been completed.
[2]
Procedures for full release. The subdivider may, upon completion
and installation of required improvements in a subdivision, the
completion of record plans and street acceptance plans, as
specified in these rules and regulations, and the completion of
a one-year labor and materials warranty period, make formal
application, in writing, to the Planning Board for full release of any
outstanding performance guarantee.
Before the Planning Board releases the full interest of the
Town in said performance guarantee:
The Planning Board shall obtain, in writing, from the
Board of Public Works or from a registered professional
engineer chosen by the Planning Board, a certificate or
statement that all work required by these rules and
regulations has been constructed in conformance with the
approved construction plans. In the case where roadways
will remain under private ownership, the project's
registered professional engineer shall supply the abovementioned
certificate or statement.
[1]
The applicant shall present the Planning Board with letters
from the electric, telephone, gas and cable TV companies
stating that their respective underground systems have
been installed to their satisfaction.
[2]
(a)
(2)
49.Editor's Note: Copies of Form E are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:334
The record construction plans, per § 322-48, Record plans
(as-builts), shall be reviewed and approved by the BPW.
[3]
Receive from the applicant street acceptance plan or plans
and necessary documents, as stated in § 322-49, Street
acceptance plans. The Planning Board shall present said
plans and documents, after approval by the Planning
Board, Board of Selectmen and the BPW, to the Town
Meeting for a formal street acceptance.
[4]
The applicant may be required to execute an instrument,
in a form approved by the Planning Board, transferring to
the Town or to an approved public utility company, without
cost, valid unencumbered title to all sanitary sewers,
water mains, and appurtenances thereto, and other
utilities constructed and installed in the subdivision or
approved portion thereof, and conveying to the Town or
to an approved public utility company, without cost and
free of all liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights and
easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace,
operate and forever maintain such sanitary sewers, water
mains and other utilities, with any manholes, conduits,
and other appurtenances, and to do all acts incidental
thereto, in, through, and under the whole of all streets
in the subdivision or approved portion thereof, and if any
such sewers or water mains have been constructed and
installed in land not within such streets, then in, through,
and under a strip of land extending a minimum of 10 feet
in width on each side of the center line of all such sewers
and water mains. The Planning Board may require greater
than 10 feet in width on each side of the center line where
it deems necessary.
[5]
If the Planning Board determines that all improvements as
shown on the endorsed definitive plan and all required plans
and legal documents have been completed satisfactorily, it
shall release all the interest of the Town in such performance
guarantee and return the bond to the person who furnished the
same, or release the covenant, by appropriate instrument, duly
acknowledged, which may be recorded.
(b)
If the Planning Board determines after inspection that said
construction or installation has not been completed, or
wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with
these rules and regulations, the Planning Board shall send by
registered mail to the applicant and to the Town Clerk the
details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply
with its rules.
(c)
The applicant shall have 30 days after receipt of such notice to
correct all problems mentioned in the above, or to request, in
(d)
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:335
writing, a time extension. Failure of the applicant to finish all
the necessary work within said 30 days, or agreed upon time
extension, shall cause the Planning Board to draw upon the
bond or deposit of money as mentioned below.
Any such bond may be enforced and any such deposit may be
applied by the Planning Board for the benefit of the Town of
Fairhaven, as provided in MGL c. 41, § 81, upon failure of the
performance for which any bond or deposit was given, to the
extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of completing such
construction and installation.
(e)
Release of lots from covenant in exchange for bond or deposit of
money. The subdivider may request a release of lots from covenant
in exchange for a financial guarantee, provided that:
The lots run consecutively and are released on both sides of
the road simultaneously, beginning with the lots nearest any
intersection of the subdivision road and a Town road.
(a)
The amount of the financial guarantee and the financial
guarantee process shall be determined by the Planning Board,
as described above.
(b)
(3)
Deviation from approved plan.
After approval of any definitive plan, the location and width of ways
shown thereon, or any street or way subject to the Subdivision
Control Law, shall not be changed unless the plan is amended in
accordance with the provisions set forth in MGL c. 41, § 81W, as
amended, and approved by the Planning Board.
(1)
In the event the applicant desires to alter or change the grade of
a street or the size, location or layout of a storm sanitary or water
line or appurtenant structure, he/she shall:
Provide the Planning Board with a written statement
requesting such alteration or change.
(a)
Provide the Planning Board with three prints of the original
definitive plan with the proposed changes drawn on said prints
in red.
(b)
(2)
No change or alteration shall be permitted unless the Planning
Board has approved such change or alteration.
(3)
After approval of a change or alteration, the applicant shall cause
such approved changes to be shown on the record plans. (See
§ 322-48.)
(4)
Deviations from material and construction specifications shall not
be allowed, except as specifically authorized by the Planning
Board, upon consultation with the BPW and/or consulting engineer.
(5)
N.
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:336
Submission of revised plans, additional materials, etc.
Any revised plans and other additional materials submitted by the
developer after the original submission must be accompanied by a
Form C, with the appropriate fee, and the developer must provide
the number of copies and the format required for the original
submittal.
(1)
The Planning Board may elect not to consider such revised plans
or other additional materials if such plans/materials are not filed
with the Planning Office at least 14 days prior to the date of the
public hearing or meeting at which the developer wishes them to
be considered. This is to ensure that the Town departments and
the public have adequate time to review and comment on said
materials.
(2)
After approval of any definitive plan, the location and width of ways
shown thereon, or any street or way subject to the Subdivision
Control Law, shall not be changed unless the plan is amended in
accordance with the provisions set forth in MGL c. 41, § 81W, as
amended, and approved by the Planning Board.
(3)
In the event the applicant desires to alter or change the grade of
a street or the size, location or layout of a storm sanitary or water
line or appurtenant structure, he/she shall:
Provide the Planning Board with a written statement
requesting such alteration or change.
(a)
Provide the Planning Board with three prints of the original
definitive plan with the proposed changes drawn on said prints
in red.
(b)
(4)
No change or alteration shall be permitted unless the Planning
Board has approved such change or alteration.
(5)
After approval of a change or alteration, the applicant shall cause
such approved changes to be shown on the record plans. (See
§ 322-48.)
(6)
Deviations from material and construction specifications shall not
be allowed, except as specifically authorized by the Planning
Board, upon consultation with the BPW and/or consulting engineer.
(7)
The Planning Board shall have 30 days to respond to the applicant's
request for said change or alteration.
(8)
O.
Private roadway maintenance and open space management.
The Planning Board shall require the formation of a homeowners'
association for subdivisions containing common open areas and/
or ways, which will remain private, the purpose of which is to
(1)
P.
§ 322-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:337
maintain said private ways and open spaces for the protection of
the lot owners in the subdivision.
In cases where a homeowners' association is required, there shall
be written into each deed for every building lot in the subdivision
a set of covenants and restrictions, the form and content of which
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board,
which shall provide for the following:
Establishment of a maintenance trust fund to be drawn upon
from time to time by the association to perform needed
maintenance and reconstruction of private roads, as well as
maintenance of common open spaces in the subdivision. Said
fund shall consist of two parts.
A maintenance endowment shall be established by the
developer in the amount of 10% of the construction
improvements cost, as approved by the Board, prior to
the release of any lot in the subdivision. The principal
amount of the endowment shall not be drawn upon by
the association for at least 25 years from the date of its
establishment, at which time it may be drawn upon for
maintenance or reconstruction of roads.
[1]
Annual maintenance deposits shall consist of interest
generated by the endowment and annual assessments
made to association members, the amount of such annual
assessment to be established by majority vote of the
association.
[2]
(a)
(2)
§ 322-14 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-14
1:338
PART 7
Design Standards
§ 322-15. Purpose; general requirements.
Purpose: These standards are the minimum design standards. Good
construction will often be in excess of these standards. With any code
for design and construction, the engineer's design must guarantee and
be responsible to the adequacy and safety of the design. They cannot
merely meet minimum design standards. Again we use these design
standards as a check at the engineer's design, to ensure that minimum
public safety standards are met.
A.
Streets, sidewalks, water systems, sanitary sewers, storm drain
systems, public and private utilities and other infrastructure shall be
constructed in accordance with this chapter, the Board of Public Works
requirements and the editions of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Public Works a) "Standard Specifications for Highways,
Bridges and Waterways," (to be referred hereto as the "Standard
Specifications"), b) "Construction Standards" on the date of the
subdivision application (to be referred to hereto as the "Construction
Standards"), and c) "Massachusetts Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas" in effect on the date of
submission of the subdivision application. If conflicts exist, the Planning
Board, in consultation with the BPW, and consultant engineer shall
determine which standard will be enforced.
B.
The subdivision shall be so designed as to protect the safety,
convenience and welfare of the occupants of the subdivision and the
Town of Fairhaven, through reasonable precautions against possible
natural disasters, provisions for traffic safety and convenience,
assurance of adequate sanitary conditions and consideration of
amenities. Proposed subdivision shall conform to overall development
plans and policies, which may be adopted by the Planning Board, and
shall adhere to the principles of sound planning and good engineering.
It shall be the responsibility of the Design Engineer for the adequacy
and safety of the design.
C.
No land shall be divided for residential use if it is of such a character
that it cannot be used for building purposes without danger to health.
D.
Nonbuildable lot. Any lot showing on a plan, which fails to meet the
frontage and/or minimum lot size requirement for the zone, shall be
required to show the following:
"No building shall be placed on lot ___________ without further
subdivision approval as provided for in MGL c. 41, § 81Y." The
preceding text shall be added inside the property lines on each lot
that is nonbuildable. Referencing notes on nonbuildable lots within
such property lines will be permitted only if the subject lot does not
contain space for the full text.
(1)
E.
§ 322-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-15
1:339
§ 322-16. Streets.
The Planning Board may allow the following text, when it appears
appropriate to allow building on the lot, subject to obtaining the
necessary variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals: "This lot is
to be considered nonbuildable."
(2)
All work and materials shall conform to the latest requirements of the
American Disability Act (ADA)50 and the Massachusetts Architectural
Access Board (MAAB). The ADA and MAAB regulations take precedence
over these regulations.
F.
The context of work required is as shown upon approved plans and is
in compliance with the Street Design Drawings in Appendix C.51 Stakes
shall be set which will indicate the exact amount of cut or fill.
G.
General provisions.
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the
opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel. Due
consideration shall also be given to the future residents of the
subdivision and to the attractiveness of the street layout in order
to obtain the maximum safety, livability and amenity of the
subdivision.
(1)
The proposed streets shall conform to the Master or Study Plan as
adopted in whole or in part by the Board.
(2)
Provisions satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
projection of the streets, or for access to adjoining property which
is not subdivided or developed. It is the Board's policy not to
approve streets that do not connect to existing neighborhoods or
do not provide for connections in the future. A right-of-way from
the end of all culs-de-sac and dead-end roads to adjoining property
must be part of the street layout and must be shown on street
acceptance plans and deeds unless there is compelling evidence
that the adjoining property will never be developed. If the adjoining
property shall never be developed, there shall be a pedestrian and
bicycle trail up to the property line, unless wetlands and grade
make that impossible.
(3)
Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite each other or with a minimum offset of
150 feet between their center lines. This minimum offset shall
also be observed whenever one or more streets entering opposite
sides of another street exist, whether located within or outside the
boundary of the proposed development.
(4)
A.
50.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-15 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-16
1:340
Streets entering the same side of another street shall be laid out
with a minimum offset of 150 feet between their center lines.
This minimum offset shall also be observed whenever one or more
streets entering the same side of another street exist, whether
located within or outside the boundary of the proposed subdivision.
(5)
Temporary dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the
provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable
to such streets if extended.
(6)
The center line of roadways shall coincide with the center line of
the street right-of-way, unless the Board specifically approves a
modification by waiver.
(7)
The center line of all intersecting streets or ways shall be a straight
line from the point of intersection of said center line for a distance
of no less than 100 feet.
(8)
On any street where the grade exceeds 5% on the approach of the
intersection, a leveling area, with a maximum slope of 3%, shall be
provided for a distance of not less than 50 feet measured from the
nearest gutter line of the intersecting street.
(9)
Vertical curves are required wherever the algebraic difference in
grade between center line tangents is 2% or more, with a minimum
length of vertical curve of 10 feet per one-percent change of grade
on minor streets and lanes, and 20 feet per one-percent change on
collector streets, or 100 feet, whichever is greater.
(10)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips shall be in the public interest.
(11)
Traffic calming: The street design shall make every effort to
reasonably calm the traffic within the subdivision and on
surrounding streets to ensure pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly
design and to prevent a decrease in traffic safety as a result of
the additional traffic the project will generate. Traffic calming
may utilize methods detailed in ITE's "Traditional Neighborhood
Development" or "Traffic Calming: State of the Practice," but must
utilize methods that will not make snow plowing or road
maintenance especially burdensome for the Town.
(12)
Grading and location of elements shall conform to the standard
cross-sections illustrated in the Street Design Drawings in
Appendix C.52
(13)
B. Street design standards.53
52.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Table A, Street Design Standards, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-16
1:341
§ 322-17. Sidewalks; school bus waiting areas.
§ 322-18. Adequate access from public way.
Street cross-sections.
Cross-sections shall be in accordance with the street design
drawings in Appendix C.54
(1)
C.
Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the street design
drawings in Appendix C.55
A.
All sidewalks shall be handicapped accessible from the roadway at
all intersections. Wheelchair ramps to accomplish the above shall be
designed and constructed according to the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board Rules and Regulations, as
amended.
B.
All subdivisions with 10 or more lots located in an area where school
busing is provided or is likely to be provided in the future must provide
at least one bus waiting area for school children. This area must be
between 50 square feet and 100 square feet, depending on the size
of the subdivision (number of students generated). The waiting area
shall not include the width necessary to meet the sidewalk standards.
It must be constructed of cement/monolithic concrete; abutting the
outside edge of the sidewalk, and shall contain a bench. The location
shall be approved by the Planning Board. All subdivisions consisting of
15 or more lots must incorporate a bus shelter in addition to a bench.
C.
Where the street system within a subdivision does not connect with
or have, in the opinion of the Planning Board, adequate vehicular,
pedestrian, and/or bicycle access from a Town, county or state public
way or private way, the Planning Board shall require, as a condition
of approval of a plan, that such adequate access be provided by the
subdivider, and/or that the subdivider make physical improvement(s)
of access to and within such a way, in accordance with the provisions
for these subdivision regulations, either from the boundary of the
subdivision to a Town, county or state public way or private way, or
along such public way for a distance which, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, is sufficient to provide adequate access to the
subdivision.
A.
Where the physical condition or width of a public way from which a
subdivision has its access is considered by the Planning Board to be
inadequate to either provide for emergency services or carry the traffic
which is expected, in the opinion of the Board, to be generated by such
subdivision, the Planning Board shall require the subdivider to dedicate
a strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting public way to
B.
54.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-18
1:342
§ 322-19. Routes out of subdivision to be provided.
In any area not protected by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers hurricane
barriers, each lot shall be serviced with streets providing a route out of the
subdivision, no part of which route lies below the thirteen-foot elevation
above mean sea level (M.S. L.).
§ 322-20. Easements.
§ 322-21. Open space.
a width commensurate with that required within the subdivision and
to make physical improvements to and within such public way to the
same standards required within the subdivision or by these subdivision
regulations. Any such dedication of land for the purpose of the way and
any such work performed within such public way shall be made only
with permission of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over
such way, and all costs of any such widening or construction shall be
borne by the subdivider.
The Planning Board shall disapprove of a subdivision plan where, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, the existing surrounding municipal
infrastructure (e.g., street width and construction, sanitary sewer,
public water, storm sewer, etc.) is insufficient and/or incapable of
handling the additional volumes (e.g., traffic, sewage, stormwater, etc.)
anticipated, by the Planning Board, to be generated by the project. The
Planning Board may accept or require off-site improvements to mitigate
any of these impacts.
C.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall be a minimum of 20 feet
wide.
A.
Easements and provisions for vehicular access shall be provided along
the entire length of storm drain lines.
B.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the Board may require that there be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to
conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary
purposes.
C.
Before approval of a plan the Board may also in proper cases require
the plan to show a park or parks suitably located for playground or
recreation purposes or for providing light and air. The park or parks
shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being
subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Board may
by appropriate endorsements on the plan require that no building be
erected upon such park or parks without its approval for a period of
three years.
A.
§ 322-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-21
1:343
§ 322-22. Fencing.
Fencing shall be required in subdivisions abutting limited or controlled
access highways or expressways, or other limited or controlled access
roads. Fencing may be required in other areas where physical features
require such safety.
§ 322-23. Guardrails.
Guardrails shall be provided at points of hazard along the roadway, such
as fixed objects and the pavement edge, high fills, fills on sharp curvature,
along watercourses, steep cliffs, along deep ditches in cuts and similar
locations as required by the MA Highway and Bridge Standards (4:1 slopes).
Type and installation of guardrails shall be approved by the BPW.
§ 322-24. Protection of natural features.
All natural features, such as large trees, watercourses, scenic points,
historic plots, stonewalls and similar community assets shall be preserved,
if, in the opinion of the Planning Board, they will add attractiveness and
value to the subdivision.
§ 322-25. Landscaping; street trees and tree belts.
If the Board requires the developer to set aside land for parks or open
space, it shall determine that such land is suitable for the intended
purpose with respect to soils, topography, drainage or other
characteristics, which could restrict the use of the site.
B.
Tree belts shall be provided on each side of the roadway in
conformance with the street design drawings, Appendix C.56 When
sidewalks are required, the tree belt shall be between the curb and
the sidewalk with the trees planted along the center line of the tree
belt. The finished grade of such tree belts shall have a slope of 1/
2 inch per foot toward the roadway. Where unusual physical land
characteristics of topographic conditions exists, and where no sidewalk
is to be constructed, the Planning Board may approve the construction
of a tree belt of a greater slope with the finished slope not projecting
above a plane sloped three horizontal to one vertical from the back of
the curb.
The top six inches of tree belt shall consist of good quality loam
extending to the right-of-way, screened, raked, and rolled with
lawn grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure adequate
coverage, rolled when the loam is moist and maintained until grass
cover satisfactory to the Planning Board has been established.
(1)
There shall be no small trees or shrubs, and no herbaceous plants
taller than one foot, within the tree belt.
(2)
A.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-21 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-25
1:344
§ 322-26. Stormwater management.
Street shade trees shall be on both sides of subdivision streets in
the tree belt when possible and otherwise within the right-of-way or
within five feet of the right-of-way. There shall be one tree planted
an average of every 30 feet of street frontage along each lot. Any
mature deciduous shade trees preserved may be applied toward this
average. The Planning Department and/or Tree Warden shall approve
the specific locations of the trees.
B.
Street trees shall not be permitted within 25 feet of the curbline of the
intersection of two streets.
C.
Trees shall be mature deciduous trees or newly planted trees of no
less than two-inch caliper measured six inches above soil root ball.
They shall be single-stemmed with a single, straight leader at time
of installation. All tree species must meet American Association of
Nurserymen Standards. Grouping is permitted, using both sides of the
sidewalk for tree planting, in order to frame or enhance a view.
D.
Street trees shall be deciduous shade trees, and no more than 35%
of any one species shall be used throughout the subdivision. The
recommended list of street trees is found in Appendix D.57
E.
Planting operations and requirements for street trees shall be in
accordance with the American Association of Nurserymen Standards
for Planting. The developer shall be responsible for maintaining the
health of trees until two growing seasons after plantings, the as-built
plans of the street are approved by the Board, or until the intended
public ways are accepted at Town Meeting. The Board may require that
surety be posted to replace shade trees that do not survive two growing
seasons. These standards shall be indicated on detail sheets.
F.
Stormwater management for each development shall accomplish the
following:
Reproduce, as nearly as possible, the hydrologic conditions in the
groundwater and surface water prior to the development;
(1)
Reduce stormwater pollution to the maximum extent possible using
best management practices (BMPs);
(2)
Have a long-term maintenance plan acceptable to the Board and
BPW;
(3)
(4) Be appropriate for the site given physical constraints.
A.
Submittal requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to submit a stormwater management plan (SMP) for all subdivisions
greater than three lots detailing the existing environmental and
B.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-26
1:345
hydrological conditions of the site, proposed alterations of the site, and
all proposed components of the drainage system and any measures
for the detention, retention, or infiltration of water for the protection
of water quality and protection from flooding. The SMP shall contain
sufficient information for the Planning Board to evaluate the
effectiveness and acceptability of those measures proposed by the
applicant for controlling flooding and pollution from stormwater runoff.
The SMP shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs,
narrative descriptions, calculations, plans showing construction details
of all systems and structures, and citations to supporting references,
as appropriate, to communicate the information as required by these
regulations. (See Appendix B for a list of required information.58)The
Planning Board reserves the right to require a SMP on subdivisions
of three lots or less if deemed necessary for flood control or pollutant
removal. The applicant shall submit a brief written description of how
the SMP complies with Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
Stormwater Management Regulations.
For subdivisions of three lots or less, the applicant's engineer shall
submit documentation, stamp and certify that the design meets the
DEP Stormwater Management Regulations.
(1)
Design standards. The design, construction, and maintenance of the
best management practices (BMPs), and the submittal of information
to evaluate the BMPs, shall be consistent with Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) Stormwater Management Regulations
and the standards and specifications of Appendix A59 of the "Rules
and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Fairhaven,
Massachusetts."
C.
BMP location. Stormwater basins and/or ponds shall be located only on
a common parcel used for service and utilities. Said BMP parcel shall
not be required to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot size or
frontage. However, at a minimum, a twenty-foot right-of-way shall exist
between the BMP parcel and the roadway. This common lot shall be
conveyed to the Town of Fairhaven at time of street acceptance.
D.
The applicant shall submit an erosion and sediment control plan.
The erosion and sediment control plan should include a written
description of the plan as well as an emergency response outline
(including response phone numbers) and a maintenance schedule.
The plan shall meet the following objectives and criteria:
Keep disturbed areas small: No more than 60 feet in width and
100 feet in length of a single lot, or five acres of the overall
tract at one time. Said plan shall identify design issues and
(a)
(1)
E.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-26
1:346
methods employed to address such items as topography, soils,
vegetation, steep slopes, wetlands and water bodies.
Stabilize and protect disturbed areas quickly: Exposed areas
and stockpiles shall be revegetated within 40 days of being
exposed. The Board, depending on weather conditions, may
require slope and stockpile stabilization sooner. Methods for
stabilizing disturbed areas include mechanical, structural and
vegetative. In some cases, some or all of these methods should
be combined in order to retard erosion. These methods shall
be identified in the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(b)
Keep stormwater runoff velocities low: Velocities of runoff
should be in the range of two to 10 feet per second. The
removal of the existing vegetative cover during the
development and the resulting increase in impermeable
surface area after development will increase both the volume
and velocity of runoff. These increases must be taken into
account when providing for erosion control.
(c)
Protect disturbed areas from stormwater runoff: Conservation
measures can be utilized to prevent water from entering and
running over the disturbed area. Diversions and other control
practices to intercept runoff from higher elevations, store or
divert it away from vulnerable areas, and direct it towards
stabilized outlets should be utilized. Selected measures should
be identified on the plan and in text.
(d)
Retain sediment within site area: The best way to control
sediment is to prevent erosion; however, sediment can be
retained by two methods:
[1] Filtering runoff as it flows and detaining sediment; or
Detain runoff for a period of time so that the soil particles
settle out.
[2]
(e)
Conveyance of stormwater.
The entire drainage system of storm drainage lines shall be capable
of conveying the twenty-five-year storm, including catch basins,
manholes and culverts.
(1)
Water velocities in pipes and gutters shall be between two and 10
feet per second. Water velocities in nonpaved areas (e.g. swales,
ditches) shall not be more than published values for maximum
permissible velocities based on surface cover type and soil types.
(2)
Water velocities in catch basins shall not exceed 1/2 foot per
second. Catch basins shall be designed (inlet capacity and spacing)
such that the flow in the gutter during a twenty-five-year design
storm is not more than three feet in width as calculated utilizing
(3)
F.
§ 322-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-26
1:347
methodologies described in "Drainage of Highway Pavements,
Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 12," as published by the U.S.
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. In
any event, water shall not be allowed to run for more than 300 feet
on paved surfaces.
Catch basins shall be Scituate-Rays precast or approved equal.
Catch basin grates shall be Lebarron Grate, Heavy Duty LF 246,
or approved equal. Catch basin grates shall be in the gutter to
facilitate snow removal.
(4)
Manholes shall be Scituate-Rays precast or approved equal.
Manhole covers shall be Lebarron Grate, Heavy Duty LA 246, or
approved equal.
(5)
The standard depth of catch basins shall be a minimum four feet
below the invert of the outlet. Manholes shall be constructed at
each junction point of storm drain lines. Catch basins shall not
serve as manholes.
(6)
Storm drains shall be of at least 12 inches in diameter inside, with
at least 24 inches of cover, and shall be of reinforced concrete Class
IV pipe if having less than forty-eight-inch cover within a street
right-of-way. Aluminum pipe of at least comparable strength may be
substituted in appropriate locations if approved by the Fairhaven
Board of Public Works (BPW). All drain pipes except subdrains
shall be reinforced concrete or ductile iron. Waivers from these
standards shall be allowed upon recommendation of the BPW.
(7)
Easements and provisions for vehicular access shall be provided
along the entire length of storm drain lines.
(8)
Roof drains; cellar drains or any other private non-preexisting
drainage systems shall not be allowed to connect to the Town's
existing drainage system, unless written approval from the BPW is
obtained.
(9)
On-site infiltration measures shall be used to approximate the
parcel's pre-development recharge.
(10)
The drainage system shall remove 80% of the average annual postdevelopment
load of total suspended solids (TSS).
(11)
Stormwater shall pass through an oil separator manhole prior to
release to an outfall.
(12)
Drainage outfalls shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly
to or cause erosion in wetlands or water bodies. A thirty-foot
buffer zone of existing vegetation shall be retained between all
point source discharges of stormwater and surface waters and
wetlands. However, the provision of this section shall not prohibit
the selective clearing of trees and shrubs, the establishment of
(13)
§ 322-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-26
1:348
new vegetation better suited to the proposed conditions, or the
discharge of stormwater across such buffer areas as any of these
actions may be permitted by the Conservation Commission under
the order of conditions.
Erosion and sedimentation controls (as identified on the approved
plans) shall be used during all construction phases.
(14)
Post-development peak discharge rates shall not exceed predevelopment
rates.
(15)
No increase in stormwater runoff over pre-development conditions
shall be permitted for all storms up to the one-hundred-year event.
(16)
Cross culverts. Culverts and stormwater outlet structures shall have
reinforced concrete headwalls designed in accordance with good
practice. At cross culverts (where a roadway bisects a stream or manmade
watercourse), drainage easements shall be established up
gradient of the culvert and delineated on the definitive plan based on
the projected one-hundred-year headwater elevation.
G.
Inspection. After the stormwater management system has been
constructed and before the performance guarantee for the development
has been released, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan detailing
the actual stormwater management system as installed. The consulting
engineer for the Planning Board and/or the BPW shall inspect the
system to confirm its as-built features. This engineer shall also evaluate
the effectiveness of the system in an actual storm. If the system is found
to be inadequate by virtue of physical evidence of operational failure,
even though it was built as called for in the definitive plan, it shall
be corrected before the performance guarantee is released. Examples
of inadequacy shall be considered but not limited to: errors in the
infiltrative capability, errors in the maximum groundwater elevation,
failure to properly define or construct flow paths, or erosive discharges
from basins. The cost of having the Planning Board's and/or the BPW's
consulting engineer review and evaluate the as-built plans and the
stormwater management system shall be borne by the developer.
H.
Maintenance. All stormwater management systems shall be maintained
in accordance with these regulations and Appendix A.60 The applicant
shall submit a maintenance plan for the stormwater management
system. The proponent shall provide copies of the stormwater
management plan to the Planning Board (10 copies). The applicant shall
be required to arrange for maintenance and inspection, at no cost to
homeowners, for a twenty-year period by one of the following methods.
Secured prepayment. The applicant shall submit to the Planning
Board a determination of the anticipated cost of maintenance,
inspection, and repair of the stormwater management system for
a twenty-year period. That determination must be reviewed and
(1)
I.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-26
1:349
§ 322-27. Utilities.
approved by the Board of Public Works, or the consulting engineer
for the Planning Board. The applicant shall establish a method
of securing the anticipated cost in the form of a cash payment,
or similar security made payable to the Town of Fairhaven for
its cost in maintaining, inspecting, or repairing the stormwater
management system. For systems not owned by the Town, the
applicant shall establish a homeowners' association to be
responsible for the maintenance and repair. The applicant shall
also grant an easement to the Town allowing it to enter on the
property as necessary to inspect, repair, or maintain the system.
In the event the Town has to maintain or repair a private facility,
said cost shall be assessed by the Town to the owners within the
subdivision. The security documents and easement shall be in a
form satisfactory to the Planning Board.
Water:
The Planning Board shall not approve a definitive plan unless
evidence satisfactory to the Board is presented that an adequate
supply of water can be provided to each lot in the subdivision which
is to be built upon.
(1)
The design and construction for developments connecting to the
municipal water system shall meet the standards and specifications
of the BPW.
(2)
Where municipal water is available, provision shall be made, to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board, for future connection of
waterlines to property boundaries to accommodate future
development, including design, layout, and sizing.
(3)
A.
Sanitary:
The Planning Board shall not approve a definitive plan if the Board
of Health has disapproved its sanitary arrangements, and no plan
shall be approved unless each lot in the subdivision, which is to be
built upon, is to be served either by public sewerage or by a private
sanitary disposal system.
(1)
The design and construction for developments connecting to the
municipal sewer system shall meet the standards and specifications
of the BPW.
(2)
Where municipal sewer is available, provision shall be made, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, for future connection of sewer
lines to property boundaries to accommodate future development,
including design, layout, and sizing.
(3)
B.
Protection from flooding. Any other regulations not withstanding, no
definitive plan shall be approved by the Planning Board for a
C.
§ 322-26 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-27
1:350
§ 322-28. Lots limited to one dwelling.
Not more than one building designed or available for dwelling purposes
shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
a subdivision or elsewhere within the Town without the consent of the
Planning Board, which shall be granted only for structures in compliance
with zoning restrictions, and only upon the Board finding that adequate
ways furnishing access to each site for such buildings have been provided
in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 322-29. Further subdivision.
In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels capable of being subdivided,
such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the logical and economic
extension of streets, utility easements, drainageways and public areas into
such parcels.
subdivision which includes land less than 13 feet in elevation above
mean sea level if not protected by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
hurricane barriers, unless the Planning Board shall determine that
all utilities are located, constructed or elevated so as to minimize or
eliminate flood damage and that methods of disposal for sewage, refuse
and other wastes and for providing drainage are adequate to reduce
flood hazards.
Location of utilities. All required utilities exclusive of transformers shall
be placed underground at the time of initial construction to every lot
to be built upon. Required utilities may include, but not be limited
to, water, sewer, storm drainage, telephone, electricity, gas, wiring
for streetlights, fire alarm systems, and cable TV unless otherwise
specified by the Board.
D.
§ 322-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-29
1:351

PART 8
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivision
§ 322-30. Streets and roadways.
The entire area of each street or way shall be cleared of all stumps,
brush, roots, boulders, like material and all trees not intended for
preservation. Loam shall not be removed from any lot area, or any other
area of the subdivision that is not outlined on the plan of a roadway,
until specific building permits are issued for the specific lots involved.
A.
All loam and other yielding material shall be removed from the roadway
area of each street or way and replaced with suitable material.
No loam suitable for reuse shall be removed from the premises
unless:
Adequate loam will remain to cover all future planting areas to
a depth of at least six inches;
(a)
Roads from which loam is being removed will be brought to
subgrade with approved foundation materials within 12
months.
(b)
(1)
B.
Traveled ways. Traveled ways shall be provided with a foundation
consisting of at least 12 inches' compacted thickness of good binding
gravel, which is satisfactory to the Board of Public Works, rolled and
compacted to a center line grade four inches below the proposed
finished grade as shown on the profile, and having a transverse grade
conforming to that shown in street design drawings, Appendix C.61
The gravel shall be spread in two equal layers, each of which shall
be thoroughly watered and rolled true to line and grade with a
roller of not less than 12 tons. Any depressions that appear during
and after rolling shall be filled with additional gravel and rerolled
until the surface is true and even.
(1)
C.
Prior to paving, all sewer, water, gas, and underground cable
connections shall be installed to the street right-of-way lines at each
lot, unless this is waived by the Board in cases where later installation
can be made by jacking or sleeving without damage to the road surface.
After the treated roadway base has been subjected to the action of
traffic for a time period specified by the Board of Public Works, but not
in excess of 30 days, a binder course of Class I bituminous concrete
shall be applied and compacted and rolled with a true surface
conforming to the cross-section of the road. After the base course has
set for one year and/or one winter, a second course shall then be
applied and compacted and rolled to grade with a true surface.
D.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-30
1:353
§ 322-31. Utilities.
§ 322-32. Curbing.
A binder course of Class I bituminous concrete shall be applied
and compacted and rolled to a thickness of 2 1/2 inches with a
true surface conforming to the cross-section of the road. After
the base course has set for one year and/or one winter, a second
course consisting of 1 1/2 inches of compacted Class I bituminous
concrete top shall then be applied and compacted and rolled to
grade with a true surface. Specification for the composition of
material, workmanship, and the method of applying pavement
material shall conform to Massachusetts Department of Public
Works specifications B-18.
(1)
Prior to placing the final top course of paving, the developer shall
do the following:
Notify all utility providers to check that all gate boxes are
raised and the operating nut is accessible.
(a)
Have the gas company send a leak detection unit to ascertain
that there are no leaks.
(b)
Have the binder course thoroughly swept and an emulsion tack
coat mechanically applied to the binder pavement.
(c)
(2)
Sewer pipe and related equipment, such as manholes and connecting
Ys, shall be constructed in conformity with specifications of the Board
of Public Works.
A.
Drainage. Refer to § 322-26 and Appendix A, Stormwater Management
Systems.62
B.
Water pipes and related equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff
valves, when public water services are provided, shall be constructed
to serve all lots on each street in the subdivision in conformity with
specifications of the Fairhaven Board of Public Works.
C.
Prior to paving, all underground utilities, such as, but not limited to,
sewer, water, gas, electric and cable connections, shall be installed
to the street right-of-way lines at each lot, unless this is waived by
the Board in cases where later installation can be made by jacking or
sleeving without damage to the road surface.
D.
Curbing is required, lining both sides of all collector streets, minor
streets and lanes.
A.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-30 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-32
1:354
§ 322-33. Driveway approach areas and aprons.
For commercial or industrial subdivisions, all curbing shall be
granite Type VB. Granite curb corners Type A shall be installed at
all driveways.
(1)
For residential subdivisions, depending on the grade and other site
factors, curbing may be one of the following types:
Type I Class bituminous concrete formed by a berm machine
and placed on a satisfactory base, except granite at curb inlets.
(a)
Bituminous concrete curb Type 2 (six-inch reveal) and placed
on a satisfactory base, except granite at curb inlets.
(b)
Cape Cod berm and placed on a satisfactory base, except
granite at curb inlets.
(c)
(2)
The outside radius of the island in all culs-de-sac shall be
constructed with sloped granite edging.
(3)
(4) Granite curb corners, wherever required, shall be Type A.
Granite curb inlets (Type VB) shall be built against all catch basin
frames and shall be installed true to the horizontal and vertical
alignment as shown on the plans.
(5)
The type and method of installation of bituminous berm, granite
curb, granite edging and granite curb corners shall conform to the
standards and specifications of the Board of Public Works.
(6)
Under special conditions, the Planning Board may require specially
constructed berms or gutters.
(7)
Driveway approach areas from the edge of the roadway to the edge
of the right-of-way shall be cement concrete a minimum of six inches
thick.
A.
The nearest line of any driveway shall not be closer than 50 feet from
the intersection of any two streets.
B.
The Planning Board may require the developer to construct certain
driveway approach areas during the construction of the subdivision, in
order to insure that certain physical characteristics, such as swales,
steep side slopes, etc., do not get disturbed after the end of
construction.
C.
In addition, the developer shall make provisions for driveway openings
in all cases where granite curb has been used. Granite curb corners
Type A shall be used at all driveway openings. The developer shall
follow the regulations as stated in Subsections A and B above in
constructing said driveways.
D.
§ 322-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-33
1:355
§ 322-34. Side slopes.
§ 322-35. Street names and signs.
§ 322-36. Monuments.
Driveways in commercial or industrial subdivisions shall be shown on
the definitive plans.
E.
Driveway permits are required by the Board of Public Works for all
proposed driveway openings.
F.
The area in back of the required grass strip, or behind the sidewalk
when one is required, shall be graded to a point where it coincides with
the finished grade of abutting lots in such a manner that no portion
thereof within the right-of-way lines of the street will project above a
plane sloped three horizontal to one vertical.
A.
The top six inches of side slopes shall consist of good quality loam
extending to the right-of-way, screened, raked, and rolled with at least a
one-hundred-pound roller to grade. The loam shall be seeded with lawn
grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure adequate coverage,
rolled when the loam is moist.
B.
Streets, which join and are in alignment with streets of abutting or
neighboring properties, shall bear the same name. Names of new
streets shall not duplicate or sound like the names of existing streets
within the Town and shall be subject to the approval of the Assessor's
Office.
A.
Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the developer.
The type, size, and location shall be subject to the approval of the
BPW. Temporary street name signs with letters four inches tall shall be
erected at the time work is started in that portion of the subdivision
and shall be replaced with permanent signs within 30 days of the
application of finished roadway pavement.
B.
Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points
of change in direction or curvature of streets and at other points as
shown in the definitive plan and where, in the opinion of the Board,
permanent monuments are necessary. Such monuments shall conform
to the standard specifications of the Board of Public Works and shall be
set according to such specifications.
A.
No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction,
which could destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
B.
All monuments shall be installed prior to any release of the
performance guarantee and will be inspected by the BPW.
C.
§ 322-33 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-36
1:356
§ 322-37. Fire alarm system and emergency water supply systems.
§ 322-38. Inspections.
Inspections shall be arranged for as outlined on Form F, Inspection Form.63
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivision developer to inform the
responsible agency, in writing, 24 hours in advance, when each inspection
is required as outlined in Inspection Form F. Below-grade inspection must
be performed prior to backfilling. Failure to comply could result in lack of
approval.
§ 322-39. Other utilities.
Materials and construction methods shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the involved utility companies after the BPW and
appropriate Town boards, commissions and departments have approved
said requirements.
§ 322-40. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls shall be designed by a registered professional structural
engineer or in accordance with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Public Works Construction Standards.
Monuments shall also be set identifying the thirteen-foot elevation
(M.S.L.) at the road sideline in all cases where it is encountered, except
on land protected by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers hurricane barriers.
D.
The placement and accurate location of these monuments shall be
certified by a professional land surveyor and properly located on the
street acceptance plans and as-built plans.
E.
The municipal fire alarm system shall be extended within the
subdivision where feasible, as directed by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
A.
Subdivisions not served by a public water system shall be provided with
an emergency water supply system or, where a natural pond exists, a
dry hydrant system, in accordance with the National Fire Code Manual,
NFPA, Volume 12, Section 1231, Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting
Regulations of 1975, as amended, upon the recommendation of the
Fairhaven Fire Department. The location, installation and final testing
for said systems shall be subject to the approval of the Fairhaven Fire
Department and shall be of a design capacity as the fire load for the
development may require.
B.
A natural pond proposed to be used as a backup source for water for
firefighting shall have adequate access to such pond to accommodate
the weight and size of a fire pumper truck.
C.
63.Editor's Note: Copies of Form F are available at the Planning Board's office and Town
Clerk's office.
§ 322-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-41
1:357
§ 322-41. Cleanup after completion of construction.
The entire area must be cleaned up within 30 days of completed
construction and prior to the completion of the subdivision so as to leave
a neat and orderly appearance free from debris and other objectionable
materials. All catch basins, pipes and stormwater facilities shall be properly
cleaned out, and the streets swept.
§ 322-42. Responsibility of subdivider for project construction.
All streets, underground utilities, shoulders, curbing, sidewalks, planting
strips, side slopes, street name signs, monuments and markers, drainage
systems, water systems, sewerage systems, and easements shall be
obtained and installed by the subdivider. Record plans and street
acceptance plans are a part of required improvements to document their
location and type. The obtaining and installing of these improvements shall
be in accordance with these regulations.
§ 322-41 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-42
1:358
PART 9
Administration
§ 322-43. Inspection and control.
The BPW, or its appointed representative, at the developer's expense,
shall review and inspect the project for compliance with all subdivision
conditions. A certified compliance report shall be sent to the Planning
Board. In the case where roadways will remain under private
ownership, the project's registered professional engineer shall supply
the above-mentioned certificate or statement. A fee for the abovereferenced
inspections shall be paid by the developer to the BPW to
cover the above-referenced inspections and reports.
A.
The Planning Board shall notify the BPW and the developer, in writing,
when the subdivision has been a) approved; and b) all the necessary
approved plans and documents have been recorded at the Bristol
County S. D. Registry of Deeds, so that construction can commence.
Prior to commencement of construction, the developer, the project's
engineer/surveyor, and the designated contractor shall attend a preconstruction
conference to be arranged by the BPW. Construction shall
not commence on any portion of the subdivision until this condition has
been met.
B.
The developer shall notify, in writing, the BPW and the Planning Board
two days in advance of the date of commencement of construction and
subsequent phases of construction so that proper inspection can take
place.
C.
At the points hereinafter indicated, the construction of required streets
and other improvements shall be inspected.
The BPW or the Board of Health, as appropriate, or their appointed
representatives, before the backfilling of trenches or other
covering of structures, shall inspect the installation of underground
utilities and services.
(1)
The curbing shall be inspected by the BPW prior to the placement
of the top course of bituminous concrete surface.
(2)
The roadway shall be inspected by the BPW upon completion of the
subgrade gravel base course, binder and surface course prior to
each required construction step.
(3)
The sidewalk shall be inspected by the BPW upon completion of the
subgrade gravel base course, binder and surface course prior to
each required construction step.
(4)
Following the completion of all the improvements required by Parts
7 and 8, the subdivision shall be inspected by the BPW.
(5)
D.
§ 322-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-43
1:359
§ 322-44. Interpretation.
Whenever these rules and regulations made under the authority hereof
differ from those prescribed by any local ordinance or other local
regulations, the provision which imposes the greater restriction or the
higher standard shall govern.
§ 322-45. Enforcement by denial of building permits.
Unless each phase of the work, including the materials used on the
project, have been inspected by the BPW, no further work shall be done
on any other phase of construction.
E.
Inspections shall be requested by the applicant two working days in
advance by notice to the BPW.
F.
The cost of inspection shall be paid by the applicant according to the
fees in effect during construction.
G.
If the Town personnel cannot perform the inspection due to the size or
complexity of the project or the unavailability of personnel, the Town
may retain the services of a private engineer to perform such inspection
service. The applicant shall pay the total cost of such services.
H.
Inspections by the BPW will in no way relieve the developer, contractor
or project engineer of responsibility in insuring that all materials and all
construction meet all standards as stated in these rules and regulations.
I.
After the installation of the complete water and sanitary systems and
prior to the placement of any gravel on the proposed roadway, the
developer shall present ties to fixed and easily identifiable objects and
elevations (whenever applicable) on four-inch-by-six-inch cards of all
appropriate components of said systems (such as bends, trees, gates,
corporations, service boxes for water systems and ways and of sanitary
services for sanitary sewer systems), so that the BPW will be able to
physically locate said components in the future. Said cards are to be
prepared by the project's engineer. (See also § 322-48, Record plans
(as-builts).) Upon approval of the above, the BPW shall instruct the
developer, in writing, to proceed with the construction.
J.
The developer shall present proof, at his/her own expense, by a
qualified person/firm, to be approved by the BPW, that the gravel to be
used on the project meets Massachusetts State specification, Borrow
Type B.
K.
The developers or their designee, at their own expense, shall test
the water main for adequate fire flow. A Massachusetts registered
professional engineer, under the supervision of the BPW, and at a time
to be chosen by the latter, shall conduct the fire flow test.
L.
The Building Commissioner shall issue no building permits for any of
the lots of any subdivision unless notified, in writing, by the Planning
A.
§ 322-43 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-45
1:360
§ 322-46. Material testing.
The developer shall test; upon the request of the BPW and at the developer's
own expense, all materials to be used in the construction of the public ways.
The tests shall be conducted by qualified firms/individuals that have been
approved by the BPW.
§ 322-47. Fees.
§ 322-48. Record plans (as-builts).
§ 322-49. Street acceptance plans.
The developer shall submit to the Planning Board the following:
Board that the approved subdivision plans and documents have been
recorded at the Bristol County S. D. Registry of Deeds.
The Building Commissioner shall not issue a full occupancy permit for
any of the lots of the subdivision unless notified, in writing, by the
Planning Board and BPW that the required subdivision improvements
have been constructed, inspected and meet all requirements of the
subdivision approval.
B.
Planning Board review fees: See Chapter 306 of the Code of the Town
of Fairhaven.
A.
Inspection and as-built fees: The inspection and as-built fees as
determined by the BPW, in effect during construction, which are subject
to change by the BPW, shall apply.
B.
The utility record plan (as-builts) detailing the utility installations are
prepared by the BPW's consultant doing the inspection work and shall
be paid for by the developer.
A.
The project record plan (as-builts) detailing all aboveground features,
such as but not limited to metes and bounds, edge of pavement,
curbing, sidewalks, hydrants, trees, utility boxes and stormwater
facilities, shall be prepared by the developer's engineer. The BPW's
consultant doing the inspection work shall review said plan and the
developer shall pay for the review. The applicant shall submit a CDROM
or DVD containing geographic data in accordance with the
Standard for Digital Plan Submittals to Municipalities (Version 1.0)
issued by the Office of Geographic and Environmental Information
(MassGIS).
B.
A petition to the Town of Fairhaven Town Meeting requesting that
a particular street be accepted as a "Town street." Each street shall
have its own petition, and each petition shall be signed by at least 10
residents of the Town of Fairhaven for an Annual Town Meeting and 100
residents of the Town of Fairhaven for a Special Town Meeting.
A.
§ 322-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-49
1:361
A title search showing that the property is free of all liens and
encumbrances.
B.
Plans and documents which shall include the following:
(1) One set of originals and 10 sets of prints.
(2) Plan(s) to be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
(3) Size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
Rules of Registry of Deeds to be followed (borders, size lettering,
scale, reserved boxes, etc.).
(4)
(5) Only one proposed street to be shown per sheet.
Match lines to be used if a street is to be shown on more than one
sheet.
(6)
Title block to be: "THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
STREET ACCEPTANCE PLAN OF ________ PREPARED FOR THE
TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN, BRISTOL COUNTY."
(7)
(8) Scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet.
(9) Date plan was prepared.
Reserve spaces for:
Town Clerk's endorsements: "_______________________ (name of
street) accepted by vote of Town Meeting; passed __________
(date), attest: __________________, Town Clerk."
(a)
Statement that: "_______________________ (name of street) is
part of the _______________________ (name) Subdivision
approved by the Fairhaven Planning Board, filed with the Town
Clerk, __________ (date) and recorded at the Bristol County S.
D. Registry of Deeds __________ (book and page)."
(b)
Planning Board's endorsement block with eight signature lines
and a date line.
(c)
Board of Selectmen's endorsement block with three signature
lines and a date line.
(d)
(10)
Street line to be shown in metes and bounds. Tie courses so that
street can be mathematically closed. Chord bearings and distances
for all curves to be shown.
(11)
Street to be tied to Massachusetts State Plane coordinate system.
Every plan shall have at least four survey-quality points on each
sheet tied into the Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate System
(NAD 1983 datum), using said published control points or the
global positioning system. The plan shall note the coordinates of
(12)
C.
§ 322-49 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 322-49
1:362
the four tie-in points, the datum, and the source and location of
monuments used for data.
All street line monuments to be shown and identified and their
exact coordinates shown, in accordance with the requirements in
the above subsection.
(13)
(14)At least 100 feet of lot property lines shown with metes and bounds.
Ownership of lots (including Registry book and page) at the time
subdivision was approved by the Planning Board.
(15)
Land court case numbers, whenever appropriate, must appear on
plans.
(16)
Full legal document (including complete descriptions) suitable for
recording at the Registry of Deeds, deeding each proposed street
to the Town of Fairhaven.
(17)
Necessary prints, forms and fee for approval not required
endorsement.
(18)
All plans must be accompanied by a CD-ROM or DVD containing
geographic data in accordance with the Standard for Digital Plan
Submittals to Municipalities (Version 1.0) issued by the Office of
Geographic and Environmental Information (MassGIS).
(19)
§ 322-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-49
1:363
Division 4, Board of Health
Chapter 401
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 401-1. Violations and penalties.
§ 401-2. Changes in regulations.
The Board of Health may from time to time amend or abrogate any of the
regulations in Division 4 of the Code if in its opinion the safety of the public
requires such action.
§ 401-3. Repealer; effective date.
§ 401-4. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of the
regulations of Division 4 of the Code be declared unconstitutional or invalid
for any reason, the remainder of said regulations shall not be affected
thereby.
Chapter 405
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 87. Animal permit fees — See Ch. 422.
Whoever violates any of the rules and regulations of the Fairhaven
Board of Health shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $300 for
each day the violations exist. Such fine shall be levied at the discretion
of the Board of Health.
A.
All charges incurred by the Town of Fairhaven in the process of abating
violations in the Board of Health rules and regulations shall be assessed
to the violator if present.
B.
All prior regulations of the Board of Health are hereby revoked as of
October 1, 1979.
A.
All regulations of the Board of Health as contained herein are hereby
adopted effective October 1, 1979.
B.
§ 322-49 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 405-1
1:364
§ 405-1. Annual report.
Owners or occupants of premises keeping domestic animals shall report to
the Board of Health annually before January 1. The term "domestic animals"
shall include but not be limited to barnyard animals, horses, cows, goats,
sheep, rabbits, swine and poultry.
§ 405-2. Permits for domestic animals.
§ 405-3. Maintenance of animal facilities.
The owner or other persons having control of any barn, stable, yard or other
facility for the keeping of barnyard animals shall maintain such facilities in
The Board of Health may require such owners or occupants to obtain a
permit to keep certain classes of domestic animals. Such permit shall
be subject to the following conditions:
The applicant shall notify all abuttors in writing of the pending
permit application at least 15 days prior to issuance of the permit.
This condition is waived in areas considered suitable for
agricultural use.
(1)
No barn, stable, yard or other facility for the keeping of barnyard
animals shall be located closer than 20 feet to any dwelling. The
distance from the property line is to be determined by the Board of
Health.
(2)
Provisions shall be made for the disposal of manure and bedding
material in a manner which will prevent the contamination of
surface and groundwaters, prevent infestation by rodents and
insects and prevent the release of objectionable odors.
(3)
Provisions shall be made for the storage of feed in a manner which
will prevent infestation by rodents and insects and prevent the
release of objectionable odors.
(4)
Drainage facilities shall be provided as necessary to prevent the
accumulation of standing water and to prevent contamination of
surface water and groundwater.
(5)
Access of barnyard animals to surface water bodies shall be
restricted as necessary to prevent stream bank erosion and
contamination of surface water bodies.
(6)
The keeping of pigs on any premises shall be limited to not more
than two pigs and one litter. A litter shall be defined as the offspring
of a single sow from the same pregnancy and being not over six
weeks of age.
(7)
A.
All permits issued under this section shall expire on the last day of the
year in which they are issued and may be revoked by the Board at any
time for violation of any of the above conditions.
B.
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-3
1:365
a clean and sanitary condition. Such facilities may be subject to periodic
inspection by the Board of Health or its agent.
§ 405-4. Vaccination of equine animals.
All equine animals within the boundaries of the Town of Fairhaven shall be
vaccinated against encephalitis on or before June 1 of each year. A valid
certification of vaccination shall be made available to the Board of Health.
The Board of Health may require any other vaccination to immunize against
diseases common to animal and man.
§ 405-5. Restriction of dogs in public recreation areas.
The Board of Health may require that dogs be restrained from entering
certain public recreation areas, such as town playgrounds and beaches.
Any such restrictions shall be posted at the site and shall be designed to
minimize the transmission of parasites.
§ 405-6. Permit for exotic animals.
A permit must be obtained for the keeping and housing of exotics, or
animals and birds, commonly held for exhibit. The provisions of §§ 405-1 and
405-2 are applicable.
§ 405-7. Permit for game or wild animals.
A permit must be obtained for the keeping of game or wild birds and
animals. The provisions of §§ 405-1 and 405-2 are applicable.
§ 405-8. Keeping of cats.
Chapter 412
DAIRY PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disease control — See Ch. 416. Milk license fees — See Ch. 422.
Any person or persons keeping five or more cats within the town in any
building or on any premises of which he/she may be the owner, lessee,
tenant or occupant shall require a permit for the keeping thereof. This
permit shall require the owner to restrain the cats to the premises and
shall be granted conditionally and shall be subject to spot inspections
by any agent of the Board of Health. A litter of kittens may be kept for
a period not to exceed six weeks.
A.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the keeping and/or sale of
cats and kittens shall be required to secure a permit authorizing the
business. All permits will be issued after an on-site inspection by a
designated agent of the Board of Health.
B.
§ 405-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 405-8
1:366
§ 412-1. Compliance with state and federal regulations.
Control over the production, transportation, storage and process of dairy
products shall be effected through strict compliance with all applicable
state and federal regulations. Such regulations include but are not limited
to MGL c. 94, §§ 12 through 63, as amended, and the regulations of the Milk
Regulations Board.
§ 412-2. Disease control.
All persons having control over facilities for the production, transportation,
storage or processing of dairy products shall notify the Board of Health of
any exposure of such facilities or exposure of employees at such facilities
to any disease classified as dangerous to the public health under the
provisions of MGL c. 111, § 6, as amended. Upon inspection of such
facilities, the Board of Health may order the suspension of production or
distribution and the sterilization of equipment and facilities.
Chapter 416
DISEASE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exposure of dairy personnel to dangerous
diseases — See Ch. 412.
§ 416-1. Compliance with state and federal regulations.
Control of communicable disease will be effected by strict compliance with
federal and state laws and regulations, including but not limited to the
provisions of MGL c. 111, §§ 92 through 121A, as amended.
§ 416-2. Authority of Board of Health.
A person afflicted with or exposed to a disease dangerous to the public
health shall be subject to such restraint as the Board of Health may deem
necessary for the protection of the public.
Chapter 422
FEES
§ 422-1. Fees established.
Fees shall be as follows:
§ 405-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 422-1
1:367
Permit/License Fee
Animal permit $5.00
Renewal $2.00
Bakery license $50.00
Boat marinas $50.00
Catering $45.00
Demolition, rodent control $5.00
Disposal works construction permit $50.00
Disposal works installer's permit $20.00
Food handler's certificate $5.00
Food service establishments $45.00
Frozen desserts $20.00
Funeral director's license $50.00
Massage and vapor baths, health
clubs (includes all weight reduction/
exercise salons)
$50.00
Masseur and masseuse license $25.00
Methyl and wood alcohol license $1.00
Milk dealer's license (vehicle) $2.00
Mobile food service $50.00
Motels and camps $50.00
Percolation test $75.00
Private well permit $30.00
Removal of offal $25.00
Site and consultation $75.00
Store milk license $2.00
Swimming pools
Public $25.00
Residential $10.00
§ 422-2. Special fee for plan review. [Added 3-18-1991]
The Board of Health hereby establishes a special fee to be paid by
applicants for permits or plan approval under review by the Board of Health
under MGL c. 41, §§ 81S and 81U. The purpose of these special fees, as
stipulated in Chapter 593 of the Acts of 1989, is to provide the Board of
Health with funds to hire outside consultants as needed to carry out the
Board's legal responsibilities in reviewing the plan. The fee shall be 1% of
the anticipated cost of the proposed project.
§ 422-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 422-2
1:368
Chapter 426
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 422.
§ 426-1. Compliance with state and federal regulations; inspections.
[Amended 3-12-2002]
The public health will be protected through the strict enforcement of the
state and federal regulations governing food service establishments. Such
regulations include but are not limited to the provisions of Article X of
the Massachusetts State Sanitary Code and the Federal Food Code, as
most recently revised. The Board of Health or its agent may inspect all
food service establishments periodically for compliance with applicable
regulations.
§ 426-2. Food handler's certificate.
§ 426-3. Seafood holding tank water.
Water used in holding tanks or containers for the keeping of fish, shellfish,
lobsters, crabs or other forms of edible sea life shall be from a source
approved by the Board of Health.
§ 426-4. Catering permit.
All persons desiring to conduct catering operations in the Town of Fairhaven
shall first obtain a permit for such catering activity from the Board of
Health.
Every food service establishment shall display a valid food handler's
certificate for each employee engaged in the preparation or serving of
food. Mantoux testing shall be done to all those required to be in the
food handler's program.
A.
If there is a positive reaction, the nurse strongly suggests the employee
see a doctor since he/she could have active tuberculosis. When the
employee presents a doctor's certificate stating that he/she is presently
free of any contagious disease, a food handler's certificate will be
issued.
B.
Any person having had an X-ray due to a previous positive Mantoux
reading shall be required to have a doctor's certificate stating that he/
she is in good health before the reissue of a food handler's certificate.
C.
§ 422-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 426-5
1:369
§ 426-5. Hairnet or hat required.
All food service establishment employees engaged in the preparation or
serving of food shall have their hair restrained by a hairnet, a hat or other
means acceptable to the Board of Health.
§ 426-6. Unwrapped food products.
Unwrapped food products, such as donuts, pastry or loose candy, shall be
protected by dust-free containers and shall not be handled by bare hands.
§ 426-7. Windows and doors to be screened.
All open doors and windows in a food service establishment shall be
screened with at least a sixteen-inch mesh screen to prevent and control the
breeding and harborage of flies and other insects.
§ 426-8. Proof of extermination.
All newly constructed, renovated and reoccupied food service
establishments shall provide proof of extermination of the premises to the
Board of Health prior to the issuance of any permits or licenses.
§ 426-9. Grease interceptors required.
§ 426-10. Maintenance of grease interceptors.
All existing food service establishments shall have properly sized
grease interceptors as required by 248 CMR 2.09(2) Massachusetts
Fuel Gas and Plumbing Codes.
A.
All new food service establishments and additions to existing
establishments must be connected to Town sewers or an on-site sewage
system and shall be upgraded to conform to Title V of the State
Environmental Code.
B.
In addition to the requirements indicated in 248 CMR 2.09(2)
Massachusetts Fuel and Plumbing Codes, grease interceptors must be
provided at food service establishments as determined by the Board of
Health. The capacity of the grease interceptor shall be calculated by
the kitchen flow rate of 15 gallons per seat or chair per day, but in no
case shall be less than 1,000 gallons. This applies to establishments
connecting to Town sewers or establishments with on-site sewage
systems.
C.
Problems with grease at individual food service establishments
constitute a violation of 105 CMR 595.000 State Sanitary Code, Article
X, Minimum Sanitation Standards for Food Service Establishments.
A.
All food establishments must have grease barrels to properly store
their grease. All grease must be poured into these barrels and the
grease sold or given to authorized rendering companies or collectors.
B.
§ 426-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 426-10
1:370
Chapter 432
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 158.
Wetlands — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 322.
Fees — See Ch. 422.
Location of wells — See Ch. 487.
West Island Sewer Enterprise Zone — See Ch.
491.
§ 432-1. Connection to public sanitary sewer.
Individual sewage disposal systems or other means of sewage disposal shall
not be approved where a common sanitary sewer is accessible adjoining the
property and where permission to enter such a sewer may be obtained from
the authority having jurisdiction over it. The Board of Health may require
the owner or occupant of any existing building or buildings, wherever a
common sanitary sewer is accessible in an abutting way, to cause such
building or buildings to be connected with the common sanitary sewer in a
manner and within a period of time satisfactory to the Board of Health.
§ 432-2. Compliance with state provisions; location of system.
Employees must be instructed to use the aforementioned containers
and not dispose of grease in sinks, toilets, drains, garbage, etc.
All inside grease interceptors must be opened and cleaned on a monthly
basis. Management must maintain a maintenance record signed by the
food service managers certifying that this cleaning has been done.
C.
All outside grease interceptors shall be checked monthly and pumped
if required. All grease interceptors must be pumped at an interval not
to exceed three months. Maintenance records must be available to the
Health Inspector at all times.
D.
All individual systems for the disposal of sanitary sewage shall be
designed, installed and operated in strict compliance with the
provisions of Title V of the Massachusetts State Environmental Code,
or any other existing applicable codes.
A.
Septic tanks shall be located not less than 10 feet from a building and/
or foundation wall and 10 feet from a property line. The leaching area
shall be located not less than 20 feet from a building and/or foundation
wall and 10 feet from a property line.
B.
§ 426-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-3
1:371
§ 432-3. Maintenance and cleaning of systems.
Every owner or agent of premises in which there are any private sewers,
individual sewage disposal systems or other means of sewage disposal
shall keep the sewers and disposal systems in proper operational condition
and shall have such works cleaned or repaired at such time as ordered
by the Board of Health. If the owner or agent of the premises fails to
comply with such order, the Board of Health may cause the works to be
cleaned or repaired and all expenses be paid by the owner. Sewage disposal
works shall be maintained in a manner that will not create objectionable
conditions or cause the works to become a source of pollution to any of the
waters of the commonwealth.
§ 432-4. Percolation tests.
Percolation testing shall be performed only during the period from October
1 through June 1, or at such other times deemed appropriate by the Board.
Such measurements and testing shall be performed only during the period
from October 1 through June 1, or at such other times deemed appropriate
by the Board. All such measurements and percolation tests shall be
witnessed by a member of the Board of Health or its authorized agent.
§ 432-5. Observation pits and percolation tests.
A minimum of two deep observation pits and two percolation tests shall be
required. The observation pits and percolation tests shall be performed in
the area designated as the primary and reserve leaching area. Additional
tests will be required where the soil structure varies or where large disposal
areas are required. A mechanical digger shall be utilized.
§ 432-6. Septic tank access to be marked.
All disposal works construction permits shall be issued with the condition
that the location of any septic tank access manhole which is below the
ground surface or otherwise obscured from view shall be clearly marked
either by the placement of a permanent marker above the access manhole
or by the installation of a marker on the foundation wall of the building
served by the disposal system.
§ 432-7. Repairs to existing leaching areas; updating of certain
plans.
All repairs to existing leaching areas shall require a plan prepared by a
professional engineer or other professionals authorized to prepare septic
system plans. All work must be installed in accordance with current state
and local regulations. Approved subsurface sewage disposal plans that have
not been implemented within two years must be reviewed and updated, if
necessary, prior to the issuing of a disposal works construction permit.
§ 432-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 432-8
1:372
§ 432-8. Permit for repair or replacement; time limit for completion
of work.
A permit must be obtained by a licensed disposal works installer before
repair or replacement of a septic tank may be executed. Having obtained
the required permit, the work shall be completed to the satisfaction of
the Board of Health within 30 days or the permit shall be automatically
canceled. If more time is needed, the installer will be granted a hearing for
extension.
§ 432-9. Certified statement by design engineer. [Amended
5-16-2017]
A certified statement by the design engineer, or other professional
authorized to prepare subsurface sewage disposal system plans, who is
unaffiliated with the construction disposal works installer, must be received
by the Board of Health prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance.
The statement must ensure that the subsurface sewage disposal system has
been installed according to the Board of Health approved plans and must
include an as-built drawing prepared by the engineer who is unaffiliated
with the construction disposal works installer, showing the final locations
and elevations of all system components.
§ 432-10. Amendments to Subsurface Sewage Disposal Regulations.
[Added 2-18-1986]
§ 432-11. Dewatered/island percolation tests.
Dewatered percolation tests, also known as "island percolation tests,"
whether by the method of pumping or by removing water mechanically with
earth-removing equipment, shall not be permitted, except on a repair to a
subsurface sewage disposal system serving a structure.
§ 432-12. Certified statement by design engineer. [Added
5-30-1989]
A certified statement by the design engineer must be received by the
Board of Health prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. The
Amend Regulation 15.03(e) by adding the sentence: "There shall be
a minimum leaching facility size requirement of 400 square feet per
system for leaching beds or 300 square feet of leaching area for
trenches, galleries or pits."
A.
Amend Regulation 15.02(13) by increasing the sewage flow per
bedroom to 140 gallons per day.
B.
Amend Regulation 15.03(7) by adding: "The minimum acceptable
distance between a well and a leaching facility shall be 150 feet."
C.
The authority to adopt this section is contained in MGL c. 111, § 31.
These amendments will become effective as of March 1, 1986.
D.
§ 432-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-12
1:373
statement must ensure that the subsurface sewage disposal system has
been installed according to the approved plan and must include an asbuilt
drawing showing the final locations and elevations of the system
components.
§ 432-13. Certification required for issuance of construction permit.
[Added 4-1-1986]
No disposal works construction permit for a subsurface sewage disposal
system shall be issued until a certification has been made by the design
engineer as to the location and elevation of the foundation as shown on the
approved plan.
§ 432-14. Determination of groundwater elevation. [Added
3-25-1994]
§ 432-15. Definitions. [Added 11-6-1989]
Groundwater elevation shall be determined at the time of the year when
the maximum groundwater level is usually reached during the months
of December through April and shall be based upon actual groundwater
elevation observations obtained from weekly readings of the Board of
Health approved observation wells placed throughout Fairhaven and
other Fairhaven Board of Health approved observation wells.
A.
This policy shall become effective forthwith. Percolation tests
performed and passed prior to this date shall require additional
groundwater observations which conform to this policy except in those
situations where Board of Health approved subsurface sewage disposal
plans have been filed in the Board of Health office. This policy is
adopted to conform to the intent and application of 310 CMR 15.00 and
is not an amendment to that regulation.
B.
The definition of a bedroom is adopted as described in a letter of policy
put forth by the Department of Environmental Protection as being a
room providing privacy, intended primarily for sleeping and consisting
of all the following:
(1) Floor space of no less than 70 square feet.
For new construction, a ceiling height of no less than seven feet
three inches.
(2)
For existing houses and for mobile homes, a ceiling height of no
less than seven feet.
(3)
(4) An electrical service and ventilation.
(5) At least one window.
A.
Living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, halls, bathrooms, unfinished
cellars and unheated storage areas over garages are not considered
B.
§ 432-12 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 432-15
1:374
§ 432-16. Conditions for construction, alteration or repair.
§ 432-17. Required connection to municipal water system.
§ 432-18. Prohibited chemicals.
bedrooms. Single-family dwellings shall be presumed to have at least
three bedrooms. Where the total number of rooms for single-family
dwellings exceeds eight, not including bathrooms, hallways, unfinished
cellars and unheated storage areas, the number of bedrooms presumed
shall be calculated by dividing the total number of rooms by two and
then rounding down to the next lowest whole number. The applicant
may design a system using design flows for a smaller number of
bedrooms than are presumed in this definition by granting the
approving authority a deed restriction limiting the number of bedrooms
to the smaller number.
No building within the Town of Fairhaven shall be converted or altered
or repaired so as to enable its use year round, nor shall its use be
changed, unless the present existing subsurface sewage disposal
system complies with the requirements of Title V, 310 CMR 15.00 and
this chapter, or the system can be brought into such compliance.
A.
In addition, no building shall be reconstructed, replaced or altered in
any manner unless said subsurface sewage disposal system complies
with Title V, 310 CMR 15.00 and this chapter or written approval is
obtained from the Board of Health.
B.
The owner or occupant of any building upon land served by a private
potable well and a subsurface sewage disposal system, which do not
meet the minimum separation distance as established under current
Board of Health rules and regulations, this chapter and the
Massachusetts Environmental Code, Title V, must, within six months,
connect to the municipal water system when said system is adjacent to
the parcel of land containing the potable well and subsurface sewage
disposal system.
A.
The potable well and all other wells on the property shall be
disconnected so as not to create a cross connection between the
municipal water system and the well or wells on the property. Said
disconnection is to be inspected and approved by the Fairhaven Water
Department or its authorized agent.
B.
The Board of Health prohibits the use of septic system chemical
additives/cleaners to an on-site subsurface septic system. These
products can work their way into the groundwater aquifer and cause
contamination. A list of prohibited chemicals is as follows:
(1) Methylene chloride.
(2) l, l, l trichloroethane.
A.
§ 432-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 432-18
1:375
§ 432-19. Required setbacks. [Added 4-11-1994]
§ 432-20. Percolation test witness fee. [Added 10-31-1994]
The attendance of the Health Agent to witness any percolation test and/or
observation requires a fee of $75. Any callback on this location will require
an additional fee of $75 per day.
(3) Trichloroethene.
(4) Tetrachloroethene.
(5) Carbon tetrachloride.
(6) Ethylene glycol monophenlether.
(7) Acids (ex., H2S04, A12(S04)3).
(8) Orthochlorobenzene.
(9) Orthochlorotoluene.
(10)Dichloromethane.
(11)Petroleum distillates.
(12)Naphthalene.
(13)Benzenes.
(14)Bases (ex., KOH, CuS04).
Further, any establishment which sells septic system additives/cleaners
must post a notice in the direct vicinity of these products so as to be
noticeable to anyone purchasing them. A sample of a notice may be
obtained at the Board of Health office.
B.
No subsurface sewage disposal leaching facility shall be closer than
100 feet to surface water supplies, reservoirs, tributaries to reservoirs,
open drains, subsurface drains, retention basins and watercourses as
defined in 310 CMR 15.00, the State Environmental Code, Title 5:
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage.
A.
Wetlands may not be filled to accommodate the setbacks required
above. Setbacks are to be measured from the original wetland line
and from any proposed replicated wetland area. For retention basins
with less than twenty-four-inch separation between the bottom of the
retention basin and maximum groundwater elevation, setbacks are to
be measured form the elevation of the outlet invert.
B.
§ 432-18 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 432-20
1:376
Chapter 437
LANDFILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 471.
§ 437-1. Purpose.
These regulations govern the disposal of garbage, offal or other offensive
substances in the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 437-2. Enforcing agent.
§ 437-3. Fee collection program.
The Board of Public Works of the Town of Fairhaven as from time
to time constituted shall act as agent of the Board of Health for the
enforcement of these regulations.
A.
The Board of Public Works of the Town of Fairhaven may designate any
person to act as its agent for the enforcement of these regulations.
B.
The Board of Public Works shall implement a fee collection program for
use of the sanitary landfill. That program shall consist of the issuance
of vehicle stickers to town residents and town businesses at a cost of
$5 per vehicle renewable annually, the issuance of trip tickets and the
following fees:
(1) Automobiles: no charge.
Automobiles with trailer: five free trips and $2 per trip thereafter,
per year.
(2)
Other vehicles based on gross vehicle weight:
Three thousand pounds to 7,500 pounds: five free trips and $5
per trip thereafter, per year.
(a)
Seven thousand five hundred one pounds to 10,000 pounds:
five free trips and $7.50 per trip thereafter, per year.
(b)
(c) Ten thousand one pounds to 20,000 pounds: $10 per trip.
(d) Twenty thousand one pounds to 35,000 pounds: $15 per trip.
(3)
Rolloffs, rubbish packers and vehicles over 35,000 pounds: $3 per
cubic yard capacity.
(4)
A.
Day passes shall be issued to nonresidents only for the disposal of
material generated as waste in Fairhaven and shall cost $1 per day, and
B.
§ 432-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 437-3
1:377
§ 437-4. Materials prohibited in landfill.
In addition to those materials otherwise prohibited by law, the following will
not be accepted for disposal in the Fairhaven Sanitary Landfill: branches,
bushes, shrubs, roofing material or other objects exceeding five feet in
measurement in any dimension; any sealed container (cans or drums
capable of holding liquids or gases), unless cut in half; hazardous chemicals
or wastes; radioactive materials; tires, unless shredded or cut up;
explosives; tree stumps; bulk fish by-products; materials of any sort not
generated as waste within the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 437-5. Notice of violation.
If the Board of Health or any of its agents determines that a violation of any
of these regulations has occurred, it shall so notify the violator in writing
and order that such violation stop or be corrected within a specified amount
of time from the date of giving such notice. Failure to stop and/or correct
such violations after receipt of notice shall constitute a further violation of
the regulations.
§ 437-6. Hearing; fine.
The Board of Health acting upon a complaint, or upon its own initiative,
may hold a hearing upon notice to the person to determine whether he/
she has violated these regulations. Said parties may present evidence at
the hearing. The Board shall make its findings in writing. If the Board
determines that a violation has occurred, it may levy a fine in the amount
of $100 per violation per day and may suspend the violator's privilege to
use the Fairhaven Sanitary Landfill for such period of time as it deems
necessary to protect the public health.
§ 437-7. Applicability. [Added 6-22-1987]
The foregoing will also apply to any town resident whose main residence is
outside the local regional area. The local regional area is defined as being
New Bedford, Dartmouth, Freetown, Rochester, Acushnet, Mattapoisett and
Marion.
each trip shall be charged the per trip cost set forth above. (Holders of
day passes shall not be entitled to free trips.)
There shall be tipping fees charged for the delivery of wastes to the
designated solid waste disposal site. Fees shall be set out in a schedule
established from time to time by the Board of Health following a public
hearing based on the operating costs of the disposal facility reasonably
apportioned according to the amount of waste delivered.
C.
Except as expressly provided herein, the Board of Public Works may
impose such administrative requirements it deems necessary for
implementation of this program.
D.
§ 437-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 437-7
1:378
Chapter 442
MASSAGE PARLORS AND BATHS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disease control — See Ch. 416. Fees — See Ch. 422.
§ 442-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall include all weight reduction and exercise salons,
gymnasiums, schools of self defense and/or other related uses.
§ 442-2. License required.
§ 442-3. Showers.
The Board may require the installation of showers in all establishments
when in its opinion this would be in the interest of good health practice.
§ 442-4. Revocation of license.
The Board of Health may revoke any license granted by it for such cause
as it deems sufficient, provided that a person licensed to massage or to
conduct an establishment for the giving of vapor, pool, shower or other
baths in any town may at the request of a physician attend patients in the
Town of Fairhaven without taking out an additional license.
No person shall practice massage, or conduct an establishment for
the giving of vapor, pool, shower or other baths for hire or reward,
or advertise or hold himself out as being engaged in the business of
massage, exercise, weight reduction or the giving of said baths without
receiving a license therefor from the Board of Health, provided that
a person registered as a barber or apprentice under the provisions of
MGL c. 112, § 87H or 87I, or as a hairdresser, operator or a student
under the provisions of MGL c. 112, §§ 87T to 87JJ, inclusive, may
practice facial and scalp massaging without such a license.
A.
Every such establishment shall display a valid license for each
employee engaged in the practice of massage. The Board of Health
shall issue a license upon satisfactory certification that the applicant
has complied with all applicable state and local regulations.
Requirements for individual licensing shall include a tuberculosis
diagnostic procedure.
B.
§ 437-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 442-4
1:379
Chapter 448
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage from outside town — See Ch. 164,
Part 1.
Dumping and littering — See Ch. 471, Part 1.
§ 448-1. Maintenance of property by owner.
The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, shall be responsible
for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean and sanitary condition and
free from garbage, rubbish or other refuse. The owner of such parcel of land
shall correct any condition caused by or on such parcel or its appurtenance
which affects the health or safety or well being of the occupants of any
dwelling or of the general public.
§ 448-2. Maintenance of property by occupant.
The occupant of any dwelling unit shall be responsible for maintaining that
part of the dwelling which he/she exclusively occupies or controls in a clean
and sanitary condition and free of garbage, rubbish, other filth or causes of
sickness.
§ 448-3. Storage of refuse.
Household refuse shall be stored in watertight, rodentproof containers.
Such containers shall not be stored in the front yard of any dwelling.
§ 448-4. Transporting garbage through town; permit.
No person shall remove or transport garbage, offal, septage or other
offensive substances through the streets of Fairhaven without first
obtaining a permit from the Board of Health. All such permits shall expire
at the end of the calendar year in which they are issued and may be revoked
by the Board at any time for cause. All vehicles used to transport offensive
materials shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
operated in a manner which prevents the leakage or spillage of offensive
materials or odors. Such vehicles shall be subject to periodic inspection by
the Board of Health or its agent.
§ 448-5. Discharges of polluted waters.
Sanitary sewage, gray water, the effluent from any sewage or waste
treatment plant or other polluting water shall not be discharged into or
allowed to flow by means of pipes, drains, etc., into any lake, pond, stream,
tidal water, watercourse or open or covered drain tributary thereto, unless
§ 442-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 448-5
1:380
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(or any other state agency) and the Board of Health.
§ 448-6. Order to remove nuisance; removal by town; costs.
The Board of Health shall order the owner or occupant of any private
premises at his/her own expense to remove any nuisance, source of filth or
cause of sickness found thereon within 24 hours or within such other time
as is considered reasonable after notice. If the owner or occupant fails to
comply with such order, the Board may cause the nuisance, source of filth
or cause of sickness to be removed, and all expenses incurred thereby shall
constitute a debt due the town upon completion of the removal and the
rendering of an account therefor to the owner, his/her authorized agent or
the occupant and shall be recoverable from such owner or occupant in an
action of contract.
Chapter 454
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY
§ 454-1. Toilet and lavatory requirements.
Chapter 461
RODENTS
§ 461-1. Certification by pest control operator.
All structures scheduled for demolition and all excavation materials must be
certified by a certified pest control operator as rodentfree. All contractors'
waste, stones, fill, loam, building material scraps and the like must be
certified free of rodent infestation before spreading, disturbing or
removing. Certification will be made by a licensed pest control operator.
This shall apply if materials have been in place over 30 days.
There shall be a minimum of one toilet and one lavatory provided per
sex at all places where food or drink is prepared, handled or served
to the public for consumption on the premises, mobile units excepted.
Such facilities shall be conveniently located as determined by the Board
of Health.
A.
In establishments not affected by 248 CMR, there shall be made
available to the public a minimum of one toilet and one lavatory per
sex in all establishments where food is prepared, handled and/or served
to the public for consumption on or off the premises, mobile units
excepted. Such facilities shall be located as defined by current rules
and regulations.
B.
§ 448-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-2
1:381
§ 461-2. Notification of Board of Health.
The exterminator shall notify the Board of Health in writing that said
structures and excavation materials are free of rodent infestation within a
period not to exceed 48 hours of demolition.
§ 461-3. Approval of extermination procedures.
Prior to any extermination and subsequent demolition, the Board of Health
must approve extermination procedures, or any variation hereof.
Chapter 466
SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor pollution control — See Ch. 132. Union Wharf — See Ch. 225.
§ 461-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 461-3
1:382
PART 1
Portable Sanitation Cleaner/Hauler
§ 466-1. License required.
All boat pump-out haulers must be licensed annually by the Board of Health.
The boat pump-out hauler's license shall be entitled "portable sanitation
cleaner/hauler" license.
§ 466-2. Equipment requirements.
Portable sanitation cleaner/haulers shall have:
§ 466-3. Disposal of materials.
All material shall be disposed of at approved treatment facilities. All rules
and regulations of the treatment facility shall be complied with by the
licensed portable sanitation cleaner/hauler.
§ 466-4. Monthly report.
A monthly written report of all boats serviced will be submitted to the Board
of Health office. Data required shall be marina, date and boats pumped.
§ 466-5. Transportation of materials.
The licensed portable sanitation cleaner/hauler shall transport all material
in a manner that will not create a nuisance or health hazard.
§ 466-6. Annual inspection.
The Board of Health shall inspect all licensed portable sanitation cleaner/
hauler annually prior to issuance of the license.
A. Watertight, leakproof tanks.
B. Suction or pressure hoses in good repair.
C. Pumps well maintained to prevent the leakage of septage.
D. Drain valves with safety locks.
Required tools for proper pumping which shall be kept clean and in
good repair.
E.
F. A means to collect a sample for testing.
G. Containment booms to contain spills within a confined area.
Any other equipment deemed necessary by other local and state
governing authorities.
H.
§ 466-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-7
1:383
§ 466-7. License fee.
There shall be a fee for the issuance of a portable sanitation cleaner/hauler
license which shall be set by the Board of Health.
§ 466-8. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with these requirements will result in revocation of the
license and fines by the Board of Health. Violation of this Part 1 shall
be subject to Chapter 401, General Provisions, § 401-1, Violations and
penalties.
§ 466-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion of this Part 1 shall not invalidate any other
portion, provision or section thereof.
§ 466-10. Purpose.
This Part 1 is enforced to ensure the public health, safety and welfare by
proper pumping and transportation of boat pump-out septage.
§ 466-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 466-10
1:384
PART 2
Boat Pump-Out Facilities/Marinas
§ 466-11. Discharge into waters prohibited.
§ 466-12. Pump-out facilities.
All marinas where 10 or more slips are available for boat docking must
have boat pump-out facilities on their property or must be contracted on
an annual basis with a Fairhaven licensed portable cleaner/hauler which
will service the contracted marina on a frequent and regular basis. A copy
of said contract, with a route frequency statement, must be forwarded
annually to the Board of Health office.
§ 466-13. List of slip renters.
All marinas where 10 or more slips are available for boat docking must
annually supply the Board of Health with a list of long-term, seasonal slip
renters. The information must contain renters' name, address and boat
registration number. Said list shall be presented to the Board of Health prior
to issuance of the annual marina license by the Board of Health.
§ 466-14. Compliance by marina.
It is the responsibility of the licensed marina to ensure the above
regulations are effectively complied with. Failure to comply may result in
marina license revocation and fines by the Board of Health.
§ 466-15. Compliance by vessels.
Nonconforming vessels shall not be allowed to remain in Fairhaven waters,
and continued noncompliance while in Fairhaven waters shall be subject to
fines by the Board of Health.
§ 466-16. Enforcement.
The Board of Health or its designated agent will have full power of the
Board in investigation and enforcement of this Part 2.
No vessel may discharge sanitary wastes into Fairhaven waters.
Approved sanitation devices or holding tanks must be used.
A.
No person may discharge oil, spirits, flammable liquids or contaminated
bilge wastes into Fairhaven waters. Approved pollution control devices
are required in all bilges.
B.
No person may dispose of kitchen wastes, garbage, litter or other
refuse into Fairhaven waters.
C.
§ 466-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-17
1:385
§ 466-17. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this Part 2 shall be subject to Chapter 401, General Provisions,
§ 401-1, Violations and penalties.
§ 466-18. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this Part 2 shall not invalidate
any other portion, provision or section thereof.
§ 466-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to ensure proper enforcement and investigation
of Chapter 132, Harbor Pollution Control, § 132-6, amendment adopted at
Town Meeting May 5, 1990.
§ 466-17 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 466-19
1:386
Chapter 471
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 164.
Landfill — See Ch. 437.
Nuisances — See Ch. 448.
§ 466-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-19
1:387

PART 1
Dumping and Littering
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as part of Ch. IV of the 1979 Regulations]
§ 471-1. Unauthorized dumping prohibited.
No person shall dump, discard, abandon or place trash, rubbish, debris,
scrap, garbage or offal on any properties in the Town of Fairhaven, except
as authorized.
§ 471-2. Violations and penalties.
A person apprehended in committing this act will be considered guilty
of littering and/or illegal dumping.
A.
Said person will be punished by a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense. [Amended 8-8-2011]
B.
§ 471-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-2
1:389

PART 2
Dumpsters
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as part of Ch. IV of the 1979 Regulations]
§ 471-3. Applicability of regulations.
These regulations govern the use and maintenance of any device used for
the storage of garbage or other refuse, which device has a storage capacity
of two cubic yards or more. Such device shall be referred to as a "dumpster."
§ 471-4. Sanitary maintenance of dumpsters.
The sanitary care and sanitary maintenance of the dumpster shall be the
responsibility of the user of the dumpster. Sanitary care shall include but
not be limited to:
§ 471-5. Location.
Placement of the dumpster must not cause any undue harm and not
otherwise be likely to be detrimental to public health and must conform to
other town departmental requirements.
§ 471-6. Dumpster to be maintained in good operating condition.
A. Lid covers shall be kept closed.
Interiors of dumpsters shall be clean and free of encrustations, food
bits, scum, debris and the like.
B.
C. Odors shall be contained and controlled.
D. No unwrapped food stuffs shall be placed in the dumpster.
Land surrounding the dumpster and in immediate proximity shall be
kept clean of any litter, debris and the like coming from use of the
dumpster.
E.
Any insect and/or rodent infestation resulting from the use of the
dumpster shall be properly professionally and immediately eradicated.
F.
Any leakage resulting from the use of the dumpster shall be
immediately absorbed by sand, clay, sawdust or other such material and
properly cleaned and removed so as to prevent insect and/or rodent
infestation.
G.
H. Prevention of any other condition dangerous to public health.
The owner of a dumpster shall maintain it in good operating condition
to avoid any harm or risk of harm to public health. Good operating
condition shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Operable lid covers.
A.
§ 471-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-6
1:391
§ 471-7. Notice of violation; hearing.
§ 471-8. Other applicable regulations.
All other applicable rules and regulations of the Board of Health, town
bylaws and the State Sanitary Code shall apply to dumpsters.
§ 471-9. Disposal of dumpsters.
These regulations do not authorize the disposal of the contents of the
dumpster in the town's sanitary landfill.
§ 471-10. Transportation of garbage from dumpsters.
No person shall transport garbage or other refuse removed from a dumpster
in or through the Town of Fairhaven, unless he/she has first obtained
a permit pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31A. The violation of any of these
regulations by the holder of a permit issued pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31A,
Smooth, nonporous, easily cleanable interiors and exteriors, free of
large rust pockets and holes.
(2)
(3) Seams shall be tight so as to not allow leakage.
Dumpsters with drainage holes must have securely fitting caps so
as to prevent leakage.
(4)
(5) Dumpsters on rollers shall have four operable rollers.
(6) Prevention of any other condition dangerous to public health.
A failure to so maintain any dumpster shall constitute a violation of
these regulations and shall be subject to the provisions of §§ 471-7 and
471-11 of these regulations.
B.
If the Board of Health determines that a violation of any of these
regulations exists, it may so notify the dumpster user and/or dumpster
owner or other violator in writing and order that such violation stop or
be corrected within a specified amount of time from the date of giving
such notice. Failure to stop and/or correct such violations after receipt
of notice shall constitute a further violation of the regulations.
A.
The Board of Health acting upon a complaint, or upon its own initiative,
may hold a hearing upon notice of the dumpster user and/or dumpster
owner to determine whether the size, location, use and physical
structure of the dumpster constitutes a harm or risk of harm to public
health or is otherwise in violation of these regulations. Said parties may
present evidence at the hearings. The Board shall make its findings
in writing. If the Board determines that size, location, use or physical
structure of the dumpster constitutes a harm or risk of harm to the
public health or is otherwise in violation of these regulations, it may
mandate immediate removal of the dumpster by the dumpster owner.
B.
§ 471-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 471-10
1:392
shall be cause for the amendment, revocation or suspension of that permit.
Proceedings thereon shall be pursuant to the procedure established by the
provisions of § 471-7B of this chapter.
§ 471-11. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of these regulations shall be punished by a fine of $10 for
each day such violation exists.
§ 471-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-11
1:393

PART 3
Radioactive Waste
[Adopted 4-30-1990 (part of Ch. XIV of the 1979 Regulations)]
§ 471-12. Acceptance of radioactive wastes prohibited.
The Fairhaven Board of Health prohibits the acceptance of radioactive
waste, deregulated or otherwise, at any solid waste facility, incinerator,
hazardous waste facility or water pollution control facility within the limits
of the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 471-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-12
1:395

PART 4
Waste Disposal Facility
[Adopted 12-10-1992 (part of Ch. XIV of the 1979 Regulations)]
§ 471-13. Agreement; tipping fee.
The Town of Fairhaven has entered into an agreement with SEMASS
Partnership, the operator of a waste disposal facility, located in Rochester,
Massachusetts, pursuant to which the town must deliver, and SEMASS must
accept, a certain amount of waste for disposal. The town must pay a tipping
fee for waste so delivered, which fee is determined by the terms of the
agreement. The town must pay the agreed tipping fee if it delivers less than
a minimum tonnage. The town must pay market rate tipping fee if it exceeds
a certain maximum tonnage. In the interest of serving all of its residents,
the Town of Fairhaven wishes to make the opportunity to use the SEMASS
facility available to those persons licensed to remove waste in the Town of
Fairhaven. In order to enable the town to offer below-market rate disposal
to private haulers of waste generated in Fairhaven, the following regulation
is established.
§ 471-14. Determination of quantity of waste.
The Board of Health or its designated agent (hereinafter referred to as
the "Board") shall from time to time determine the quantity of waste
periodically generated in the Town of Fairhaven, which waste (hereinafter
"private haul waste") is removed for disposal by each person licensed
(hereinafter "licensee") by the Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111,
§ 31A. Each person so licensed may be required by the Board of Health to
provide any information requested by it in order to determine quantities of
waste generated by the customers of a licensee.
§ 471-15. Notice of election; bond.
Prior to the commencement of the deliveries of waste by the Town of
Fairhaven to the SEMASS facility, and upon the issuance or reissuance
of a license to haul waste, the Board shall deliver to each licensee a
written notification that he/she may elect to deliver private haul waste to
the SEMASS facility subject to these regulations. Any such licensee may
elect to deliver private haul waste to the SEMASS facility (hereinafter a
"participating licensee") by delivering to the Board within 14 days a notice
of election in a form provided by the Board (hereinafter "notice of election").
Such notice of election shall state the quantity of private haul waste which
the participating licensee shall deliver to SEMASS annually. That quantity
shall not exceed the quantity of waste determined by the Board for the
licensee pursuant to § 471-14 above. The notice of election shall be subject
to approval by the Board of the quantity of waste so designated in the notice
of election. Each participating licensee must produce a performance bond
whose amount shall be the assessed tipping fee for 1/3 the quantity of waste
designated in the participating licensee's notice of election. The assessed
§ 471-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-15
1:397
tipping fee shall be determined by the Board of Health from time to time,
but no less than once a year.
§ 471-16. Identification documents.
The Town of Fairhaven shall provide each participating licensee all
necessary passes or other identification documents necessary for use of the
SEMASS facility. The participating licensee shall be subject to all of the
applicable rules and regulations established by SEMASS, or by anyone so
authorized by SEMASS, for the operation and use of the facility.
§ 471-17. Commencement of delivery by private hauler.
A participating licensee shall commence delivery of private haul waste up
to the amount designated by him/her in his/her notice of election to the
SEMASS facility no sooner than the date designated to him/her in writing
by the Board. The participating licensee may deliver private haul waste to
the SEMASS facility subject to the same restrictions imposed upon the town
under the terms of its agreement with SEMASS. The town shall not be liable
to any participating licensee because of the failure or refusal of SEMASS to
accept his/her delivery of private haul waste for any reason.
§ 471-18. Responsibility of participating licensee for costs and
charges.
§ 471-19. Payment of bills; disputes.
A participating licensee shall be responsible for all costs incurred by
the town under its agreement with SEMASS, which costs are
attributable to the quantity of private haul waste specified by the
participating licensee in his/her notice of election to the Board. The
participating licensee shall pay the assessed tipping fee for waste
delivered by him/her to SEMASS. In addition, if the town is required to
pay tipping fees for waste not delivered, the participating licensee shall
pay a pro rata share to the extent he/she failed to deliver the quantity
of private haul waste so specified by him/her. If the town is required to
pay tipping fees for waste delivered in excess of the contract quantity,
the participating licensee shall pay a pro rata share to the extent he/she
exceeded the quantity of private haul waste so specified by him/her.
A.
The participating licensee shall be responsible for those charges made
by SEMASS to the town for delivery by the participating licensee of
waste unacceptable to SEMASS under its contract with the town, or any
other charges or costs incurred by the town as a result of the delivery
of waste or any other act or omission by the participating licensee.
B.
The town will bill the participating licensee promptly upon receipt of
any billing from SEMASS. The participating licensee shall pay any such
billing within 20 days of receipt of any such billing received from the
town. Any dispute concerning the amount of any bill may be submitted
in writing by the participating licensee to the Board along with payment
A.
§ 471-15 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 471-19
1:398
§ 471-20. Amendment of notice of election.
The Board may, from time to time, review the quantity of waste designated
by a participating licensee in his/her notice of election to determine whether
it varies from the quantity of private haul waste actually removed by him/
her in the Town of Fairhaven. Upon the finding that it does so vary from
the quantity of such waste actually removed, the Board may amend the
participating licensee's notice of election by amending the designated
amount of waste to be delivered to the SEMASS facility. In its sole
discretion, the Board may at any time accept a notice of election from
any licensee who is not a participating licensee or may amend a notice
of election of a participating licensee upon his/her request, if it finds that
the participating licensee has changed the quantity of private haul waste
removed by him/her.
§ 471-21. Order by Board; appeals.
The Board or its authorized agent may issue such orders as it or he/she
deems necessary to further the purpose and provisions of this regulation.
A participating licensee shall comply with such order in every case. Any
person subject to such an order may appeal such order to the Board in
writing within seven days of receipt of the order. An appeal to the Board
from an order of the Board's agent shall be heard and decided by the
Board within 14 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. There shall be no
administrative appeal of an order issued by the Board after said hearing.
Failure by the Board to issue a decision within that time shall be deemed a
denial of the appeal.
§ 471-22. Violations and penalties.
of the bill in full. Failure to pay the bill in full within 20 days of
receipt shall be an absolute bar to the right of the participating licensee
to dispute the amount billed. The Board shall hold a hearing on any
disputed bill and issue its decision in writing within 30 days of receipt of
the written notice of dispute. Prior to any such hearing, the Board may
review and adjust any bill so disputed, and if adjusted to the satisfaction
of the licensee, as evidenced by his/her signature, no hearing need be
held.
Any bill by the town to a participating licensee which remains unpaid
20 days after receipt of the bill by the participating licensee shall
constitute a debt owed by him/her to the town collectible in an action in
contract. In any such contract action, a participating licensee who has
failed to follow the administrative procedure for disputing the amount
of the bill as set forth in this section shall have waived, and be barred
from raising as an issue, any dispute concerning the amount of the bill.
The contract remedy shall be in addition to any penalty which the town
may impose upon any person for violations of these regulations, and
exercise of the contract remedy shall not prevent enforcement of any
penalty under these regulations.
B.
§ 471-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 471-22
1:399
The following shall be violations of this regulation:
(1) Failure to comply with the requirements of this regulation.
Failure to comply with the rules and regulations of SEMASS or any
person so authorized by SEMASS for the operation and use of its
facility.
(2)
Failure to provide to the Board any information requested by it in
order to determine quantities of waste generated by the customers
of a participating licensee or removed by a participating licensee.
(3)
Private haul waste delivered to SEMASS that is charged at the
Fairhaven generated waste tip fee but is not generated within the
Town of Fairhaven, except as otherwise specifically allowed by
contract with the town.
(4)
Waste not acceptable by SEMASS pursuant to its contract with the
Town of Fairhaven.
(5)
Delivery to SEMASS of less than 90% or more than 100% of the
amount designated by the participating licensee in his/her notice of
election.
(6)
Failure by a participating licensee to pay bills submitted to him/her
by the town within 20 days of receipt.
(7)
Failure by any person to obey an order issued by the Board or its
authorized agent pursuant to these regulations.
(8)
A.
If the Board or any of its agents determines that a violation of any of
these regulations has occurred, it shall so notify the violator in writing
and order that such violation stop or be corrected within a specified
amount of time from the date of giving such notice. Failure to stop and/
or correct such violations after receipt of notice shall constitute further
violation of the regulations.
B.
The Board acting upon a complaint, or upon its own initiative, may
hold a hearing upon notice to a person to determine whether he/she
has violated these regulations. That person may present evidence at
the hearing. The Board shall make its findings in writing. If the Board
determines that a violation has occurred, it may levy a fine in the
amount of $100 per violation per day and may suspend or terminate the
violator's privilege to haul private waste to SEMASS.
C.
§ 471-22 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 471-22
1:400
Chapter 475
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
§ 475-1. Inspection and approval of installation.
No pool used for swimming or bathing designed for a water depth of 24
inches or more or with a surface area greater than 150 square feet shall
be placed in service until the initial installation has been inspected and
approved by the Board of Health or its agent.
§ 475-2. Fencing; sanitation; location.
All such pools shall comply with the State Building Code and the following
standards:
Chapter 479
TOBACCO CONTROL
All pools shall be entirely enclosed by a building wall and/or fence of not
less than four feet in height. Any gate shall be equipped with a secure
lock. Such fencing shall be designed and constructed so as to make
the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through fence
openings.
A.
All pools shall provide filtration, disinfection or other facilities as
necessary to maintain the quality of pool water within the standards
specified by state regulation for public swimming areas.
B.
All pools shall be located in conformance with Chapter 198, Zoning,
as accessory structures and shall be located at least 10 feet from any
dwelling or property line and at least 20 feet from any sewage disposal
facilities.
C.
§ 471-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 475-2
1:401

PART 1
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-31-1996 (Ch. XVI of the 1979 Regulations)]
§ 479-1. Rationale.
§ 479-2. Authority.
The Fairhaven Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, Tercentary
Edition and amendments thereto, adopts the following regulation governing
no smoking in municipal buildings" as a reasonable health regulation
designed to protect and improve the health of municipal employees and the
residents of the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 479-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
The 1986 Surgeon General's Report on the "Health Consequences of
Involuntary Smoking" clearly documents that nonsmokers are placed
at risk for developing disease as a result of exposure to environmental
tobacco smoke or secondhand smoke. In 1993, the Environmental
Protection Agency classified environmental tobacco smoke as a known
human carcinogen. Further numerous studies have found that tobacco
smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution and that breathing
secondhand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in
nonsmokers. There exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoke
causes cancer, respiratory diseases, cardiovascular disease, negative
birth outcomes, allergies, as well as irritations to the eyes, nose and
throat. Tobacco use is the leading cause of premature deaths in the
United States. Evidence further demonstrates that tobacco use is
extremely addictive.
A.
Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke presents a serious and
substantial public health risk. Of particular concern is the workplace
environment of nonsmokers, where they may be subjected to sustained,
involuntary exposure. Both smokers and those exposed to secondhand
smoke are at risk. At special risk are children, elderly persons,
individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired
respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive
airway disease.
B.
The Greater New Bedford Tobacco Control Program Advisory Board
(comprised of representatives of the Boards of Health from the Towns
of Dartmouth, Fairhaven and Mattapoisett and the City of New Bedford)
has urged all municipal buildings to become smoke-free.
C.
To prevent secondhand smoke from affecting the health of the general
public.
A.
B. To prevent indoor air pollution.
§ 479-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-3
1:403
§ 479-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building owned, operated, leased and/or
under the control of the Town of Fairhaven, including but not limited to
Town Hall, Council on Aging sites, school buildings (MGL c. 71, § 2A),
school administration building, police station(s), fire station(s), library,
maintenance/repair buildings, water treatment plants, sewer treatment
plants and office buildings under the control or jurisdiction of the Town of
Fairhaven.
MUNICIPAL VEHICLE — Any town-owned, -operated and/or -leased vehicle
under the control of the Town of Fairhaven.
SECONDHAND SMOKE — A combination of smoke released from the
burning end of a lighted tobacco product as well as exhaled smoke.
SMOKING — The lighting of or having in one's possession any lighted
tobacco product, including a cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other lighted
smoking equipment.
§ 479-5. Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings and vehicles.
§ 479-6. Display of notice of no smoking.
All points of entry to municipal buildings shall conspicuously display on the
premises the international symbol for no smoking (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it) or state that this is a smoke-free building.
§ 479-7. Variance.
The Board of Health, upon its own initiative or upon application to or by any
person, after due notice and public hearing, may vary any provision of these
regulations as it may deem necessary with respect to any particular case,
when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice,
provided that the decision of the Board of Health is based solely upon health
concerns and shall not conflict with the intent of these regulations.
To promote a safe and healthy environment in work areas under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Fairhaven.
C.
Smoking shall not be allowed in any municipal building in the Town of
Fairhaven.
A.
Smoking shall not be allowed in any municipal vehicles in which any
occupant is a nonsmoker, unless express permission is given by the
nonsmoker.
B.
§ 479-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 479-8
1:404
§ 479-8. Implementation.
Department heads of each municipal building will be responsible for
monitoring the conduct of employees under their supervision and shall
make reasonable efforts to prevent smoking within the entire confines of
the municipal building.
§ 479-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of these regulations may be subject
to disciplinary action under Chapter 401, General Provisions, § 401-1,
Violations and penalties. Alternatively, any person who violates any
provision of these regulations may be penalized by a noncriminal complaint
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 1, General
Provisions, of the Town of Fairhaven Code. The penalty for each violation of
these regulations under the noncriminal complaint procedure is $25. Each
violation of these regulations shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 479-10. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 479-11. Enforcement; complaints.
§ 479-12. Effective date.
These regulations shall be effective as of May 31, 1996 (World No Tobacco
Day).
The Board of Health or its agents shall have the authority to enforce
this regulation.
A.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint of noncompliance under
this regulation may do so by contacting the Board of Health.
B.
§ 479-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-12
1:405

PART 2
Youth Access to Tobacco Products
[Adopted 4-14-1997]
§ 479-13. Rationale.
§ 479-14. Authority.
The Town of Fairhaven Board of Health, pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31,
Tercentary Edition, and amendments thereto, adopts the following
regulation affecting youth access to tobacco products as a reasonable
health regulation designed to protect and improve the health of its residents
and the general public.
§ 479-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to establish restrictions on the sale and
distribution of cigarettes and other tobacco products in order to reduce the
number of children and adolescents who use these products and to reduce
the life-threatening consequences associated with tobacco use in the Town
of Fairhaven.
§ 479-16. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this regulation, shall, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Town of Fairhaven Board of Health.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who furthers the distribution of cigarettes or
other tobacco products at any point from the original place of manufacture
to the person who sells or distributes the product to individuals for personal
consumption.
Tobacco use is a leading public health problem in the Town of Fairhaven
and throughout the United States, and there exists conclusive evidence
that tobacco smoke causes cancer, respiratory diseases, various cardiac
diseases, negative birth outcomes, allergies and irritations to the eyes,
nose and throat of both the smoker and nonsmoker exposed to
secondhand smoke.
A.
Furthermore, cigarette smoking and other tobacco use by minors
continues to be a problem with grave public health consequences.
More than 80% of all smokers begin smoking before the age of 18
(the legal age to purchase cigarettes in the commonwealth), and an
estimated 3,000 minors begin smoking every day in the United States.
In recognition of the United States Surgeon General's conclusion that
nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin and that tobacco is an
initial drug preferred by young people and is associated with other drug
use, action is needed to curtail the easy access of cigarettes and other
tobacco products to minors.
B.
§ 479-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-16
1:407
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer in
return for wages or profit.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust,
nonprofit entity or other organized group, including the Town of Fairhaven
and any department or agency thereof, who or which employs two or more
employees.
MANUFACTURER — Any person, including any repacker and or relabeler,
who manufactures, fabricates, assembles, processes or labels a finished
cigarette or other tobacco products.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years of age.
PACKAGE — A pack, box, carton or container of any kind in which cigarettes
are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
POINT OF SALE — Any location at which a consumer can purchase or
otherwise obtain cigarettes or other tobacco products for personal
consumption.
RETAILER — Any individual who sells cigarettes or smokeless tobacco
to individuals for personal consumption or who operates a facility where
vending machines or self-service displays are permitted.
RETAIL STORE — Any establishment selling goods or articles or personal
services to the public.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which individual packs or
cartons of tobacco products may be selected by the customer.
TOBACCO — Cigarettes, cigars, snuff or tobacco in any of its forms.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any machine or device designated for
the vending of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco or tobacco products upon the
insertion of coins, trade checks, swipe cards, slips or any other payment,
with or without assistance by a clerk or operator.
§ 479-17. Sale and/or distribution of tobacco products.
Tobacco sales permit.
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall sell tobacco
products within the Town of Fairhaven without a valid tobacco sales
permit issued by the Board of Health. The fee for this permit shall
be set forth in the Board of Health's fee schedule for licenses,
permits and services.64
(1)
Within 30 days of the effective date of this regulation, all retailers
who are required to hold a state license to sell cigarettes or other
tobacco products will be required to file an application for a
tobacco sales permit from the Town of Fairhaven Board of Health
for each point of sale at which tobacco products are sold.
(2)
A.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 422, Fees.
§ 479-16 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 479-17
1:408
After receiving the permit, the retailer will receive signage that
states "Sale of cigarettes or any tobacco products to persons under
age 18 is illegal, MGL c. 270, §§ 6 and 7." Any retailer not posting
said signage will be in noncompliance of this regulation.
(3)
The tobacco sales permit shall be for a term of one year and will
automatically expire on December 31 of each year.
(4)
Applications for renewal must be submitted at least 30 days prior
to the expiration date.
(5)
The fee for a one-year tobacco retailer's tobacco sales permit for
each tobacco retail point of sale shall be set forth in the Board of
Health's fee schedule for licenses, permits and services.
(6)
A tobacco sales permit is not transferable from a person or a
location.
(7)
(8) The permit must be posted in conspicuous view of the public.
Tobacco vending machines.
Within 30 days of the effective date of this regulation, no person,
firm, corporation or other entity shall install or maintain a vending
machine to distribute or sell tobacco products in the Town of
Fairhaven, except in facilities where the retailer ensures that no
person younger than 18 years of age is present, or permitted to
enter, at any time.
(1)
When allowed by Subsection B(1), the vending machine shall be
located in the establishment in the immediate vicinity and in plain
view and control of a responsible employee, so that all purchases
are observable and controllable.
(2)
B.
Packaging/free distribution.
No manufacturer, distributor or retailer may distribute or cause to
be distributed any free samples of cigarettes or tobacco products
in the Town of Fairhaven. Such restrictions shall not apply to use
of coupons from magazines, newspapers, periodicals or attached
packaging.
(1)
It shall be unlawful to remove and commercially sell single
cigarettes from the manufacturer's package which states the
federally required health warnings. Commercial sale and/or
distribution of cigarettes or other tobacco products in a form other
than the original factory-wrapped packaging is prohibited.
(2)
The sale of cigarettes in packages of fewer than 20 cigarettes is
prohibited.
(3)
C.
Self-service displays. Self-service displays of all tobacco products from
which individual packages or cartons may be selected by the customer
D.
§ 479-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-17
1:409
§ 479-18. Posting of notices.
shall be banned effective August 28, 1997, except in facilities where the
retailer ensures that no person younger than 18 years of age is present,
or permitted to enter, at any time.
Sales to minors.
In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 6, no person or entity shall sell
a cigarette, chewing tobacco or any tobacco in any of its forms to
any person under 18 years of age or, not being his or her parent or
guardian, give a cigarette, chewing tobacco or any tobacco in any
of its forms to any person under 18 years of age.
(1)
Retailers of cigarettes or other tobacco products shall verify, by
means of photographic identification containing the bearer's date
of birth, that no person purchasing the product is younger than 18
years of age. No such verification is required for any person 27
years of age or older.
(2)
A written note or telephone communication from an adult will not
permit a person under the age of 18 to purchase a tobacco product.
(3)
E.
Sales by employees. No commercial entity selling tobacco products
at retail shall allow any employee to sell cigarettes or other tobacco
products until such employee reads this Town of Fairhaven Board of
Health youth access to tobacco products regulation and state laws
regarding the sale of tobacco and signs a statement provided by the
Fairhaven Board of Health indicating that such regulation/laws have
been read and understood, a copy of which will be filed in the office
of the employer. Such signed statements must be made available for
inspection during the permit holder's normal business hours upon
request of an agent of the Board of Health.
F.
Vending machines. All vending machines as permitted in accordance
with § 479-17B shall display a conspicuous sign stating that it is illegal
to sell cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors. Signage will be
furnished by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made
available by the Board of Health in accordance with MGL c. 64, § 10,
which sign states "Persons under age 18 are prohibited from using this
machine."
A.
Points of entry. Notices provided by the Board of Health or its agents
must be posted conspicuously by the owner or individual in charge
thereof at all accessible points of entry at each establishment or place
used to sell cigarettes or tobacco products at retail. Such notice shall
be at least 48 square inches, shall directly face any person entering the
establishment at each point of entry and shall not be obstructed from
view or placed at a height of less than four feet or greater than nine
feet from the floor.
B.
§ 479-17 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 479-18
1:410
§ 479-19. Violations and penalties.
Cash registers. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 7, notices provided
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
by the Board of Health or its agents must be posted conspicuously
by the owner or the other individual in charge thereof in each
establishment or place used to sell cigarettes or tobacco products at
retail. Such notice shall be posted in a manner so that it may be readily
seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. Such
notices shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed
from view or placed at a height of less than four feet or greater than
nine feet from the floor.
Such notice shall be at least 48 square inches and shall be posted
at the cash register which receives the greatest volume of single
cigarette package sales.
(1)
For all other cash registers that sell cigarettes, a notice shall be
posted that is no smaller than nine square inches.
(2)
C.
Removal of notices. Notices provided by the Board of Health in
accordance with Subsections A, B and C of this section must not be
removed from the designated posting locations on the premises of the
permit holder. Any retailer and/or permit holder removing said signage
will be in noncompliance with this regulation.
D.
Sale and/or distribution of tobacco products. It shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder and/or individual in charge of the
area where tobacco products are being sold to ensure compliance with
§ 479-17 of this regulation pertaining to his or her place of business.
Each calendar day on which any violation of this tobacco control
regulation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. The violation
of this regulation is subject to a specific penalty and may be subjected
to disciplinary action upon enactment under Chapter 401, General
Provisions, § 401-1, Violations and penalties, of this Code.
The permit holder and/or individual in charge of the area permitted
for tobacco sales or persons involved in violation of any of the
provisions of § 479-17 of this tobacco control regulation may
receive:
(a) In the case of a first violation, a written warning.
(b) In the case of a second violation within one year, a fine of $100.
In the case of a third violation within one year, a fine of
$200, and the permit shall be suspended for seven consecutive
calendar days.
(c)
In the case of a fourth violation, a fine of $300, and the permit
shall be suspended for 30 consecutive calendar days.
(d)
(1)
A.
§ 479-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-19
1:411
The Board of Health shall provide written notice to the permittee
of the intent to suspend a tobacco sales permit. The notice shall
contain the reasons for the suspension and establish a date and
time for a hearing. The date of the hearing shall be no earlier than
seven days after the date of said notice. The permittee shall have
an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of
the Board of Health's decision and reasons in writing.
(2)
Revocation.
The Board of Health may, after providing opportunity for a
hearing, order the revocation of a permit for:
Serious or repeated violation of any of the requirements of
this regulation;
[1]
Interference with the Board of Health in the performance
of its duties; or
[2]
A criminal conviction of the permit holder relating to the
sale and/or distribution of tobacco products.
[3]
(a)
Notice of the intent to revoke a permit shall be given by the
Board of Health to the permit holder in writing. The notice
shall specify the reason(s) for which the permit is to be revoked
and that the revocation shall be imposed at the end of the 10
days following service of such notice unless a written request
for hearing is filed with the Board of Health by the permit
holder within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is
filed within the ten-day period, the permit shall be revoked. If a
written request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period,
a hearing shall be scheduled no earlier than seven days after
the date of said filing. The permittee shall have an opportunity
to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Board
of Health's decision and reasons in writing.
(b)
(3)
During such time that a tobacco sales permit for tobacco products
has been suspended or revoked for violations of this regulation, all
tobacco products must be removed from the premises.
(4)
Posting of notices. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and/
or individual in charge of the area where tobacco products are being
sold to ensure compliance with § 479-18 of this regulation pertaining to
his or her place of business. Each calendar day on which any violation of
this tobacco control regulation exists shall be deemed to be a separate
offense. The violation of this regulation is subject to a specific penalty
and may be subjected to disciplinary action upon enactment under
Chapter 401, General Provisions, § 401-1, Violations and penalties, of
this Code. The permit holder and/or individual in charge of the area
permitted for tobacco sales or persons involved in violation of any of the
provisions of § 479-18 of this tobacco control regulation may receive:
B.
§ 479-19 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 479-19
1:412
§ 479-20. Public education.
The Board of Health shall supply retailer education for all new applicants
for tobacco sales permits at the time of application for the permit. Such
education may include distribution of materials to guide retailers in their
compliance with the regulation.
§ 479-21. Enforcement; complaints.
§ 479-22. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 479-23. When effective.
This regulation shall be adopted and effective upon publication in the
Standard Times.
In the case of a violation of § 479-18A, B and/or C, a written
warning and/or a fine of $25.
(1)
In the case of a violation of § 479-18D, a written warning and/or a
fine of $10.
(2)
The Board of Health and/or its designated agent(s) shall have the
authority to enforce this regulation.
A.
Any person who desires to register a complaint of noncompliance under
this regulation may do so by contacting the Board of Health.
B.
§ 479-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 479-23
1:413
Chapter 483
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor pollution control — See Ch. 132.
§ 479-23 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 479-23
1:414
PART 1
Nasketucket River Basin
[Adopted 9-26-1979 as Ch. XII of the 1979 Regulations]
§ 483-1. Pesticide applications.
Exemptions from this regulation:
Minor amounts commonly in quantities of one pound dry weight
or one gallon liquid measure or less of pesticides approved by
Federal Drug Administration, Environmental Protection Agency or
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare and sold at retail
may be used inside a residence, business or agricultural buildings,
accessory buildings or within 100 feet of such buildings.
(1)
A.
Pesticide permit procedure. All other pesticide applications (not
exempted in the preceding subsection) shall require a special permit
issued by the Board of Health, said permit to be obtained prior to
the proposed pesticide application. The minimum conditions for the
issuance of such special permit shall be as follows:
Permit application must be filed on behalf of the property owner
by a pesticide operator licensed by the commonwealth, and actual
application must be by such licensed operator.
(1)
The permit application must indicate the following minimum data:
(a) The name and address of the property owner.
(b) Area involved, in square feet.
Trade name, generic name and manufacturer's name of the
pesticide involved.
(c)
(d) Purpose for the use of said pesticide.
Total quantity by weight (or volume if liquid) of the pesticide to
be used.
(e)
Concentration (percentage of active ingredients in the
pesticide as purchased).
(f)
The proposed dilution, if any, of the purchased pesticide
planned in actual use and the dilution media (e.g., water,
kerosene, inert mineral filler).
(g)
Method of proposed application (e.g., spraying, fogging,
broadcasting).
(h)
Proposed frequency or interval between applications
contemplated.
(i)
Time of year, weather conditions or other proposed climatic
limitations of the application.
(j)
(2)
B.
§ 483-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-1
1:415
§ 483-2. Fertilizer applications.
Prohibited pesticides. Except for the exemptions cited in Subsection
A(1) the use of the following pesticides shall be prohibited:
Chlorinated hydrocarbons.:
Oxygenated, e.g. dieldrin, endrin, methoxychlor or chemically
similar.
(a)
Nonoxygenated benzenoid, e.g. DDT, DDE, TDE, lindane or
chemically similar types.
(b)
Nonoxygenated and nonbenzenoid, e.g. aldrin, chlordane,
toxaphene and chemically similar compounds.
(c)
(1)
Organophosphorus compounds:
Aliphatic types (e.g. malathion, naled, dichlorvos phorate or
chemically similar compounds).
(a)
Aromatic types (e.g. Carbophenothion, EPN, parathion,
Fenthion or chemically similar compounds).
(b)
(2)
Toxic metal pesticides: compounds containing mercury, arsenic,
antimony, cadmium, silver, lead, selenium or other metal complexes
of equal toxicity to humans and animals (e.g., sodium arsenite,
lead arsenate, ethyl mercuric chloride, PMA, Panogen, Ceresan M,
MSMA, MAMA and chemically similar compounds).
(3)
Miscellaneous pesticides: chlorophenols (e.g., 2, 4-D,
pentachlorophenol, 2, 4, 5-T); cyanides, carbomates with a half life
in soil exceeding 10 days; sulfur chloride or its derivatives and
any pesticide of whatever chemical composition which possesses
equal toxicity to any of the previously enumerated pesticides in this
entire § 483-1, Pesticide applications." In judging the equal toxicity
or hazard of any proposed pesticide not specifically enumerated,
the equivalency shall be based on the hazard potential profile as
cited in the Hazardous Substances Rules of the Environmental
Protection Agency, Federal Register, Tuesday, December 30, 1975.
(4)
C.
Exemptions from this regulation:
Natural organic fertilizers, compost, agricultural lime, animal or
fowl manure; approved domestic sewage sludge (containing no
industrial wastes) from a municipal wastewater secondary
treatment plant (e.g. Fairhaven Waste Water Treatment Plant) may
be applied for agricultural purposes within 100 feet of the
associated wetlands of the Nasketucket River Basin System.
(1)
Animal and fowl manure incidental to keeping or pasturage of
animals or fowls may be permitted within 50 feet of the associated
wetlands of the Nasketucket River Basin System.
(2)
A.
§ 483-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 483-2
1:416
Chemical fertilizers and compounds.
The following chemical fertilizers, compounds and agricultural
amendments shall be deemed to comprise this class:
All synthetic chemical fertilizers in general, containing over
five parts per million of cadmium or other toxic metals, and the
total of all such toxicants shall not exceed 10 parts per million.
(a)
Sewage plant fertilizers containing industrial effluents with
over five parts per million of cadmium or other toxic metals,
or over five parts per million of cyanide, arsenic or equally
hazardous contaminants, and the total of all toxicants shall not
exceed 10 parts per million.
(b)
Chemical fertilizers containing any pesticides cited as
prohibited in the previous regulatory section, § 483-1,
Pesticide applications.
(c)
Rock phosphates assaying or containing over 10 parts per
million of arsenic, cadmium or other equally toxic metals.
(d)
(1)
A special permit may be granted by the Board of Health to use
a chemical fertilizer within 100 feet of the associated wetlands
of the Nasketucket River Basin system if the proposed fertilizer
is analyzed by and certified by a qualified chemical laboratory to
contain less than five parts per million of each or all the following
materials: arsenic, lead, mercury, fluoride, selenium, hexavalent,
chromium, cadmium, silver, cyanide or prohibited pesticide and not
more than 10 parts per million of all such toxicants in total.
(2)
B.
§ 483-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-2
1:417
Chapter 487
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Covering and filling of wells — See Ch. 110. Private well permit fee — See Ch. 422.
§ 487-1. Conditions for permit.
Before any well may be installed or used as a source of potable water, a
permit must be obtained from the Board of Health. Such permit will be
issued only if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board
that the following conditions will be met:
Chapter 491
WEST ISLAND SEWER ENTERPRISE ZONE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 158. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
432.
§ 491-1. Adoption.
This regulation is adopted by the Fairhaven Board of Health under MGL c.
111, § 31, to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
West Island in the Town of Fairhaven.
§ 491-2. Purpose.
The well shall be located so as to minimize the danger of contamination.
A well shall not be installed less than 150 feet from a sewage disposal
system, manure storage area or waste disposal site, less than 10 feet
from a street layout or less than five feet from the property line. A
special variance may be granted by proper authority in cases where
relocation is necessary because of pollution or failure.
A.
The well shall be designed and installed in a manner which effectively
prohibits the leakage of surface water into the well.
B.
The location of any well which is completely below the ground surface
or otherwise obscured from view shall be clearly marked either by the
placement of a permanent marker above the well or by the installation
of a marker on the foundation wall of the building served by the well.
C.
§ 483-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 491-2
1:418
§ 491-3. Upgrade of existing subsurface systems.
The Board of Health shall not approve any upgrade, expansion or
replacement of an on-site subsurface sewage disposal system for any
existing dwelling unit or building if a sanitary sewer abuts the property and
approval for connection into the sanitary sewer is granted by the Board of
Health and other approving authorities.
§ 491-4. Required sewer connection.
All existing buildings and all buildings for which a building permit was
issued prior to January 28, 1996, shall be required to connect to the sewer
system if it abuts the property and if the connection is within the design
limits of the system. The connection will be made in a manner and within a
period of time consistent with Chapter 158, Sewers. No other dwelling, unit
or building shall be allowed to connect to the system.
§ 491-5. Construction limits.
No dwelling unit or building which existed or for which a building permit
was issued prior to January 28, 1996, and is located on property which abuts
the proposed system shall be increased in size or otherwise altered in such
a way as to increase the total number of bedrooms per dwelling unit beyond
two, as defined by 310 CMR 15.002, Bedroom.
§ 491-6. Effective date.
The original regulation, Chapter VI of the Fairhaven Board of Health Rules
and Regulations, was duly adopted by the Board of Health on January 28,
1996. This amended regulation shall take effect upon its publication, June
14, 1996.
The purpose of this regulation is to provide for proper drainage and
sewerage, to conserve natural resources and to prevent pollution and
degradation of the natural environment.
A.
The town intends to construct a sewage treatment system to service
portions of West Island. The capacity of that system will be limited
by deed restrictions imposed by the Department of Environmental
Management, as well as by flow limitations, subsurface sewage disposal
conditions and long-term effluent acceptance rate of the subsurface
disposal site for the system.
B.
§ 491-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-6
1:419
Division 5, Zoning Board of Appeals
Chapter 493
COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS, RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 198.
§ 493-1. Purpose and context.
These rules establish procedures for applications to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for comprehensive permits granted under the Anti-Snob
Zoning Act (Chapter 774 of the Acts of 1969), MGL c. 40B, §§ 20-23, and
the regulations promulgated thereunder. They are required by MGL
c. 40B, § 21, and by 760 CMR 31.02. The purpose of that act and
these rules is to facilitate the development of affordable housing in
Massachusetts. Further explanation of the background and purpose is
provided in the regulations of the Housing Appeals Committee, 760
CMR 30.01.
A.
These rules alone are not sufficient to describe comprehensive permit
procedures before the Zoning Board of Appeals. They must be read
in conjunction with and implemented in a manner consistent with the
complete regulations of the Housing Appeals Committee, 760 CMR
30.00 and 31.00, and with the Guidelines for Local Review of
Comprehensive Permits, published periodically by the Department of
Housing and Community Development. In addition, the Board's
regulations governing variances, special permits, and administrative
appeals for the conduct of hearings under MGL c. 40A apply to
comprehensive permit applications. In case of inconsistency or conflict
between those general rules for conduct and these rules, these rules
shall govern.
B.
These rules and regulations may be adopted and from time to time
amended by majority vote of the Fairhaven Zoning Board of Appeals
members present and voting, provided that such adoption or
amendment is taken after a public hearing on any proposed changes.
C.
These rules and regulations are effective when voted and a copy filed
with the office of the Town Clerk.65
D.
65.Editor's Note: These rules and regulations were filed with the Town Clerk 8-2-2006.
§ 491-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 493-2
1:420
§ 493-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Means the Zoning Board of Appeals established under MGL c.
40A, § 12.
LOCAL BOARD — Means any local board or official, including but not
limited to any Board of Survey; Board of Health; Planning Board;
Conservation Commission; Historical Commission; Water, Sewer, or other
commission; Fire, Police, traffic, or other department; Building Inspector or
similar official or board; Board of Selectmen.
LOW INCOME UNITS — Shall remain low income in perpetuity.
§ 493-3. Filing, time limits, and notice.
The application for a comprehensive permit shall consist of:
A completed application form66 filed with the Town Clerk;
determination of project eligibility (site approval) from appropriate
state agency; filing fees required by § 493-3B.
(1)
Preliminary site development plans at a scale of one inch equals 40
feet, unless another scale is previously requested by the applicant
and found suitable by the Board, showing the locations and outlines
of proposed buildings; the proposed locations, general dimensions
and materials for streets, drives, parking areas, walks and paved
areas; and proposed lighting improvements within the site
prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered
architect.
(2)
A plan and report on existing site conditions and a summary of
conditions in the surrounding areas, showing the location of
existing wetlands, unique vegetation, water bodies, wells, onehundred-
year floodplain elevation and other natural features;
streams, wetlands, vistas, slope areas, geological features, unique
vegetation, and historic features; the location and nature of
existing buildings, existing street elevations, traffic patterns and
character of open areas, if any, in the neighborhood; and other
features that may be important to the site. This submission may
be combined with that required in § 493-3A(2), above; the plan
shall be stamped by the registered land surveyor who performed
the instrument boundary survey and who shall certify the accuracy
of the locations of the buildings, setbacks and all other required
dimensions, elevations and measurements, adjacent property wells
and septic systems. The plans shall be signed under the penalties
of perjury.
(3)
A.
66.Editor's Note: The application form is available at the Building Department.
§ 493-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-3
1:421
A landscape plan prepared and stamped by the registered
landscape architect, to include the total square feet of all
landscape, open space and recreation areas and depiction of
materials to be used and the quantity, size, methods, and species of
plantings.
(4)
Preliminary, scaled, architectural drawings. For each building the
drawings shall be signed by a registered architect and shall include
typical floor plans, typical elevations, and sections and shall
identify construction type and exterior finish.
(5)
The application shall also furnish a narrative summary of the vital
statistics of the project. Such information shall include but not be
limited to total gross and net square footage; number of parking
spaces; estimated amounts of water consumption and sewer
discharge; traffic generation information; a tabulation of proposed
buildings by type, size (number of bedrooms, floor area), and
ground coverage; and a summary showing the percentage of the
tract to be occupied by buildings, by parking and other paved
vehicular areas and by open areas.
(6)
Where a subdivision of land is involved, a preliminary subdivision
plan.
(7)
A preliminary utilities plan showing the proposed location and
types of sewage, drainage, and water facilities, including hydrants.
Adequate supporting information shall be provided to demonstrate
that the drainage system will meet all stormwater management
guidelines promulgated by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection and/or Town of Fairhaven stormwater
management regulations, whichever are more stringent.
(8)
An upkeep and maintenance plan, with supporting legal
documents.
(9)
Documents showing that the applicant fulfills the jurisdictional
requirements of 760 CMR 31.01, that is:
The applicant shall be a public agency, a nonprofit
organization, or a limited dividend organization.
(a)
The project shall be fundable by a subsidizing agency under
a low- and moderate-income housing subsidy program. The
Board may review this documentation to ensure that the
applicable subsidizing agency has performed the due diligence
required under 760 CMR 31.01.
(b)
The applicant shall control the site and the means of access
thereto. This documentation must adequately demonstrate that
the applicant possesses the necessary control over the site
and the site access to develop the project as proposed in the
application.
(c)
(10)
§ 493-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 493-3
1:422
A list of requested exceptions to local requirements and
regulations, including local codes, ordinances, bylaws or
regulations. The application shall describe how the project does not
meet the local requirement and describe why relief from the local
requirement is necessary.
(11)
A complete pro forma, detailing the projected costs and revenues of
the proposed project. In preparing its pro forma, the applicant shall
limit its costs to actual investment in the property. Acquisition costs
shown in the pro forma shall be limited to the lesser of the existing
as-is fair market value of the property (i.e., the value under existing
bylaws and regulations without the benefit of waivers or variances)
or the amount of last arm's-length sale (with all reasonable and
demonstrable carrying costs), whichever is less. Additionally, the
applicant shall fully disclose any costs ascribed to related entities.
Profits generated by any related entities in the development of any
aspect of the project shall not be allowable as project costs.
(12)
A complete copy of any and all materials and applications
submitted by the applicant to any prospective subsidizing agency
or source, including, but not limited to, applications for site
approval.
(13)
An abutters list as they appear on the Town tax list, approved by
the Town Assessor, for all property owners within a three-hundredfoot
radius of the site. The abutters list shall also be put on mailing
labels; the labels shall be one inch by 2 5/8 inch (Avery 5160/8160,
white).
(14)
The application shall be accompanied by the following fees:
A filing fee based upon the number of proposed housing units:
(a) Fairhaven Housing Authority or other public agency: $0.
(b) Others: $1,000, plus $50 per unit.
(1)
(2) Legal advertisement fee: $150 deposit.
Abutter notification fee: $4.64 per abutter within the 300 feet, for
certified return receipt mailing.
(3)
Modifications of comprehensive permits:
(a) Where no public hearing is required: $500.
Where a public hearing is required: $1,000, plus $25 per unit,
plus legal advertisement and abutter notification fees as above.
(b)
(4)
Additionally, the application fee shall include a deposit of $5,000 to
pay for the services of legal counsel for assistance in any project
of 25 units or less, and $7,500 for any project in excess of 25 units
but not exceeding 75 units, and $10,000 for any project in excess
(5)
B.
§ 493-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-3
1:423
of 75 units. This cost is a reasonable estimate of the administrative
costs for counsel retained to assist the Board with the multitude of
legal issues that must be explored in the MGL c. 40B process. In
the event that such sum is insufficient to fund the necessary legal
services, the Board may require additional deposits. The Board, in
its sole and unfettered discretion, may waive any or all of this fee.
Alternatively, the applicant may opt to pay for the Board's legal
counsel in the manner prescribed by MGL c. 44, § 53G, or § 493-4
hereof.
Within seven days of filing of the application, the Board shall notify each
local official of the application by sending such official a copy of the
list required by § 493-3A(11), above, as well as any other information
that will enable such local official to assess the proposed project. Based
upon that list, it shall also invite the participation of each local official
who has a substantial interest in the application by providing such
official with a copy of the entire application.
C.
In order to allow review by local officials, the applicant shall provide
the Town Clerk 24 copies of the complete application for the following
boards, officials and departments for review: [Amended 5-7-2016
ATM by Art. 36]
The nine members of the ZBA
Planning & Economic Development Department
Town Engineer/BPW Superintendent
Conservation Commission
Building Inspector
Town Clerk
Planning Board
Town Administrator
Board of Health
Fire Department
Police Department
Town Counsel
ZBA file
Fairhaven Housing Authority
Peer civil engineer
Peer traffic engineer
D.
The applicant shall provide to the Board for copying purposes one
unbound copy of the complete application and 11-inch-by-17-inch
copies of all plans (with match lines). The Board, at its sole discretion,
reserves the right to distribute the application to other municipal
departments or officials or to expert consultants for their review and
E.
§ 493-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 493-3
1:424
§ 493-4. Review fees.
advice, including, but not limited to, traffic engineering, civil
engineering, architectural, accounting, and legal counsel. The Board
reserves the right to require that the applicant, at his/her expense,
provide additional copies of the application.
When reviewing an application for, or when conducting inspections
in relation to, a comprehensive permit application, the Board may
determine that the assistance of outside consultants is warranted due
to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, because of a
project's potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary
expertise to perform the work related to the comprehensive permit
application. Whenever possible, the Board shall work cooperatively
with the applicant to identify appropriate consultants and to negotiate
payment of the consultant fees. Alternatively, the Board may, by
majority vote, require that the applicant pay a reasonable project
review fee of a sufficient sum to enable the Board to retain consultants
chosen by the Board alone. The Board may require that an applicant
deposit a lump sum in order to retain consultants. In the event that such
sum is insufficient to fund the necessary consulting services, the Board
may require additional deposits.
A.
In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers,
scientists, financial analysts, planners, lawyers, facilitators, architects,
urban designers or other appropriate professionals who can assist the
Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all relevant
laws, bylaws and regulations. Such assistance may include, but not be
limited to, analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a project
or site for compliance with the Board's decision or regulations, or
inspecting a project during construction or implementation.
B.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited
with the Municipal Treasurer, who shall establish a special account
for this purpose, consistent with the terms and provisions of MGL c.
44, § 53G. Expenditures from this special account may be made at
the direction of the Board without further appropriation. Expenditures
from this special account shall be made only for services rendered in
connection with a specific project or projects for which a project review
fee has been or will be collected from the applicant. Accrued interest
may also be spent for this purpose. Failure of an applicant to pay a
review fee shall be grounds for denial of the comprehensive permit
application.
C.
At the completion of the Board's review of a project, any excess amount
in the account, attributable to a specific project, shall be repaid to
the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. A final report of
said account shall be made available to the applicant or applicant's
successor in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any person or
entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest shall provide
the Board with documentation establishing such succession in interest.
D.
§ 493-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-4
1:425
§ 493-5. Public hearing and decision.
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection of
the outside consultant to the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must
be made in writing and may be taken only within 14 days after the
Board has mailed or hand-delivered notice to the applicant of the
selection. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that
the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess
the minimum, required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall
consist either of an educational degree in, or related to, the field at
issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field. The required time limit for action upon an application by the
Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal.
In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within
one month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the
Board shall stand.
E.
The Board shall hold its initial public hearing on the application within
45 days of its receipt. It may request the appearance at the hearing,
or at any subsequent hearing(s), of such representatives of a local
board as it considers necessary or helpful in reviewing the application.
In making its decision, the Board shall take into consideration the
recommendations of a local board.
A.
At the Board's discretion, the Board may establish a negotiating
subcommittee to negotiate with the developer to resolve site, massing,
technical, and buffering issues. The negotiating subcommittee shall
normally consist of the following: one of the members of the Board to
act as a liaison, the Planning and Economic Development Director, the
Building Commissioner, an independent mediator, the developer and/
or members of the development team, and any other representatives
of the Board's choosing. The Board's liaison will report back to the full
Board on the progress of negotiations. The actions and opinions of the
liaison and/or the negotiating subcommittee shall not be construed to
be binding on the full Board.
B.
The Board shall render a decision, based on a majority vote of the
Board, within 40 days after termination of the public hearing, unless
such time period is extended by written agreement of the Board and the
applicant. The hearing is deemed terminated when all public testimony
has been received and all information requested by the Board has been
received.
C.
The Board may dispose of the application in the following manner:
Approve a comprehensive permit on the terms and conditions set
forth in the application;
(1)
(2) Deny a comprehensive permit as not consistent with local needs; or
D.
§ 493-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 493-5
1:426
§ 493-6. Changes in application.
§ 493-7. Appeals.
Approve a comprehensive permit with conditions, including but
not limited to the number of permitted housing units; the height,
size, shape or general appearance of the proposed buildings; the
configuration of the site plan; and any other reasonable condition
that is necessary to address local concerns while not rendering the
construction or operation of such housing uneconomic. In order
to assist the Board with determining the permissible extent of
conditions, the Board may require that the applicant provide a
revised pro forma at the Board's request, during the latter stages
of the public hearing after the parties have had an opportunity
to review the proposed project and any revisions thereto. The
economic viability of a project may be determined with reference
to the average profit earned by other developers of residential
housing, as adjusted for the type of housing and the geographical
area.
(3)
It shall be the applicant's burden to demonstrate that the waiver of
any particular local regulation, bylaw or ordinance is necessary in
order to maintain the project's economic viability. There shall be a
presumption that the waiver of any local bylaw, ordinance or regulation
will adversely affect local concerns.
E.
In the event that, during the public hearing, the applicant proposes any
changes in his/her application or project plans that, in the Board's sole
and unfettered discretion, constitute a material or substantial change
to the project, the applicant shall provide a new site eligibility letter
from the designated subsidizing agency.
A.
In the event of material or substantial changes, the Board may request,
and the applicant shall provide, any and all information specified in
§ 493-3 hereof that is deemed by the Board to be necessary to evaluate
such changes.
B.
In the event of a material or substantial change, any and all plans
and supporting information shall be provided to all of the local entities
identified in § 493-3D, above.
C.
If the applicant submits a revised plan for the Board's consideration
and said plan is the plan that is the subject of the Board's hearing and
deliberation, then the application shall be deemed to be revised, subject
to the foregoing provisions.
D.
If the Board approves the comprehensive permit, any person aggrieved
may appeal within the time period and to the court provided in MGL c.
40A, § 17.
A.
§ 493-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 493-7
1:427
§ 493-8. When effective and recording.
§ 493-9. Performance guarantee.
As a condition of the comprehensive permit, the applicant shall post a bond,
or other form of surety, as a safeguard for performance, and/or a penal sum
in a form and amount acceptable to the Board, prior to the expiration of the
twenty-day appeal period, unless the Board shall specify otherwise. If the
applicant is not the owner and must purchase the property in question in
order to assume such obligations, or if another form of ownership or control
is in force, such person or entity shall comply with the provisions of this
section within 20 days following the date of such purchase or control. If said
performance guarantee shall lapse before completion and certification of
final inspection by the Board, a new guarantee shall be filed expeditiously
by the applicant/controller of the land and/or project. Sum of bond shall be
determined by the engineer or engineers as set forth by the Board to be
the total of cost of roadways, sewer or septic system, water system or wells,
parking areas, landscaping and such estimated by the Board's engineer.
§ 493-10. Severability of provisions.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are severable. If any provision
of these rules and regulations is held invalid, the other provisions shall
not be affected thereby. If the application of these rules and regulations
or any of their provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the application of these rules and regulations and their provisions to other
persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Appendix
Chapter A501
If the Board denies the comprehensive permit or approves the permit
with conditions or requirements considered by the applicant to be
unacceptable, the applicant may appeal to the Housing Appeals
Committee as provided in MGL c. 40B, § 22.
B.
No comprehensive permit shall take effect until a copy of the decision,
bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days have elapsed
after the filing of the decision and no appeals has been filed, is recorded
in the Registry of Deeds and is indexed under the name of the owner of
record of the land.
A.
No comprehensive permit shall take effect until copies of the Board
of Health and Conservation Commission written decisions of approval
or a determination of applicability or order of conditions and until the
Fairhaven Board of Health certifies the wells and septic systems and
they all meet the relevant sections of Title V, bearing the date filed with
the Town Clerk, are recorded in the Registry of Deeds and are indexed
under the name of the owner of record of the land.
B.
§ 493-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § 493-10
1:428
ACCEPTANCES OF GENERAL LAWS
§ A501-1. List of acceptances.
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
28, 1 to 14 6-19-1908 Public parks
31,28 and 49 4-28-1937 STM/6 Civil service for Chief
of Police
3167 , 48 and
49
2-27-1937 ATM/50 Civil service
31,68 48 4-28-1937 STM/4 Civil service
32, 4(2)(b1/2) 12-7-1996 STM/7 Creditable service for
call firefighters
32, 9D1/2 11-6-1997 STM/23 Health insurance for
surviving spouse
32, 22(1)b1/2 6-22-1993 ATM/45 Salary cap
32, 22D 6-22-1993 ATM/45 Funding retirement
system
32, 90G3/4 11-18-1993 STM/
17
Creditable service to
employees over 70
32B, 7A 5-6-1980 ATM/19 Insurance contracts
32B, 9E 9-19-1984 STM/5 Insurance for retired
employees
32B, 20 5-7-2011 ATM/22 Other Post-
Employment Benefits
Liability Trust Fund
33, 59 11-23-1998 STM/
18
2-6-2002 STM/12
Town employees in the
Armed Forces
67.Editor's Note: Voted unanimously, acting pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 4, Section 4B,
revocation of the acceptance of General Laws, Chapter 31, the State Civil Service Law, was
adopted 12-7-1996 STM by Art. 10, as it applies to two positions in the Highway
Department: Motor Equipment Repairman and Working Foreman Motor Equipment
Repairman for the Town of Fairhaven. This revocation to apply to the successors to the
employee incumbent in that position.
68.Editor's Note: Voted unanimously, acting pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 4, Section 4B,
revocation of the acceptance of General Laws, Chapter 31, the State Civil Service Law, was
adopted 12-7-1996 STM by Art. 10, as it applies to two positions in the Highway
Department: Motor Equipment Repairman and Working Foreman Motor Equipment
Repairman for the Town of Fairhaven. This revocation to apply to the successors to the
employee incumbent in that position.
§ 493-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A501-1
1:429
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
39, 23D 10-29-2008 STM/6 Allowing members of
boards, commissions
and committees who
have missed a single
adjudicatory hearing
to participate in a
decision on the matter
under certain
circumstances
40, 5, cl. (50)
and (51)
3-16-1963 ATM/47 Conservation
Commission
40, 6A 10-17-1991 STM/
15
Advertising
40, 6B 8-14-1969 STM/10 Uniform allowance
40, 6F 3-19-1960 ATM/28 Repairs on private
town ways
40, 8A 3-20-1965 ATM/68 Development and
Industrial Commission
40, 8C 3-16-1963 ATM/47 Conservation
Commission
40, 8D 4-3-1971 ATM/67 Historical Commission
40, 8G 2-9-1978 STM/7 Police mutual aid
40, 8J 5-3-1997 ATM/12 Commission on
Disability
40, 13C 5-10-1995 ATM/39 Workers' compensation
40, 13E 5-6-2017 ATM/40 School district reserve
fund
40, 21, cl. 10 5-6-1989 STM/7 Numbering of
buildings
40, 21D 5-2-1992 ATM/14 Enforcement
40, 22F 5-6-1995 STM/17 Fees and charges
40, 39K 5-2-1987 STM/8 Enterprise fund for
water service
40, 39K 5-2-1987 STM/9 Enterprise fund for
sewer service
40, 39K 5-2-1987 STM/10 Enterprise fund for
landfill service
40, 42A to 42F 3-4-1944 ATM/18 Water liens
§ A501-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A501-1
1:430
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
40, 42G to 42I 5-4-1991 STM/11 Water supply
betterment assessment
40, 44A to 44K 5-12-1977 ATM/22 Regional Refuse
Disposal District
40, 57 5-6-1995 STM/12 Revoke or suspend
local licenses and
permits for failure to
pay municipal taxes
40N, 25 (a)-(c) 5-1-2004 STM/8 Establishment of
regional water
commission district
41, 19K 10-18-2005 STM/1 Compensation of Town
Clerk
41, 23A 9-24-1987 STM/8 Executive Secretary69
41, 25 9-24-1987 STM/4 Board of Assessors
41, 38A 2-27-1943 ATM/32 Tax Collector
41, 97A 5-7-1983 ATM/8 Police Department
regulations
41, 108L 5-5-2001 ATM/4
2-16-2002 STM/13
Career incentive pay
increases to police
officers
41, 108P 10-18-2005 STM/1 Compensation of Town
Collector and Town
Treasurer
41, 111A 3-2-1946 ATM/17 Vacations
41, 111D 2-5-1968 Vacations
44, 35 8-16-1921 System of accounts
44, 53D 5-5-2001 STM/5 Park Department
revolving fund
44, 53E 1/2 2-6-2002 STM/11 Hazardous material
revolving fund
44, 53F 1/2 6-8-2002 STM/11 Enterprise fund for
recreational facility
44B, 3 to 7 5-1-2004 STM/6
4-4-2005 ATE/12
Fairhaven Community
Preservation Act
48, 42 5-6-1995 ATM/16 Fire Department
69.Editor's Note: See now Chapter 381 of the Acts of 2014 establishing the position of Town
Administrator in the Town of Fairhaven. (See Ch. A502, Special Acts.)
§ A501-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A501-1
1:431
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
48, 58D 2-2-1970 Fire Department hours
of duty
53, 9A 3-9-1968 ATM/26 Nomination papers
54, 103-A 3-17-1951 ATM/75 Absentee voting
59, 5, cl. 37A 5-10-1988 ATM/29 Property tax
exemption for the
blind
59, 5, cl. 17D 5-10-1988 ATM/46 Property tax
exemption for
surviving spouse or
minor child
59, 5, cl. 41C 5-10-1988 ATM/47 Property tax
exemption for the
elderly
59, 5K 5-5-2007 ATM/15 Property tax liability
reduced in exchange
for volunteer services;
persons over age 60
59, 57B 5-10-1988 ATM/48 Interest on unpaid
taxes
59, 57C 11-23-2009 STM/7 Quarterly tax payment
system
59, 59A 5-7-2005 STM/23 Tax abatement
agreements for certain
properties
60, 15 10-29-2008 STM/5 Increase in demand
fees
60, 23B 5-6-2006 ATM/14 Municipal lien
cerificate fees
64G, 3 5-4-1991 ATM/39 Excise tax on transfer
of occupancy
64G, 3A 5-6-1995 STM/13 Excise tax on transfer
of occupancy
64N 5-5-2018 ATM/39 Local sales tax on
marijuana
71, 37M 5-6-2017 ATM/16 Consolidation of public
school administrative
functions with Town
71, 71E 1-31-1991 STM/5 Money for school
purposes
§ A501-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A501-1
1:432
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
75, 65 to 90 3-6-1911 Nuisances and filth
80, 13B 5-1-2004 ATM/15 Betterments -- deferral
and recovery
agreements
83, 16A to 16F 5-6-1980 ATM/18 Unpaid sewer charges
83, 27 3-10-1945 ATM/37 Sewer assessments
85, 11A 2-28-1942 ATM/39 Bicycle registration
90, 17C and
18B
5-5-2018 ATM/34 Speed limit, safety
zones
90, 18A 4-12-1975 ATM/36 Pedestrians
90, 20A 10-1-1981 STM/4 Parking regulations
90, 20C 4-12-1975 ATM/37 Parking violations
111, 26G 5-7-2005 ATM/34 Authorization of
certain Board of
Health members to
engage in septic tank
installation in certain
areas
111, 126 3-26-1921 Board of Health
130, 52 5-3-1997 ATM/9 Shellfish regulations
132, 35 2-3-1941 ATM/36 Town forest
136, 21 to 28 7-8-1924 Sports on Sunday
136, 21 406/1928 2-9-1929 ATM/48 Sports and games on
Sunday
138, 12B 5-6-1995 STM/11 Nudity or partial
nudity in licensed
premises
138, 17B 12-5-1985 STM/5 Alcoholic beverages
licenses
140, 27A 3-8-1952 ATM/55
140, 147A 5-5-1987 ATM/17 Dog regulations
143, 3Y 5-5-1987 ATM/9 Building Commissioner
term of office
147, 13A 4-28-1937 STM/5 Reserve police force
148, 26C 5-10-1983 ATM/38 Smoke detectors
148, 26G 1-15-1987 STM/14 Automatic sprinklers
§ A501-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A501-1
1:433
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
148, 26H 6-7-2003 STM/15 Fire prevention:
lodging or
boardinghouses;
automatic sprinkler
systems
148, 26I 6-7-2003 STM/15 Fire prevention:
multiple dwelling
units; new
construction;
automatic sprinkler
systems
208, 9 3-8-1902 Forest fires
258, 13 4-5-1982
170/1891 4-8-1901 Highways and county
bridges
49/1902 2-12-1916 Sidewalks
209/1908 3-6-1909 Forest or sprout lands
244/1911 6-3-1912 Forest or sprout lands
191/1907 3-7-1914 Board of Survey
377/1914 7-31-1914 Wharf
240/1916 § 1 2-5-1917 Employee hours
153/1916 2-5-1917 Slaughterhouses
293/1916 2-5-1917 Passenger motor
vehicles
655/1913
§§ 1-10
2-7-1920 Building laws
43/1926 3-15-1926 STM/3 Union Wharf
350/1939 8-31-1939 STM/1 Water for Sconticut
Neck
162/1941 3-10-1945 ATM/36 Inspector of Animals
317/1948 3-12-1949 ATM/83 Water Commissioners
516 and 524/
1950
3-25-1967 Department of Public
Works liability
28/1954 3-13-1954 STM/2;
5-3-2008 STM/19
(revocation)70;
5-6-2017 ATM/50
(revocation)71
Civil service
562/1955 8-11-1955 STM/3 Referendum procedure
§ A501-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A501-1
1:434
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
409/1962 3-21-1964 ATM/57 Pedestrian regulations
478/1963 3-21-1964 ATM/55 Pension increase
401/1966 10-28-1967 STM/5 Workmen's
compensation
715/1966 3-16-1968 ATM/6 Acquisition of
Fairhaven Water
Company/Millicent
Library
1140/1973 3-9-1974 Transportation Aid
Program
743/1981 5-6-1982 ATM/49 Property tax
exemption
595/1982 5-8-1984 ATM/19 License plates for
prisoners of war
653/1983 5-10-1983 ATM/55 Property tax
exemption
640/1985 5-9-1989 ATM/40 Licenses and permits
236/1987 5-9-1989 ATM/38 Expenditure of default
funds by Planning
Board
499/1987 5-7-1988 STM/14 Property tax
exemption for
veterans' organizations
712/1987, § 3 5-9-1989 Municipal Scholarship
Fund
281/1988 5-9-1989 ATM/39 Voter education and
registration
653/1989,
§ 181
5-5-1990 STM/6 Sale of alcoholic
beverages
275/1990 5-2-1992 STM/13 Revolving funds
291/1990 5-4-1991 STM/9 911 service
336/1990 5-2-1992 STM/12 Registration plates
70.Editor's Note: Chapter 28 of the Acts of 1954 was revoked to the extent it applies to
employee of the Town appointed by the Board of Public Works, said revocation to apply to
the successors to the employees incumbent in any applicable positions.
71.Editor's Note: Chapter 28 of the Acts of 1954 was revoked to the extent it applies to all
positions represented by the Custodial and Maintenance Union and appointed by the
School Department.
§ A501-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A501-1
1:435
MGL
c., Sec.
Chapter/
Acts of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
473/1990 5-4-1991 ATM/36 Compensation of
Clerks serving as
Registrars of Voters
516/1990 5-5-1990 Recall of elected
officials
41/1993 5-12-1993 Town Meeting
members at large
17/1997 5-2-1998 ATM/34 Annual cost of living
adjustment for retirees
92, § 2-4/
1997
5-2-1998 ATM/34 Mattapoisett River
Valley Water Supply
Protection Fund
456/1998 5-1-1999 STM/5 Cost-of-living
adjustments for
noncontributory
retirees
127, § 51/
1999
5-9-2000 ATM/10 Increase in cost of
living adjustment for
retirees
116, § 6/ 2002 10-16-2002 STM/
11
Amendment to military
service credit
137/2003 5-7-2005 ATM/35 Public employees
serving in the Armed
Forces of the United
States
157/2005 5-6-2006 ATM/42 Disability retirement
benefits for veterans
55/2006 5-5-2007 STM/6 Increasing accidental
death benefits payable
to surviving children
Chapter A502
SPECIAL ACTS
§ A502-1. Union Wharf.
Chap. 18, Acts of 1806
An Act to authorize the owners of lots of land adjoining on Accushnett
River, in the Town of New-Bedford, in the county of Bristol, from Clark's
Point, so called, to the head of navigation in said river, to build and extend
wharves beyond low water mark in said river.
§ A501-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-1
1:436
SECT. 1. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in
General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the
owners and proprietors of lots of land adjoining Accushnett River, in the
Town of New-Bedford, in the county of Bristol, between Clark's Point, so
called, and the head of navigation in said river, their heirs and assigns,
shall be, and hereby are authorized and empowered to erect, continue and
maintain, wharves parallel with the line of their several lots, as they abut
upon said river; said wharves to extend to the channel of said river. If the
owners of said lots think proper; and each owner of said lot shall have
authority to provide docks, or erect wharves, as aforesaid on the aforesaid
extended portion of his said lot, in such way and manner as he may think
proper, not exceeding the limits of said channel of said river.
SECT. 2. And be it futher enacted, That if at any time hereafter, it shall
be made to appear to the satisfaction of the General Court of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, that the erection, maintaining, or
continuing said wharves or docks, mentioned in the first section of this
act, operates any obstruction to the navigation of said river, or to the right
of taking shell or other fish, in said river, in that case the said General
Court shall have a right, notwithstanding this act, to make such provisions
respecting the navigation of said river, and the right of taking said fish, as
they may think the public interest requires. (June 23, 1806.)
UNION WHARF BILL
Article 2, Acts of 1926
(Chapter 43)
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
In the Year One Thousand Nine Hundred and Twenty-six.
AN ACT
Authorizing the Town of Fairhaven to Acquire the Union Wharf Property in
Said Town.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1: The Town of Fairhaven may purchase for an amount not
exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars, or may take by eminent domain
under chapter seventy-nine of the General Laws, the wharf property in said
Town known as Union wharf, and may maintain and operate the same as a
wharf.
SECTION 2: The powers conferred by this act may be exercised by
the selectmen, who shall also have power to make rules and regulations
governing the use of said wharf, subject, however, to such rules and
regulations as the Town may fix by vote.
§ A502-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-1
1:437
SECTION 3: For the purpose of meeting the expense incurred by the
purchase or taking of Union wharf as aforesaid, the Town of Fairhaven may
borrow from time to time, within a period of five years from the passage of
this act, such sums as may be necessary, not exceeding, in the aggregate,
twenty-five thousand dollars, and may issue bonds or notes therefor, which
shall bear on their face the words. Fairhaven Wharf Loan, Act of 1926.
Each authorized issue shall constitute a separate loan, and such loans shall
be paid in not more than ten years from their dates, but no issue shall
be authorized under this act unless a sum equal to an amount not less
than ten percent of such authorized issued is voted for the same purpose
to be provided from available funds or to be raised by the tax levy of
the year when authorized. Indebtedness incurred under this act shall be
inside the statutory limit and shall, except as herein provided, be subject to
chapter forty-four of the General Laws, exclusive of the provision inserted
in section seven of said chapter by chapter three hundred and thirty-eight
of the acts of nineteen hundred and twenty-three.
SECTION 4. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
House of Representatives,
February 17, 1926.
Passed to be enacted,
JOHN C. HULL, Speaker,
In Senate,
February 23, 1926.
Passed to be enacted,
WELLINGTON WELLS,
President.
February 25, 1926.
Approved.
§ A502-2. Limited Town Meetings
Chapter 285 of the Acts of 1930, Massachusetts General Laws, "An Act
Establishing in the Town of Fairhaven Representative Town Government
by Limited Town Meetings," Approved by the Massachusetts General Court
May 7, 1930. Voted acceptance 1434-572 Referendum November 4, 1930.
Chapter 168 of the Acts of 1945, "An Act Relative to Quorums of Town
Meeting Members in the Town of Fairhaven"; Approved by the
Massachusetts General Court March 29, 1945.
Chapter 562 of the Acts of 1955. "An Act Relative to Referendum
Procedure in the Town of Fairhaven" Approved by the Massachusetts
General Court July 19, 1955. Voted Acceptance 133-82 at Special Town
Meeting of August 11, 1965. (Article No. 3.)
§ A502-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-2
1:438
Chapter 589 of the Acts of 1955, "An Act Relative to Representative
Town Government by Limited Town Meetings in the Town of Fairhaven";
Approved by the Massachusetts General Court July 22, 1955. Voted
Acceptance 2202 to 1135 at Annual Election of February 6, 1956.
AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN
REPRESENTATIVE TOWN GOVERNMENT BY LIMITED TOWN
MEETINGS.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
Section 1. Upon the acceptance of this act by the Town of Fairhaven,
as hereinafter provided, the selectmen and board of registrars of voters,
acting jointly, and hereinafter referred to as the districting board, shall
forthwith divide the territory thereof into not less than four nor more than
eight voting precincts, each of which shall be plainly designated and shall
contain not less than five hundred registered voters.
The precincts shall be so established as to consist of compact and
contiguous territory, to be bounded as far as possible by the center line of
known streets and ways or by other well defined limits. Their boundaries
shall be reviewed and, if need be, wholly or partially revised by the
districting board in November, once in five years, or in November of any
year when so directed by a vote of a representative Town meeting not
later than October thirtieth of that year. The Town clerk shall notify every
registered voter affected by a change in precinct boundaries or a change
in polling place.
The districting board shall, within twenty days after any establishment
or revision of the precincts, but not later than December twentieth of that
year, file a report of their doings with the Town clerk, the registrars of
voters and the assessors, with a map or maps or descriptions of the
precincts and the names and residences of the registered voters therein.
The districting board shall also cause to be posted in the Town hall a map
or maps or description of the precincts as established or revised form time
to time, with the names and residences of the registered voters therein;
and it shall also cause to be posted in at least one public place in each
precinct a map or description of that precinct with the names and
residences of the registered voters therein. The division of the Town into
voting precincts and any revision of such precincts shall take effect upon
the date of the filing of the report thereof by the districting board with the
Town clerk. Whenever the precincts are established or revised, the Town
clerk shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the state secretary,
stating the number and designation of the precincts. Meetings of the
registered voters of the several precincts for elections, for primaries, and
for voting upon any question to be submitted to all the voters of the town,
shall be held on the same day and at the same hour and at such place or
places within the Town as the selectmen shall in the warrant for such
meeting direct. The provisions of the general laws relating to precinct
voting at elections, so far as the same are not inconsistent with this act,
shall apply to all elections and primaries in the Town upon the
establishment of voting precincts as hereinbefore provided.
§ A502-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-2
1:439
Section 2. Other than the officers designated in section three as Town
meeting members at large, the representative Town meeting membership
shall in each precinct consist of the largest number divisible by three which
will not exceed five percent of the registered voters in the precinct. The
registered voters in every precinct shall, at a special election called for that
purpose, to be held not sooner than thirty days after the establishment of
precincts under this act, or at the first annual Town election held after the
establishment thereof, and at the first annual Town election following any
precinct revision where the number of precincts is changed, conformably
to the laws relative to elections not inconsistent with this act, elect by
ballot the number of registered voters in the precinct, other than the
officers designated in section three as Town meeting members at large,
provided for in the first sentence of this section, to be Town meeting
members of the town. The first third in order of votes received of members
so elected shall serve three years, the second third in such order shall
serve two years, and the remaining third in such order shall serve one year,
from the day of the annual Town meeting, or, in case such election is at a
special meeting, from the next annual Town meeting; in case of a tie vote
affecting the division into thirds, as aforesaid, the members elected from
the precinct shall by ballot determine the same; and thereafter, except as
is otherwise provided herein, at each annual Town election the registered
voters of each precinct shall, in like manner, elect one third of the number
of Town meeting members to which that precinct is entitled for the term
of three years, and shall at such election fill for the unexpired term or
terms any vacancy or vacancies then existing in the number of Town
meeting members in their respective precincts. The name of Town meeting
candidates for three-year terms and of candidates to fill vacancies shall be
listed together in one group on the ballot, and all three-year terms shall
first be filled in order of the votes received, then the vacancies for two
years, if any, in such order, and then any vacancies for one year. Upon
every revision of the precincts where the number of precincts is changed,
the terms of office of all Town meeting members from every precinct shall
cease upon the election of their successors. The Town clerk shall, after
every election of Town meeting members, forthwith notify each member by
mail of his election.
§ A502-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-2
1:440
Section 3. Any representative Town meeting held under the provision
of this act, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be limited to the
voters elected under section two, together with the following, designated
Town meeting members at large; namely, any member of the general court
of the commonwealth who is a resident of the town, the moderator, the
Town clerk and treasurer, the members of the board of selectmen, the tax
collector, the members of the board of health, the members of the school
committee, the members of the board of assessors, the members of the
sewer commission, the members of the park commission, the chairman of
the finance committee, the members of the planning board, and the tree
warden. All the foregoing shall be included within the general designation
of Town meeting members. The Town clerk shall notify the Town meeting
members of the time and place at which representative Town meetings are
to be held, the notices to be sent by mail at least seven days before the
meeting.
The Town meeting members, as aforesaid, shall be the judges of the
election and qualifications of their members. One hundred Town meeting
members shall constitute a quorum for doing business; but a less number
may organize temporarily and may adjourn from time to time, and at an
adjourned meeting seventy-five Town meeting members shall constitute a
quorum. Notice of every adjourned representative Town meeting shall be
posted by the Town clerk in at least one public place in each precinct,
and he shall notify the members by mail of the adjournment at least
forty-eight hours before the time of the adjourned representative Town
meeting. The notices shall state briefly the business to be acted upon at
any meeting and shall include notice of any proposed reconsideration. All
Town meetings shall be public. The Town meeting members as such shall
receive no compensation. Subject to such conditions as may be determined
from time to time by the representative Town meeting, any voter of the
Town who is not a Town meeting member may speak at any representative
Town meeting, but shall not vote. A Town meeting member may resign by
filing a written resignation with the Town clerk, and such resignation shall
take effect upon the date of such filing. No elected member whose official
position entitles him to be a member at large shall act as a member at
large during such time as he remains an elected member. A Town meeting
member who removes from the Town shall cease to be a Town meeting
member and an elected Town meeting member who removes from one
precinct to another or is so removed by a revision of precincts shall not
retain membership after the next annual election.
§ A502-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-2
1:441
Section 4. Nomination of candidates for Town meeting members to be
elected under this act shall be made by nomination papers signed by not
less than ten voters of the precinct in which the candidate resides, filed
with the registrars of voters for certification at least thirty-five days before
the election and filed with the Town clerk at least twenty-eight days before
the election; provided, that any Town meeting member may become a
candidate for re-election by giving written notice thereof to the Town clerk
at least forty-two days before the election. No nomination papers shall be
valid in respect to any candidate whose written acceptance is not thereon
or attached thereto when filed.
Section 5. The articles in the warrant for every Town meeting, so far as
they relate to the election of the Town officers, Town meeting members,
and, as herein provided, to referenda and all matters to be acted upon and
determined by ballot of the town, shall be acted upon and determined by
the voters in their respective meetings by precinct. All other articles in the
warrant for any Town meeting, beginning with the elected, shall be acted
upon and determined exclusively by Town meeting members at a meeting
to be held at such time and place as shall be set forth by the selectmen
in the warrant for the meeting, subject to the referendum provided for by
section eight.
Section 6. A moderator shall be elected by ballot for a three-year term,
and shall serve as moderator of all Town meetings, except as otherwise
provided by law, until a successor is elected and qualified. Nominations for
and election of a moderator shall be as in the case of other elective Town
officers, and any vacancy in the office may be filled by the Town meeting
members at a meeting held for that purpose. If a moderator is absent, a
moderator pro tempore may be elected by the Town meeting members.
§ A502-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-2
1:442
Section 7. Any vacancy in the full number of Town meeting members
form any precinct, whether arising from a failure of the registered voters
thereof to elect, or from any other cause, may be filled until the next annual
election by the remaining elected Town meeting members of the precinct
from among the registered voters thereof. Notice of any vacancy shall be
given by the Town clerk to the remaining members from the precinct in
which the vacancy or vacancies exist and he shall call a special meeting of
such members prior to any annual or special Town meeting for the purpose
of filling any vacancy. He shall cause to be mailed to every such member,
not less than seven days before the time set for the meeting, a notice
specifying the object, time and place of the meeting. At the said meeting
one third of the members from such precinct shall constitute a quorum,
and they shall elect from their own number a chairman and a clerk. The
choice to fill any vacancy shall be by written ballot, unless waived by a
two-thirds vote of those present, and a majority of the votes cast shall be
required for a choice. The chairman and clerk shall count the ballots and
shall make a certificate of the choice and forthwith file the same with the
Town clerk, together with a written acceptance by the member or members
so chosen who shall thereupon be deemed elected and qualified a Town
meeting member or members, subject to the right of all the Town meeting
members to judge of the election and qualifications of the members as set
forth in section three.
Section 8. A vote passed at any representative Town meeting
authorizing the expenditure of twenty thousand dollars or more, as an
appropriation other than Town charges, shall not be operative until after
the expiration of five days, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, from the
dissolution of the meeting. If, within said five days a petition, signed by not
less than five percent of the registered voters of each precinct, containing
their names and addresses as they appear on the list of registered voters, is
filed with the selectmen requesting that the question or questions involved
in such vote be submitted to the voters of the Town at large, then the
selectmen, within fourteen days after the filing of the petition, shall call a
special meeting, which shall be held within ten days after the issuing of
the call, for the purpose of presenting to the voters at large the question
or questions so involved. The polls shall be opened at two o'clock in the
afternoon and shall be closed not earlier than eight o'clock in the evening,
and all votes upon any questions so submitted shall be taken by ballot, and
the check list shall be used in the several precinct meetings in the same
manner as in the election of Town officers. The questions so submitted
shall be determined by a majority vote of the registered voters of the
Town voting thereon, but no action of the representative Town meeting
shall be reversed unless at least twenty percent of the registered voters
shall vote to disapprove such action. The questions so submitted shall be
stated upon the ballot in substantially the same language and form in which
they were stated when presented to said representative Town meeting by
the moderator as appears from the records of the said meeting. If such
petition is not filed within the said period of five days, the vote of the
representative Town meeting shall become operative upon the expiration
of the said period.
§ A502-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-2
1:443
Section 9. The Town of Fairhaven, after the acceptance of this act,
shall have the capacity to act through and be bound by its said Town
meeting members who shall, when convened from time to time as herein
provided, constitute representative Town meetings; and the representative
Town meetings shall exercise exclusively, so far as will conform to the
provisions of this act, all powers vested in the municipal corporation.
Action in conformity with all provisions of law now or hereafter applicable
to the transaction of Town affairs in Town meetings shall, when taken by
any representative Town meeting in accordance with the provisions of this
act, have the same force and effect as if such action had been taken in a
Town meeting open to all the voters of the Town is heretofore organized
and conducted.
Section 10. The representative Town meeting may make such rules
consistent with general law as may be considered necessary for conducting
its meetings.
Section 11. The representative Town meeting may appoint such
committees for investigation and report as it may consider necessary.
Section 12. All by-laws or parts of by-laws of the Town inconsistent with
the provisions of this act are hereby repealed. The provisions of chapter
forty-four of the General Laws shall continue to apply in the Town of
Fairhaven notwithstanding the provisions of this act.
Section 13. This act shall not abridge the right of the inhabitants of
Fairhaven to hold general meetings, as that right is secured to them by
the constitution of this commonwealth; nor shall this act confer upon any
representative Town meeting in Fairhaven the power finally to commit
the Town to any measure affecting its municipal existence or changing its
government, without action thereon by the voters of the Town at large,
using the ballot and the check list therefor.
Section 14. This act shall be submitted to the registered voters of the
Town of Fairhaven at any annual or special Town meeting. The vote shall
be taken in precincts by ballot in accordance with the provisions of the
General Laws, so far as the same shall be applicable, in answer to the
question, which shall be placed, in case of a special meeting, upon the
ballot to be used at said meeting, or, in case of an annual meeting, upon
the official ballot to be used for the election of Town officers: "Shall an
act passed by the General Court in the year nineteen hundred and thirty,
entitled 'An Act establishing in the Town of Fairhaven representative Town
government by limited Town meetings, be accepted by this town?"
So much of this act as authorizes its submission for acceptance to the
registered voters of the Town of Fairhaven shall take effect upon its
passage, and the remainder, except section fifteen, shall take effect upon
its acceptance by a majority of the voters voting thereon.
Section 15. If this act is rejected by the registered voters of the Town
of Fairhaven when submitted to said voters under section fourteen, it may
again be submitted for acceptance in like manner from time to time to
such voters at any annual Town meeting in said Town within three years
thereafter, but not more than three times in the aggregate.
§ A502-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-2
1:444
Chap. 587. AN ACT RELATIVE TO REPRESENTATIVE TOWN
GOVERNMENT BY LIMITED TOWN MEETINGS IN THE TOWN OF
FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of chapter 285 of the acts of 1930 is hereby
amended by striking out, in line 5, the word "five" and inserting in place
thereof the word: — two.
SECTION 2. The first sentence of section 4 of chapter 285 of the acts
of 1930, as appearing in section 4 of chapter 589 of the acts of 1955, is
hereby further amended by striking out, in lines 7 to 10, inclusive, the
words: -- "; provided that any Town meeting member may become a
candidate for reelection by giving written notice thereof to the Town clerk
at least forty-two days before election."
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved July 15, 1968.
Chap. 400. AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE REPRESENTATIVE TOWN
MEETING FORM OF GOVERNMENT IN THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of chapter 285 of the acts of 1930 is hereby
amended by striking out the first sentence, as amended by section 1 of
chapter 587 of the acts of 1968, and inserting in place thereof the following
sentence: -- Other than the officers designated in section three as Town
meeting members at large, the representative Town meeting membership
shall in each precinct consist of the largest number divisible by three which
will not exceed five percent of the registered voters in the precinct.
SECTION 2. Section 4 of said chapter 285 is hereby amended by
striking out the first sentence, as amended by section 2 of said chapter
587, and inserting in place thereof the following sentence: -- Nomination
of candidates for Town meeting members to be elected under this act shall
be made by nomination papers signed by not less than ten voters of the
precinct in which the candidate resides, and filed with the Town clerk at
least fifteen days before the election; provided, that any Town meeting
member may become a candidate for reelection by giving written notice
thereof to the Town clerk at least forty-two days before election.
SECTION 3. The first sentence of section 2 of said chapter 285, as
amended by section 1 of this act, is hereby further amended by striking out
the Word "five" and inserting in place thereof the word: -- two.
SECTION 4. The first sentence of section 4 of said chapter 285, as
amended by section 2 of this act, is hereby further amended by striking
out the words "; provided, that any Town meeting member may become a
candidate for reelection by giving written notice thereof to the Town clerk
at least forty-two days before election".
§ A502-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-2
1:445
SECTION 5. Sections one and two of this act shall take effect upon its
passage. Sections three and four of this act shall take effect upon the next
precinct revision by the Town of Fairhaven, as set forth in chapter 285 of
the acts of 1930, as amended.
Approved June 10, 1969.
Chap. 609. AN ACT PROVIDING THAT NOMINATING PAPERS OF
CANDIDATES FOR TOWN MEETING MEMBER IN THE TOWN OF
FAIRHAVEN SHALL BE FILED AT LEAST TWENTY-EIGHT DAYS BEFORE
THE ELECTION FOR SUCH OFFICE.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 4 of chapter 285 of the acts of 1930 is hereby
amended by striking out the first sentence, as most recently amended by
section 2 of chapter 400 of the acts of 1969, and inserting in place thereof
the following sentence: -- Nomination of candidates for Town meeting
members to be elected under this act shall be made by nomination papers
signed by no less than ten voters of the precinct in which the candidate
resides and filed with the Town clerk at least twenty-eight days before
the election; providing, that any Town meeting member may become a
candidate for reelection by giving written notice thereof to the Town clerk
at least forty-two days before election.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved August 4, 1970.
Chap. 39. AN ACT ELIMINATING THE REQUIREMENT THAT THE TOWN
CLERK OF THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN GIVE CERTAIN NOTICES BY MAIL
OF ADJOURNED REPRESENTATIVE TOWN MEETINGS.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. The second paragraph of section 3 of chapter 285 of
the acts of 1930 is hereby amended by striking out the third sentence
and inserting in place thereof the following sentence: — Notice of every
adjourned representative Town meeting shall be posted by the Town clerk
in at least one public place in each precinct.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved February 26,1973.
Chap. 62. AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE ELECTION OF TOWN MEETING
MEMBERS IN THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
Section 4 of chapter 285 of the acts of 1930 is hereby amended by
striking out the first sentence, as most recently amended by section 1 of
chapter 609 of the acts of 1970, and inserting in place thereof the following
sentence: - Nomination of candidates for Town meeting members to be
elected under this act shall be made by nomination papers signed by no
less than ten voters of the precinct in which the candidate resides, and filed
with the Town clerk at least twenty-eight days before the election.
§ A502-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-2
1:446
Approved April 25, 1983.
Chapter 156. AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE REPRESENTATIVE TOWN
MEETING FORM OF GOVERNMENT IN THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 2 of chapter 285 of the acts of 1930 is hereby
amended by striking out the first sentence, as most recently amended by
section 3 of chapter 400 of the acts of 1969, and inserting in place thereof
the following sentence:- Other than the officers designated in section three
as Town meeting members at large, the representative Town meeting
membership shall in each precinct consist of the largest number divisible
by three which will not exceed two and seven tenths percent of the persons
residing in the precinct.
SECTION 2. Section 4 of said chapter 285 is hereby amended by
striking out the first sentence, as most recently amended by section 4 of
said chapter 400, and inserting in place thereof the following sentence:-
Nomination of candidates for Town meeting members to be elected under
this act shall be made by nomination papers signed by not less than ten
voters of the precinct in which the candidate resides, and filed with the
Town clerk at least twenty-eight days before the election; provided, that
any Town meeting member may become a candidate for reelection by
giving written notice thereof to the Town clerk at least forty-nine days
before election.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect on April first, nineteen hundred
and eighty-eight.
Approved June 22, 1987.
Chapter 41
FAIRHAVEN, TOWN OF—DESIGNATION OF TOWN
MEETING MEMBERS AT LARGE
An act relative to the designation of certain elected officials of the Town
of Fairhaven as Town meeting members at large.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
§ A502-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-2
1:447
SECTION 1. The first paragraph of section 3 of chapter 285 of the acts
of 1930 is hereby amended by striking out the first sentence and inserting
in place thereof the following sentence:- Any representative Town meeting
held under the provisions of this act, except as otherwise provided herein,
shall be limited to the voters elected under section two, together with
the following, designated Town meeting members at large; namely, any
member of the general court of the commonwealth who is a resident of
the town, the moderator, the Town clerk, the members of the board of
selectmen, the members of the board of health, the members of the school
committee, the members of the planning board, the members of the board
of public works, the commissioners of trust funds, the elected members of
the housing authority, the chairman to the finance committee, and the tree
warden.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved May 12, 1993.
§ A502-3. Board of Public Works.
Chap. 722. AN ACT ESTABLISHING A BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS IN THE
TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. There shall be established in the Town of Fairhaven a board
of public works, hereinafter called the board, consisting of seven members,
one to be elected from each precinct and one to be elected at large, to be
elected at the first annual Town election after the passage of this act. The
member elected at large and the first two in order of votes received of the
members elected from precincts shall serve for terms of three years, the
second two in the order of votes shall serve for terms of two years, and
the remaining two in the order of votes shall serve for terms of one year.
Thereafter, when the term of any member expires, his successor shall be
elected at an annual Town election to serve for a term of three years. In
all cases, the members of the board shall serve until their successors are
qualified. The members of the board shall, after each annual Town election,
elect from its members a chairman and a clerk for the ensuing year. In
case of a vacancy, the board of selectmen shall, within thirty days, fill such
vacancy until the next Town election, when a new member or members
shall be elected to fill the unexpired term. No person shall serve on the
board who holds an elective or appointed office in the Town other than
Town meeting members, and no person who is an employee of the Town
shall serve on the board.
§ A502-2 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-3
1:448
SECTION 2. Upon the election and qualification of the initial members
of the board of public works, the board shall have all the powers and duties
now and from time to time vested by general or special laws, Town charter
or Town by-laws in the following boards, departments and offices having
corresponding powers and duties in the Town of Fairhaven, to wit: highway
department, water and sewer commissioners, park commissioners,
cemetery commissioners, refuse and garbage collection, and with respect
to construction and maintenance only, the Town dump and such boards,
offices and departments shall be abolished. No contracts or liabilities then
in force shall be affected by such abolition, but the board of public works
shall in all respects be the lawful successor of the boards, departments and
offices so abolished.
The board shall have such additional powers with respect to the
furnishing of engineering services, the maintenance and repair of Town
buildings and property, and the performance of such duties of any other
boards, departments and offices of the Town as may be reasonably related
to the duties and responsibilities of a board of public works, as the Town
may, from time to time, by by-law provide, and other provisions of law to
the contrary notwithstanding.
SECTION 3. The board shall appoint and fix the compensation of a
superintendent of public works who shall exercise and perform, under the
supervision and direction of the board, such powers, rights and duties
transferred to it under sections two and three as it may, from time to
time, designate. He shall be responsible for the efficient exercise and
performance of such powers, rights and duties and shall hold office subject
to the will of the board. He shall be specially fitted by education, training
and experience to perform the duties of said office, and need not be
a resident of the town. During his tenure he shall hold no elective or
other appointive office, nor shall be be engaged in any other business
or occupation. He shall give to the Town a bond with a surety company
authorized to transact business in the commonwealth as surety, for the
faithful performance of his duties, in such sum and upon such conditions
as the board may require, and shall, subject to the approval of the board,
appoint such assistants, agents and employees as the exercise and
performance of his powers, rights and duties may require. He shall keep
full and complete records of the doings of his office and render to the
board as often as it may require a full report of all operations under his
control during the period reported upon; and annually, and from time to
time as required by the board, he shall make a synopsis of such reports for
publication. He shall keep the board fully advised as to the needs of the
Town within the scope of his duties, and shall furnish to the board each
year upon its request a carefully prepared and detailed estimate in writing
of the appropriations required during the next succeeding fiscal year for
the proper exercise and performance of all said powers, rights and duties.
Approved July 19, 1968.
§ A502-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-3
1:449
PROPOSED AMENDMENT
"Shall the Town of Fairhaven approve the charter amendment proposed by
the Town meeting summarized below?"
Voted:
2359 – YES
988 – NO
SUMMARY
(Chapter 722 of the Acts of 1968 created the Board of Public Works for the
Town of Fairhaven. Section 1 of that Act provided in substance for seven
members of the Board of Public Works, one to be elected from each of
six precincts and one to be elected at large, the terms of which members
would be for three years. It is proposed to the voters to amend Section 1
so that the membership of the Board of Public Works will consist of five
members, all elected at large, the terms of which members would be for
five years.)
The full text of the measure is as follows:
To see if the Town meeting will vote, in accordance with the provisions
of Article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution of Massachusetts
(Home Rule Amendments) and the procedures for amendment of existing
special laws pertaining to towns under the provisions of General Laws
Chapter 43B Section 10 to propose to the voters the amendment of Section
1 of Chapter 722 of the Acts of 1968 (creating the Board of Public Works)
so as to read as follows:
Section 1. There shall be established in the Town of Fairhaven a Board
of Public Works hereinafter called the Board, consisting of five members
at large, to be elected at the first annual Town election after the passage
of this act as amended. The first in order of votes received of members so
elected shall serve for a term of five years, the second in such order shall
serve for four years, the third in such order shall serve for three years, the
fourth in such order shall serve for two years and the fifth in such order
shall serve for one year. Thereafter when the term of any member expires,
his successor shall be elected at an annual Town election to serve for a
term of five years. In all cases, the numbers of the board shall serve until
their successors are qualified. The members of the Board shall after each
annual Town election, elect from its members a chairman and a clerk for
the ensuing year. In case of a vacancy the Board of Selectmen shall, within
thirty days fill such vacancy until the next Town election when a member
or members shall be elected to fill the unexpired term or terms. No person
shall serve on the board who holds an elected or appointed office in the
Town other than Town Meeting Member, and no person who is an employee
of the Town shall serve on this Board; this amendment to take effect of the
first Annual Town Election after the passage) thereof.
§ A502-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-3
1:450
Chap. 453. AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS IN THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN
AND ESTABLISHING THE POSITION OF SUPERINTENDENT OF
HIGHWAYS IN SAID TOWN.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 3 of chapter 722 of the acts of 1968 is hereby
amended by striking out the second sentence and inserting in place thereof
the following sentence: — He shall be responsible for the efficient exercise
and performance of such powers, rights and duties and shall hold office
subject to the will of the board and shall not be subject to any provisions of
chapter thirty-one of the General Laws.
SECTION 2. Said chapter 722 is hereby further amended by adding the
following section:
Section 4. The board shall appoint and fix the compensation of the
superintendent of highways who shall exercise and perform, under the
supervision and direction of the board, such powers, rights and duties,
transferred to it under sections two and four as it may, from time to
time, designate. He shall be responsible for the efficient exercise and
performance of such powers, rights and duties and shall hold office subject
to the will of the board and shall not be subject to any provisions of chapter
thirty-one of the General Laws. He shall be specially fitted by education,
training and experience to perform the duties of said office, and need not
be a resident of the town. During his tenure he shall hold no elective or
other appointive office, nor shall be be engaged in any other business or
occupation.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved July 11, 1975.
Chapter 510
FAIRHAVEN, TOWN OF—SUPERINTENDENT OF
PUBLIC WORKS—OTHER OFFICES
An act authorizing the superintendent of public works in the Town of
Fairhaven to hold other appointive offices.
Be it enacted by the senate and House of Representative in General court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 3 of chapter 722 of the acts of 1968, as amended by
section 1 of chapter 453 of the acts of 1975, is hereby further amended by
striking out the fourth sentence and inserting in place thereof the following
sentence:- During his tenure he shall hold no elective office nor shall be be
engaged in any other business or occupation.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved January 2, 1991.
Chapter 122
FAIRHAVEN, TOWN OF — BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ A502-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-3
1:451
An act relative to the board of public works of the Town of Fairhaven.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. The charter amendment adopted by the Town of Fairhaven
effective February first, nineteen hundred and seventy-one with respect to
the number and terms of office of the members of the board of public works
of said Town is hereby ratified, validated and confirmed.
SECTION 2. Chapter 722 of the acts of 1968 is hereby amended by
striking out section 1 and inserting in place thereof the following section:
Section 1. There shall be established in the Town of Fairhaven, a board
of public works, hereinafter called the board, consisting of five members at
large. Upon the expiration of the term of any member, his successor shall
be elected at an annual Town election to serve for a term of three years.
In all cases the members of the board shall serve until their successors are
qualified. The members of the board shall, after each annual Town election,
elect from among its members a chairperson and a clerk for the ensuing
year. In the case of a vacancy, the board of selectmen shall, within thirty
days, fill such vacancy until the next annual Town election, when a member
shall be elected to fill an unexpired term resulting from such vacancy. No
person shall serve on the board who holds an elected or appointed office in
said Town other than Town meeting member and no employee of the Town
shall serve on the board.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved July 14, 1992.
§ A502-4. Recall Elections.
Chapter 516
FAIRHAVEN, TOWN OF — RECALL ELECTIONS
An act providing for recall elections in the Town of Fairhaven.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Any person who holds an elected office in the Town of
Fairhaven, with more than six months remaining in the term of such office
on the date of filing of the affidavit, referred to in section two, may be
recalled from office by the registered voters in said town, in the manner
herein provided.
§ A502-3 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-4
1:452
SECTION 2. 50 or more voters of the Town of Fairhaven may file
with the Town clerk of said Town an affidavit containing the name of
the officer whose recall is sought and a statement of the grounds upon
which the petition is based. The Town clerk shall deliver to the said voters
petition blanks demanding said recall, printed forms of which he shall
keep available. Said blanks may be completed by writing or typewriting;
they shall be addressed to the board of selectmen; they shall contain the
names of the persons who filed the affidavit and the grounds for recall as
stated in the affidavit; they shall demand the election of a successor to the
office; and they shall be dated and signed by the Town clerk. A copy of the
petition shall be kept on file in the office of the Town clerk in a record book
maintained for that purpose. The recall petitions shall be returned and filed
in the office of the Town clerk within fourteen days following the date the
petitions were issued, signed by at least 20 percent of the total number of
registered voters duly recorded on the registration list of the Town clerk
as of the preceding Town election. [Amended by Ch. 82, Acts of 2002,
approved 4-4-2002]
The Town clerk shall, within twenty-five hours following such filing,
submit said petitions to the registrars of voters who shall, within seven
days certify thereon the number of signatures which are names of
registered voters of the town.
SECTION 3. If the petition shall be certified by the registrars of voters
to be sufficient, the Town clerk shall forthwith submit the same to the
board of selectmen. Upon its receipt of the certified petition, the board of
selectmen shall within forty-eight hours give written notice of said petition
and certificate to the person whose recall is sought. If said officer does
not resign his office within five days following delivery of the said notice,
the board of selectmen shall order an election to be held not less than
sixty nor more than ninety days after the date of the registrars' certificate
of the sufficiency of the petition. If, however, another Town election is to
occur within one hundred days after the date of the certificate, the board
of selectmen shall hold the recall election on the date of said other Town
election. If a vacancy occurs in the office after a recall election has been
ordered, the election shall nevertheless proceed as provided in this section,
but only the ballots for candidates need be counted.
SECTION 4. An officer whose recall is sought may be a candidate to
succeed himself at the recall election. The nomination of candidates, the
publication of the warrant for the recall election, and the conduct of the
same shall all be in accordance with the provisions of laws relating to
elections, unless otherwise provided in this act. [Amended by Ch. 82,
Acts of 2002, approved 4-4-2002]
SECTION 5. The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of his
office until the recall election. If he is not recalled in the election he shall
continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall
as before, except as provided herein.
§ A502-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-4
1:453
If the officer is recalled in the election, he shall be deemed removed
upon the qualification of his successor who shall hold office during the
unexpired term. If the successor fails to qualify within five days after
receiving notification of his election, the incumbent shall thereupon be
deemed removed and the office vacant.
SECTION 6. Ballots used at a recall election shall contain the following
propositions in the order indicated:-
For the recall of (name of officer)
Against the recall of (name of officer)
Adjacent to each proposition, there shall be a place to mark a vote.
After the propositions shall appear the word "Candidates" followed by the
names of candidates arranged alphabetically, by surname. If a majority
of the votes cast upon the question of recall is in the affirmative, the
candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.
If a majority of the votes on the question is in the negative, the ballots for
the candidates need not be counted, except as provided in section three
above.
SECTION 7. No recall petition shall be filed against an officer within
6 months after he takes office, or in the case of an officer subjected to a
recall election and not recalled thereby until at least six months after the
election at which his recall was submitted to the voters. [Amended by Ch.
82, Acts of 2002, approved 4-4-2002]
Approved January 2, 1991.
§ A502-5. Additional license for the sale of wines and malt
beverages.
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN TO ISSUE AN
ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF WINES AND MALT
BEVERAGES TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General
Laws, the licensing authority of the town of Fairhaven may grant to Excel
Restaurant Group, Inc. d/b/a Hickory Creek, a license for the sale of wines
and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises at 142 Huttleston avenue
in the town of Fairhaven under section 12 of said chapter 138. The license
shall be subject to all of said chapter 138, except said section 17. The
license authorized by this act shall not be transferred to another location
but may be transferred to another person at the same location.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved February 8, 2002
§ A502-4 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-5
1:454
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN TO GRANT AN
ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF ALL ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General
Laws, the licensing authority of the town of Fairhaven may grant an
additional license for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the
premises under section 12 of said chapter 138 to Turan Irge at 214
Huttleston avenue. The license shall be subject to all of said chapter 138,
except said section 17.
The licensing authority shall not approve the transfer of the license to
any other location, but it may grant the license to a new applicant at the
same location if the applicant files with the licensing authority a letter
from the department of revenue indicating that the license is in good
standing with the department and that all applicable taxes have been
paid.
If the license granted under this act is cancelled, revoked or no longer
in use, it shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges
and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing authority, which may
then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location under the
same conditions as specified in this act.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved September 18, 2013.
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN TO GRANT AN
ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF WINES AND MALT
BEVERAGES TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. (a) Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the
General Laws, the town of Fairhaven may grant an additional license for
the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises under
section 12 of said chapter 138 to Jevon Enterprises, d/b/a Mac's Soda Bar,
located at 115 Sconticut Neck road. The license shall be subject to all of
said chapter 138 except said section 17.
(b) The licensing authority shall not approve the transfer of the license
authorized in this act to any other location but it may grant the license to
a new applicant at the same location if the applicant files with the
licensing authority a letter from the department of revenue indicating that
the license is in good standing with the department and that all applicable
taxes have been paid.
§ A502-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-5
1:455
(c) If the license granted under this act is cancelled, revoked or no
longer in use, it shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights,
privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing authority,
and the licensing authority may then grant the license to a new applicant
at the same location under the same conditions as specified in this act.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved October 18, 2013.
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN TO GRANT 1
ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF WINES AND MALT
BEVERAGES TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. (a) Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the
General Laws, the licensing authority for the town of Fairhaven may grant
1 additional license for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk
on premises pursuant to section 12 of said chapter 138 to Pizzeria Brick
Inc. for use at 213 Huttleston avenue. The license shall be subject to all of
said chapter 138 except said section 17.
(b) The licensing authority shall not approve the transfer of the license
to any other location but it may grant the license to a new applicant at the
same location if the applicant files with the licensing authority a letter
from the department of revenue and a letter from the department of
unemployment assistance indicating that the license is in good standing
with those departments and that all applicable taxes, fees and
contributions have been paid.
(c) If the license granted under this act is cancelled, revoked or no
longer in use at the location of original issuance, it shall be returned
physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions
pertaining thereto, to the licensing authority and the licensing authority
may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location under
the same conditions as specified in this act.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved, September 30, 2016.
§ A502-6. Town Administrator.
AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE POSITION OF TOWN ADMINISTRATOR IN
THE TOWN OF FAIRHAVEN.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. The executive powers of the town of Fairhaven shall be vested
in the board of selectmen, who shall have all the powers given to boards of
selectmen by the General Laws, except for those executive powers granted
to the town administrator.
§ A502-5 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-6
1:456
The board of selectmen shall serve as the chief goal-setting and policymaking
agency of the town of Fairhaven. The duties and responsibilities
for day-to-day management of the town shall be delegated to the town
administrator. The board shall act through the adoption of policy directives
and guidelines which shall be implemented by the town administrator and
the officers and employees appointed by, or under the authority of, the
board. Individual selectmen shall not purport to represent the board or
exercise the authority of the board except when specifically authorized by
the board.
The board of selectmen shall:
(a) enact rules and regulations to implement policies and to issue
interpretations;
(b) exercise, through the town administrator, general supervision over all
matters affecting the interests or welfare of the town;
(c) appoint the town counsel and any special counsels, and all members
of committees, boards and commissions except the finance committee and
except those appointed by the moderator, elected by the voters or under
the jurisdiction of the school committee and may make appointments to
temporary posts and committees the board creates for special purposes;
(d) have general administrative oversight of such boards, committees and
commissions appointed by the board of selectmen;
(e) have the responsibility and authority for licenses and other quasi-judicial
functions as provided by the General Laws and by the by-laws of the town
of Fairhaven;
(f) issue all town meeting warrants;
(g) review the annual proposed budget submitted by the town administrator
and make recommendations with respect to the annual proposed budget as
the board deems advisable; provided, however, that the town administrator
shall present the budget to the town meeting, incorporating the
recommendations of the board of selectmen;
(h) appoint, and may re-appoint, and enter into a contract for the
employment of a town administrator for a term of not more than 3 years,
who shall be a person with executive and administrative qualifications
and especially fitted by education, training and experience to perform the
duties of the office; provided, that the town may from time to time, by
by-law, establish such additional qualifications as it deems necessary and
appropriate;
(i) remove the town administrator at any time, for just cause following a
formal procedure including a written intent to dismiss, a written response
and a public hearing, to be completed within 30 days after the issuance
of a written intent to dismiss, in accordance with the terms of the town
administrator's contract;
§ A502-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-6
1:457
(j) set the compensation for the town administrator, not to exceed an
amount appropriated by the town meeting; and
(k) designate a qualified person as acting town administrator to perform the
duties of the office during any vacancy exceeding 30 days, caused by the
town administrator's absence, illness, suspension, removal or resignation;
provided, that the appointment of an acting town administrator shall be for
a period not to exceed 180 days.
SECTION 2. The town administrator shall be the chief administrative officer
of the town of Fairhaven and shall act as the agent for the board of
selectmen. The town administrator shall be responsible to the board of
selectmen for coordinating and administering all town affairs under the
jurisdiction of the board of selectmen.
The town administrator's powers and duties shall include those outlined in
subsections (a) to (aa), inclusive.
(a) Consult and advise the board of selectmen regarding its policies and
implement those policies.
(b) Attend all meetings of the board of selectmen, except when excused, and
consult with and advise the board of selectmen on all matters that come
before the board.
(c) Attend all town meetings and advise the town meeting on all warrant
articles within the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen.
(d) Attend all finance committee meetings, except when excused by the
board of selectmen, and keep the finance committee informed on all matters
under the jurisdiction of the town administrator that come before the
committee.
(e) Manage and direct the daily reporting and supervision of all town
departments under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen including:
assessors, building commission, council on aging, police, civil defense,
animal control officer, gas inspector, plumbing inspector, wiring inspector
and weights and measures inspector, recreation, highway, water, sewer,
tree and park, planning, finance, finance director, collector, treasurer,
accounting, veterans, town counsel, other committees appointed by and
under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen and the fire department,
subject to section 42 of chapter 48 of the General Laws.
(f) Review and advise the board of selectmen on all warrants for the
payment of town funds as prepared by the town accountant in accordance
with section 56 of chapter 41 of the General Laws.
(g) Except with respect to the school department, the town administrator
shall have sole authority over the administration of personnel policies for
all town employees. With respect to the fire department, such authority
shall be subject to section 42 of chapter 48 of the General Laws. The town
administrator shall act as the personnel board under all applicable laws
§ A502-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-6
1:458
and by-laws, except as otherwise set forth in this act. The personnel board
as presently constituted shall be eliminated upon the appointment of the
town administrator. The town may enact by-laws establishing the wages,
salaries and other benefits of employees, which shall be consistent with the
authority granted to the town administrator in this act. Notwithstanding
the elimination of the personnel board, all actions taken prior to the
appointment of the town administrator by the personnel board within its
authority, and by any other town official or board, with respect to personnel,
including the appointment of all officers and employees, shall continue in
full force and effect subject to future action by the town administrator
within the town administrator's authority.
(h) Administer the town's insurance policies, including the ability to settle
claims; provided, however, that all insurance contracts and claims
settlements shall receive the approval of the board of selectmen.
(i) With the approval of the board of selectmen, appoint and remove all
department heads under the direct control of the town administrator. Each
department head, with the approval of the town administrator, shall appoint
and remove all department staff within their respective departments. All
appointments shall be based entirely on merit and fitness. All appointments
and terminations shall be conducted in accordance with the General Laws,
personnel policies, by-laws of the town of Fairhaven and any applicable
employment contracts; provided, that fire department appointments shall
also be subject to section 42 of chapter 48 of the General Laws.
(j) With the approval of the board of selectmen, reorganize any
departmental structures under the jurisdiction of the town administrator.
(k) With the approval of the board of selectmen, negotiate all collective
bargaining agreements on behalf of the town, except for the school
department. The town administrator may seek the assistance of labor
counsel if the town administrator deems it necessary to effect successful
negotiations. All final agreements must be approved and executed by the
board of selectmen.
(l) With the approval of the board of selectmen, establish compensation
packages for all town employees under the jurisdiction of the town
administrator, not subject to a collective bargaining agreement. Such
compensation shall not exceed the amount appropriated therefor by town
meeting and shall be subject to all applicable laws and by-laws.
(m) Submit to the board of selectmen a written proposed budget for town
government for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget shall detail
all estimated revenue from all sources, and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service for the previous, current and ensuing 5 years. The
proposed budget shall include proposed expenditures for both current
operations and capital projects during the ensuing year, detailed by
department, committee, agency, purpose and position and proposed
financing methods. The proposed budget shall include estimated revenues
and free cash available at the close of the fiscal year, including estimated
§ A502-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-6
1:459
balances in special accounts. The town may, by by-law establish additional
financial information and reports to be provided by the town administrator.
To assist the town administrator in preparing the proposed annual budget
of revenue and expenditures, the finance director, all boards, officers and
committees of the town, including the school committee, shall furnish to the
town administrator, in a writing in such a form as the town administrator
shall establish, all relevant information in their possession, including a
detailed estimate of the appropriations required and any available funds.
(n) Report on the probable amount required to be levied and raised by
taxation to defray all expenses and liabilities of the town together with an
estimate of the necessary tax rate.
(o) Establish calendar dates by which the proposed budget, revenue
statement and tax rate estimate are to be submitted to the board of
selectmen.
(p) Submit annually to the board of selectmen a 5-year capital
improvements program, or the same as approved by a formal capital
planning committee, to include: (i) a list of all capital improvements and
supporting data proposed to be undertaken during the next 5 years; (ii) cost
estimates, methods of financing and recommended time schedule; and (iii)
the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining any facility to be
constructed or acquired.
(q) Advise the board of selectmen at least monthly, of all departmental yearto-
date revenues.
(r) Direct action as deemed necessary to ensure that all operating and
capital budgets under the direct control of the town administrator are
maintained in accordance with the town meeting vote that approved those
budgets and coordinate efforts with the governing bodies of those
departments not under the direct supervision of the town administrator
to ensure that those operating and capital budgets are maintained in
accordance with the town meeting vote that approved those budgets.
(s) Keep and complete records of the office of the town administrator and
annually submit to the board of selectmen, unless requested to do so more
frequently, a full report of the operations of the office.
(t) Be responsible for coordination of operational and strategic planning for
the town.
(u) Serve as the procurement officer for the town, establish and enforce
procurement policies and guidelines in accordance with applicable state
laws.
(v) Manage and oversee the use, maintenance, security and, with the
approval of the board of selectmen, regulate the rental for all the town
buildings, properties and facilities, including information technology, except
those under the jurisdiction of the school department, unless requested by
the school department.
§ A502-6 FAIRHAVEN CODE § A502-6
1:460
(w) Prepare the application of all town warrants for approval by the board
of selectmen.
(x) With the approval of the board of selectmen, prosecute, defend and
settle all litigation for or against the town, subject to such appropriation as
may be necessary to effect settlement, except for litigation involving only
the school department, or its officers and employees.
(y) Delegate and direct any qualified town official or employee to carry out
any duty that is within the authority of the town administrator.
(z) During a temporary absence, with the approval of the board of
selectmen, the town administrator may designate a qualified administrative
employee or officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the
town administrator.
(aa) Perform any other duties or tasks assigned by the board of selectmen,
assigned by the town meeting or mandated by applicable state law.
SECTION 3. The town administrator of the town of Fairhaven shall have
access to all municipal books, papers and documents or information
necessary for the proper performance of the duties of the town
administrator. The town administrator may, without notice, cause the affairs
of any division or department under the town administrator's supervision,
or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof, to be examined.
SECTION 4. All laws, by-laws, votes, rules and regulations, whether enacted
by authority of the town of Fairhaven or any other authority, which are in
force in the town on the effective date of this act, not inconsistent with this
act, shall continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 5. No contract existing, and no action at law or suit in equity, or
other proceeding pending, on the effective date of this act shall be affected
by this act.
SECTION 6. The town of Fairhaven shall be governed by this act. To the
extent that this act modified or repeals existing General Laws and special
acts or the by-laws of the Town of Fairhaven, this act shall govern.
SECTION 7. This act shall not impair the rights or obligations of any
person holding a town office, or employed by the town, on its effective date,
except those duties assigned by this act to another officer or employer, and
except those duties which are subsequently assigned to another officer or
employee pursuant to this act. No person who continues in the permanent
full-time service or employment of the town shall forfeit their pay, grade or
time in service as a result of this act.
SECTION 8. This act shall take effect upon its acceptance by the town of
Fairhaven by a vote at the town meeting.
Approved, November 25, 2014.
§ A502-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A502-7
1:461
§ A502-7. Shellfish aquaculture license fees.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same as follows:
Notwithstanding section 64 of chapter 130 of the General Laws, the town
of Fairhaven, acting by and through its board of selectmen, may charge an
annual fee of not less than $5 per acre nor more than $200 per acre, or part
thereof, for shellfish aquaculture licenses granted pursuant to section 57 of
said chapter 130. The board shall fix the date the fee shall be due. If any
part of the fee is not paid within 6 months after it becomes due, the license
shall immediately be forfeited.
Approved, December 19, 2014.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM Art. 17 11-6-1997 Mooring and boat usage
amendment
Ch. 145
STM Art. 18 11-6-1997 Street use regulations
amendment
Ch. 169, Part 1
STM Art. 19 11-6-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 20 11-6-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 22 11-6-1997 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 23 11-6-1997 Accept MGL c. 32, § 9D 1/
2
Ch. A501
STM Art. 34 11-6-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 35 11-6-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 33 5-2-1998 Accept Ch. 92, §§ 2 to 4,
Acts of 1997
Ch. A501
ATM Art. 34 5-2-1998 Accept Ch. 17, Acts of
1997
Ch. A501
STM Art. 24 5-2-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 26 5-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 27 5-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 29 5-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
§ A502-7 FAIRHAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:462
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 7 5-6-1998 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
ATM Art. 8 5-6-1998 Meetings amendment Ch. 50
ATM Art. 17 5-6-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 18 5-6-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 19 5-6-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 20 5-6-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 28 5-8-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
Planning Board 9-22-1998 Fees Ch. 306
Planning Board 9-22-1998 Procedural rules
amendment
Ch. 316
Planning Board 9-22-1998 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 322
STM Art. 17 11-23-1998 Dogs amendment Ch. 87, Part 1
STM Art. 18 11-23-1998 Accept MGL c. 33, § 59 Ch. A501
STM Art. 22 11-23-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 23 11-23-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 24 11-23-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 25 11-23-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 5 5-1-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 6 5-1-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 7 5-1-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 8 5-1-1999 Zoning amendment:
Wetland Resource
Protection District
Ch. 198
ATM Art. 9 5-1-1999 Zoning amendment:
storm- water
management
Ch. 198
ATM Art. 17 5-1-1999 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
ATM Art. 18 5-1-1999 Water amendment Repealed
2-6-2002 STM
by Art. 9
ATM Art. 19 5-1-1999 Water amendment Repealed
2-6-2002 STM
by Art. 9
STM Art. 5 5-1-1999 Accept Ch. 456, Acts of
1998
Ch. A501
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:463
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM Art. 18 5-1-1999 Sealer of Weights and
Measures fees
amendment
Ch. 119,
STM Art. 12 5-6-2000 Water amendment Repealed
2-6-2002 STM
by Art. 9
STM Art. 13 5-6-2000 Sewers amendment Ch. 158
STM Art. 18 5-6-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 33 5-6-2000 Constables amendment Ch. 12
ATM Art. 34 5-6-2000 Water amendment Repealed
2-6-2002 STM
by Art. 9
ATM Art. 10 5-6-2000 Accept § 51 of Ch. 127
Acts of 1999
Ch. A501
STM Art. 21 1-30-2001 Finance Committee
amendment
Ch. 33
STM Art. 22 1-30-2001 Parking violations fines
amendment
Ch. 182, Part 2
STM Art. 4 5-5-2001 Accept MGL c. 41, § 108 Ch. A501
ATM Art. 11 5-5-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 13 5-5-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 14 5-5-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 5 5-5-2001 Accept MGL c. 44, § 53D Ch. A501
STM Art. 6 5-5-2001 Dogs amendment Ch. 87, Part 1
STM Art. 6 2-6-2002 Union Wharf fees Ch. 177
STM Art. 9 2-6-2002 Water use restriction Ch. 187
STM Art. 11 2-6-2002 Hazardous materials
revolving fund
Ch. A501
STM Art. 12 2-6-2002 Accept MGL c. 33, § 59 Ch. A501
STM Art. 13 2-6-2002 Accept MGL c. 41, § 108L
(ratification of 5-5-2001
STM, Art. 4)
Ch. A501
Board of Health 3-12-2002 Food service
establishments
amendment
Ch. 426
Board of
Selectmen
6-6-2002 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
ATM Art. 5 6-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 6 6-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
§ DL-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:464
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 7 6-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 8 6-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 9 6-8-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 11 6-8-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 13 6-8-2002 Waterways, moorings and
boat usage
Ch. 145
STM Art. 11 6-8-2002 Accept MGL c. 44, § 53F
1/2
Ch. A501
STM Art. 9 10-16-2002 Dogs amendment Ch. 87
STM Art. 11 10-16-2002 Accept § 6 of Ch. 116,
Acts of 2002
Ch. A501
Board of
Selectmen
3-3-2003 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
Board of
Selectmen
4-7-2003 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
STM Art. 11 6-7-2003 Noncriminal disposition of
violations amendment
Ch. 1
STM Art. 12 6-7-2003 Noncriminal disposition of
violations amendment;
driveway and sidewalk
construction amendment
Chs. 1; 169,
Part 4
STM Art. 15 6-7-2003 Accept MGL c. 148,
§§ 26H, 26I
Ch. A501
STM Art. 18 6-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 29 6-7-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 13 2-11-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 14 2-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 15 2-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 16 2-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 17 2-11-2004 Duties of Town Counsel Ch. 56
STM Art. 19 2-11-2004 Alarms Ch. 82
STM Art. 20 2-11-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 83
STM Art. 21 2-11-2004 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
ATM Art. 15 5-1-2004 Accept MGL c. 80, § 13B Ch. A501
STM Art. 6 5-1-2004 Accept MGL c. 44B, §§ 3 -
7
Ch. A501
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:465
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM Art. 8 5-1-2004 Accept MGL c. 40N,
§ 25(a)-(c)
Ch. A501
STM Art. 11 5-1-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 13 5-1-2004 Electronic or video card
games amendment
Ch. 150
ATE Art. 12 4-4-2005 Accept MGL c. 44B, §§ 3 -
7
Ch. A501
STM Art. 12 5-7-2005 Community Preservation
Committee
Ch. 6
ATM Art. 19 5-7-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 20 5-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 23 5-7-2005 Tax abatement
agreements; accept MGL
c. 59, § 59A
Chs. 73; A501
ATM Art. 34 5-7-2005 Accept MGL c. 111, § 26G Ch. A501
ATM Art. 35 5-7-2005 Accept Ch. 137 of the
Acts of 2003
Ch. A501
Board of
Selectmen
7-25-2005 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
STM Art. 1 10-18-2005 Accept MGL c. 41, § 19K
and § 108P
Ch. A501
ATM Art. 10 10-18-2005 General provisions and
fire prevention and
protection amendment
Chs. 1 and 122
ATM Art. 7 5-6-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM Art. 8 5-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 9 5-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 11 5-6-2006 Community Preservation
Committee amendment
Ch. 6
ATM Art. 14 5-6-2006 Accept MGL c. 60, § 23B Ch. A501
ATM Art. 23 5-6-2006 Public health mutual aid
agreement
NCM
ATM Art. 42 5-6-2006 Accept Ch. 157, Acts of
2005
Ch. A501
STM Art. 7 5-6-2006 Shellfish regulations
amendment
Ch. 218
Zoning Board of
Appeals
8-1-2006 Rules and regulations
governing comprehensive
permits
Ch. 493
§ DL-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:466
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Planning Board 3-27-2007 Subdivision of land Ch. 322
ATM Art. 15 5-5-2007 Accept MGL c. 59, § 5K Ch. A501
ATM Art. 26 5-5-2007 Driveway and sidewalk
construction amendment
Ch. 169, Part 4
ATM Art. 28 5-5-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 83
ATM Art. 29 5-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
parking violation fines
amendment
Ch. 182, Part 2
STM Art. 6 5-5-2007 Accept Ch. 55, Acts of
2006
Ch. A501
STM Art. 18 5-5-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 20 5-5-2007 Community Preservation
Committee amendment
Ch. 6
ATM Art. 21 5-3-2008 Meeting amendment Ch. 50
ATM Art. 45 5-3-2008 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
ATM Art. 46 5-3-2008 General provisions
amendment; vehicles and
traffic: trailers not
attached to motor
vehicles prohibited
Chs. 1; 182,
Part 4
ATM Art. 49 5-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
STM Art. 19 5-3-2008 Revocation of acceptance
of Chapter 28, Acts of
1954
Ch. A501
STM Art. 30 5-3-2008 Department of Finance
amendment
Ch. 37
STM Art. 5 10-29-2008 Accept MGL c. 60, § 15 Ch. A501
STM Art. 6 10-29-2008 Accept MGL c. 39, § 23D Ch. A501
STM Art. 11 10-29-2008 General provisions
amendment; driveway
and sidewalk construction
amendment
Chs. 1; 169,
Part 4
STM Art. 12 10-29-2008 General provisions
amendment; waterways,
moorings and boat usage
amendment
Chs. 1; 145
ATM Art. 12 5-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:467
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 30 5-2-2009 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 83
ATM Art. 32 5-2-2009 Agricultural Commission Ch. 3
ATM Art. 33 5-2-2009 Right to farm Ch. 155
STM Art. 15 5-2-2009 Finances: special-purpose
appropriations
Ch. 2, Part 1
STM Art. 16 5-2-2009 Waterways, moorings and
boat usage amendment
Ch. 145
STM Art. 17 5-2-2009 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
Planning Board 6-23-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 306
STM, Art. 7 11-23-2009 Accept MGL c. 59, § 57C Ch. A501
STM Art. 13 5-1-2010 Wetlands amendment Ch. 192
ATM Art. 31 5-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 32 5-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
Board of
Selectmen
1-18-2011 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
Board of
Selectmen
4-25-2011 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
STM Art. 10 5-7-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM Art. 22 5-7-2011 Pawnbrokers; dealers in
junk, old metals or
secondhand articles
Ch. 141, Part 2
STM Art. 23 5-7-2011 Criminal history checks Ch. 141, Part 3
ATM Art. 22 5-7-2011 Accept MGL c. 32B, § 20 Ch. A501
Board of Health 8-8-2011 Solid waste: dumping and
littering amendment
Ch. 471, Part 1
Planning Board 8-23-2011 Procedural rules
amendment
Ch. 316
ATM Art. 9 5-5-2012 Meetings amendment Ch. 50
Board of
Selectmen
4-29-2013 Houseboats Ch. 208
STM Art. 5 5-4-2013 Department of Finance
amendment
Ch. 37
STM Art. 8 5-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM Art. 19 5-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
Board of
Selectmen
8-8-2013 Special municipal
employee
Ch. 220
§ DL-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:468
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ch. 83, Acts of
2013
9-18-2013 Grant of additional
license for sale of all
alcoholic beverages
Ch. A502
Ch. 107, Acts of
2013
10-18-2013 Grant of additional
license for sale of wines
and malt beverages
Ch. A502
STM, Art. 8 2-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM, Art. 10 2-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
winter parking
amendment
Ch. 182, Part 1
ATM, Art. 26 5-3-2014 Capital Planning
Committee
Ch. 40
STM, Art. 7 5-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
STM, Art. 11 5-3-2014 Authorize petition of
General Court
NCM
Ch. 381, Acts of
2014
11-25-2014 Establishing position of
Town Administrator
Ch. A502
Ch. 406, Acts of
2014
12-19-2014 Shellfish aquaculture
license fees
Ch. A502
Board of
Selectmen
5-26-2015 Animal control fees Ch. 206
Board of Health 7-8-2015 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 87, Part 1,
Editor's Note
only
ATM, Art. 31 5-7-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 34 5-7-2016 Authorize petition of
General Court
NCM
ATM, Art. 36 5-7-2016 Executive Secretary
repealer; nomenclature
change to Town
Administrator
Ch. 28,
reference only;
Ch. 37; Ch. 40;
Ch. 61; Ch. 73;
Ch. 493; Ch.
A501, Editor's
Note only
Board of
Selectmen
7-11-2016 Marine Resources
Committee
Ch. 212
Board of
Selectmen
8-8-2016 Council on Aging Ch. 207
Ch. 277, Acts of
2016
9-30-2016 Grant of additional
license for sale of wines
and malt beverages
Ch. A502
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:469
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 16 5-6-2017 Accept MGL c. 71, § 37M Ch. A501
ATM, Art. 33 5-6-2017 Finances: use of revolving
accounts
Ch. 2, Part 2
ATM, Art. 40 5-6-2017 Accept MGL c. 40, § 13E Ch. A501
ATM, Art. 49 5-6-2017 Personnel Ch. 61
ATM, Art. 50 5-6-2017 Revocation of acceptance
of MGL c. 31, § 47
Ch. A501
ATM, Art. 51 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 198
ATM, Art. 53 5-6-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Board of Health 5-16-2017 Individual sewage
disposal systems
amendment
Ch. 432
ATM, Art. 31 5-5-2018 Licenses and Permits:
Delinquent Taxpayers
Amendment
Ch. 141, Part 1
ATM, Art. 32 5-5-2018 Stretch Energy Code Ch. 171
ATM, Art. 34 5-5-2018 Accept MGL c. 90, § 17C
and 18B
Ch. A501
ATM, Art. 36 5-5-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 37 5-5-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 38 5-5-2018 Animals: Animal Control
Fees Amendment
Ch. 206, Pt. 1
ATM, Art. 39 5-5-2018 Accept MGL c. 64N, § 3 Ch. A501
§ DL-1 FAIRHAVEN CODE § DL-1
1:470