Part I: Administrative Legislation 

Chapter 1 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1:1 

ARTICLE I 
Adoption of Code 
[An ordinance to adopt the recodified Code of the Town of Greenfield,including its renumbering and reorganization and certain substantive changes, has been presented to Town Council. Uponadoption, the ordinance will be included as Article I of this chapter.] 
§ 1-1. through § 1-13. (Reserved) 
1:3 

ARTICLE II 
Definitions and Interpretation
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. I, §§ 1-5 and 1-6, of the 2002 Bylaws] 

§ 1-14. Amendment procedures. [Amended 6-15-2011 by Order No.FY 11-102] 
The ordinances of the Town may be amended, repealed or revised from timeto time by a majority vote of the Town Council. A change in the ZoningOrdinance shall require a two-thirds vote (MGL c. 40A, § 5). All proposed ordinances shall be posted on the Town Bulletin Board in accordance withCharter Section 2-9(c). 
§ 1-15. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BYLAWS/ORDINANCES — The word "ordinance" shall be synonymous with the word "bylaw" when applied to the Town of Greenfield. 
MAJORITY VOTE — A majority of those present and voting, provided aquorum of the body is present. 
TWO-THIRDS VOTE — Two-thirds of the number present and voting,provided a quorum of the body is present. 
1:5 

ARTICLE III 
Penalties and Enforcement 
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. I, §§ 1-3, 1-9 and 1-10, of the 2002 Bylaws] 
§ 1-16. General penalty. [Amended 5-21-1997; approved by AG9-14-1997] 
Whoever shall offend against or fail to comply with any of the provisionsof these ordinances shall, unless some other penalty is provided by law orby an ordinance of the Town, for each and every offense forfeit and pay a penalty of not less than $25 and not more than $300, all pursuant to MGL c.40, § 21 and/or 21D. All fines recovered under this section shall inure to thebenefit of the Town. 
§ 1-17. Noncriminal disposition of violations. 
A. 	Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, the following noncriminal disposition isprovided for violations of the Town Code or any rule or regulation of any municipal officer or department, the violation of which is subject tospecific penalty. 
(1) 	
Any persons taking cognizance of a violation of the above of which he/she is empowered to enforce, hereinafter referred to as the"enforcing person," as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, may give the offender a written notice to appear before the clerk of the district court having jurisdiction thereof atany time during office hours, not later than 21 days after the dateof such notice. Such notice shall be in triplicate and shall contain the name and address, if known, of the offender, the specific offensecharged, and the time and place for his/her required appearance.Such notice shall be signed by the enforcing person and shall be signed by the offender whenever practicable in acknowledgmentthat such notice has been received. 

(2) 	
The enforcing person shall, if possible, deliver to the offender a copy of said notice at the time and place of violation. If it is notpossible to deliver a copy of said notice to the offender at the timeand place of the violation, said copy shall be mailed or delivered by the enforcing person, or by his commanding officer or the head ofhis department or by any person authorized by such commandingofficer, department, or head, to the offender's last known address, within 15 days after said violation. Such notice, so mailed, shallbe deemed a sufficient notice, and a certificate of the person somailing such notice that it has been mailed in accordance with this section shall be prima facie evidence thereof. 

(3) 	
Any person notified to appear before the Clerk of the GreenfieldDistrict Court may so appear and confess the offense charged, either personally or through a duly authorized agent or by mailingto such Clerk with the notice such specific sum of money not 


1:7 

exceeding $300 for violation of the ordinance. Such payment shallif mailed, be made only by postal note, money order or check. The payment to the Clerk of such sum shall operate as a finaldisposition of the case. Upon receipt of such notice, the Town Clerkshall forthwith notify the Greenfield District Court Clerk of such payment, and the receipt by the Greenfield District Court Clerk ofsuch notification shall operate as final disposition of the case. Noperson so notified to appear before the clerk of a district court shall be required to report to any probation officer, and no recordof the case shall be entered in any probation records. [Amended4-16-1997; approved by AG 9-17-1997] 
(4) 	
If any person so notified to appear desires to contest the violationalleged in the notice to appear and also to avail himself of theprocedure established pursuant to this section, he may, within 21 days after the date of the notice, request a hearing in writing.Such hearing shall be held before a district court judge, clerk, orassistant clerk, as the court shall direct, and if the judge, clerk, or assistant clerk shall, after hearing, find that the violation occurredand that it was committed by the person so notified to appear,the person shall be permitted to dispose of the case by paying the specific sum of money fixed as a penalty as aforesaid, or suchlesser amount as the judge, clerk or assistant clerk shall order,which payment shall operate as final disposition of the case. If the judge, clerk, or assistant clerk shall, after hearing, find that theviolation alleged did not occur or was not committed by the personnotified to appear, that finding shall be entered in the docket, which shall operate as a final disposition of the case. Proceedings heldpursuant to this subsection shall not be deemed to be criminalproceedings. No person disposing of a case by payment of such a penalty shall be required to report to any probation office as aresult of such violation, nor shall any record of the case be enteredin the probation records. 

(5) 	
If any person so notified to appear before the clerk of the districtcourt fails to pay the fine provided for hereunder within the timespecified or, having appeared, does not confess the offense before the clerk or pay the sum of money fixed as penalty after a hearingand finding as provided in the preceding subsection, the clerk shallnotify the enforcing person who issued the original notice, who shall determine whether to apply for the issuance of a complaintfor the violation of the ordinance. 


B. 	All fines recovered under this section shall inure to the benefit of the Town. 
1:8 

§ 1-18. Work done by Town; liability for costs.1 
Whenever any provision of these ordinances imposes a duty and affixes a penalty for the neglect or violation thereof, if such neglect or violation shallnevertheless occur, the Mayor may perform or cause the performance ofsuch duty, at the expense of the persons liable to perform the same; and such expense may be recovered in contract by the Town. 
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:9 
Chapter 13 
CIVIL DEFENSE 

§ 13-1. Director of Civil Defense. 
The Director of the Civil Defense shall be appointed by the Mayor and shallhave direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the civil defense organization for the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 13-2. Compliance with state provisions. 
In all other respects, all civil defense powers shall conform to Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950 and/or Special Law Chapter 31. 
Chapter 18 
EMERGENCY SERVICES 

1:10 

ARTICLE I 
Police Department Mutual Aid
[Adopted as amended in its entirety 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY
12-109 (Ch. 132 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 18-1. Aid authorized. 
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to the aid of another cityor town at the request of said city or town in the suppression of riots or anyother form of violence therein. 
1:11 

§ 18-1 GREENFIELD CODE 	§ 22-3 
Chapter 22 
EMINENT DOMAIN 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Development review — See Ch. 244. Vacant and foreclosing property — See Ch. 
431. 
§ 22-1. Scope. 
A. 	This chapter shall be considered a further restriction on the powers of eminent domain in Greenfield; all provisions of MGL and federal lawwill still stand and be in full force. 
B. 	This chapter shall be considered a restriction solely on municipal condemnations and have no force in Greenfield RedevelopmentAuthority, state and federal takings. 
C. 	This chapter shall be confined to condemnations for the purpose of economic development and/or tax base expansion, and shall not limitthe municipality in the exercise of eminent domain powers for thepurposes of building roads, schools, public parks and other recreation centers, municipal administrative buildings, water and sewer facilities,including but not limited to easements, teen centers, senior centers,veteran centers, police facilities, fire prevention and response facilities, public health facilities, libraries, museums, and other public projectswith obvious benefit to the municipality as a whole. 
§ 22-2. Restrictions on eminent domain powers. 
Eminent domain powers shall only be used for the purpose of economicdevelopment and/or expanding the tax base when all the followingcircumstances have been met: 
A. 	The unemployment rate for Greenfield is in the highest 20% of municipalities in the commonwealth. 
B. 	The total equalized property value for Greenfield is in the lowest 20% of municipalities in the commonwealth. 
C. 	The property in question has been vacant for a period over two consecutive years. 
D. 	The property in question has been deemed a substandard, decayed, orblighted open area either under state law or by the provisions of thischapter. 
§ 22-3. Procedure for declaring property to be substandard,decayed or blighted. 
1:12 

A. 	Declaring a property substandard, decayed, or a blighted open areashall require a two-thirds vote of the Greenfield Town Council. 
B. 	Declaring a property substandard, decayed, or a blighted open areamust take place within one year from the original motion or it shall bedeemed to fail. 
C. 	State recognition of the property as substandard, decayed or blightedunder MGL shall be sufficient cause for the Greenfield Town Council to declare the same without following the remaining provisions of § 22-3 of this chapter. 
D. 	Upon a motion to declare a property as substandard, decayed or ablighted open area, the Greenfield Town Council or a subcommittee thereof and the Greenfield Planning Board shall each hold a publichearing. 
E. 	The Greenfield Planning Board shall have a public hearing no sooner than 30 days from the motion and no later than 90 days. 
F. 	The Greenfield Town Council shall have a public hearing no sooner than30 days and no later than 145 days.2 
G. 	Public hearings for both shall be posted and advertised in accordancewith MGL. 
H. 	Owners of affected properties, and abutters, and abutters of abutters shall be notified by certified mail of the public hearings. 
I. 	The Town Council shall seek in writing the opinion of the DPW Director,the Public Safety Commission, the Board of Health, the Building Inspector, the Board of Assessors, the Planning Board, the GreenfieldRedevelopment Authority, the Marketing and Economic DevelopmentCoordinator and the Mayor. 
J. 	If a written opinion is not received by the Town Council within 120 days,it may proceed without such opinion. 
K. 	If the declaration fails, it may not be considered again for 18 months. 
§ 22-4. Right of reconsideration or remedy. 
A. 	A declaration that a property is substandard, decayed, or a blightedopen area must be reported to the property owner by certified mail within 30 days. 
B. 	No condemnation proceedings shall be taken of a property that is substandard, decayed, or a blighted open area for the purpose of economic development and expanding the tax base for one year afterthe declaration. 
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:13 
C. 	No sooner than 180 days or later than 270 days from the declarationdate, the property owner may petition the Town Council for reconsideration in writing, with a progress report and plan for remediation of substandard, decayed, or blighted conditions. 
D. 	No condemnation proceedings may begin while such a petition is under consideration. 
E. 	The Town Council or a subcommittee thereof shall hold a public hearingin accordance with MGL no sooner than 30 days nor later than 90 days to take comment on the petition. 
F. 	The Town Council shall vote on the petition no later than 120 days fromthe date of receipt. 
G. 	A majority vote of the Town Council may move the property fromsubstandard, decayed, or a blighted open area status to a probationarysubstandard, decayed, or a blighted open area status. 
H. 	At any time following the vote to move to substandard, decayed, ora blighted open area probationary status, the Town Council, with apublic hearing and by majority vote, may reinstate active status with no further right of reconsideration. 
I. 	After five years without vote of the Town Council, the property will losesubstandard, decayed, or a blighted open area probationary status and no longer be listed as substandard, decayed, or a blighted open area. 
§ 22-5. Condemnation. 
A. 	Condemnation of a property substandard, decayed, or a blighted open area for the purpose of economic development and/or expanding the taxbase shall require a two-thirds vote of the Town Council. 
B. 	No condemnation proceedings on substandard, decayed, or a blighted open area for the purpose of economic development and/or expandingthe tax base shall begin before one year after the initial vote of theTown Council declaring it a substandard, decayed, or a blighted open area. 
Chapter 27 
FINANCES 
1:14 

ARTICLE I 
Contract Review 
[Adopted 5-18-2011 by Order No. FY 11-084 (Ch. 164 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 27-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to allow adequate time for all Town Councilorsto be able to read, study, request clarification, and take due diligence on thecontent of any contract submitted by the Mayor for approval by the Town Council. 
§ 27-2. Submission to Council. 
A. 	All contracts requiring Town Council approval must be submitted 30 days prior to Council consideration of the contract. 
B. 	Contracts submitted under this article and amended on the Council floor shall not be considered new contracts and therefore shall not be subject to another thirty-day submission time frame. 
§ 27-3. Exception. 
In the event that time is "of the essence," the Council may waive the thirty-day submission requirement upon a two-thirds vote of the Council. 
1:15 

ARTICLE II 

Departmental Transfers and Supplemental Appropriations[Adopted as amended 1-18-2012 by Order No. FY 12-068 (Ch. 67 ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 27-4. Purpose. 
This article shall be deemed to fulfill the requirements of Section 5-7 of theGreenfield Home Rule Charter. 
§ 27-5. Intradepartmental transfers. 
A. 	Intradepartmental transfers of funds from one line item to another lineitem within the same department may be made when authorized, inwriting, by the Mayor. 
B. 	Written notice of said transfer and the reason it was deemed advisable shall be filed with the Clerk of the Council. 
C. 	The transfer shall be effective upon the filing of said notice with the Clerk of the Council. 
§ 27-6. Interdepartmental transfers and supplementalappropriations. 
A. 	Interdepartmental transfers and supplemental appropriations of fundsmust be approved by the Town Council. 
B. 	Interdepartmental transfers or supplemental appropriations sought by the Mayor shall be submitted as a written request filed with the Clerkof the Council setting forth the following: 
(1) 	
The amount or amounts requested; 

(2) 	
The reasons for the request; 

(3) 	
The source of the requested funds; 

(4) 	
The department or other entity responsible for the expenditure of the funds. 


C. 	Said request shall be accompanied by an advisory opinion signed by thehead of the department from which the funds are being transferred, indicating to what extent, if any, the transferring department will beprevented from performing any of its vital functions and the sufficiencyof remaining funds to meet the monetary needs of the department for the remainder of the fiscal year. 
D. 	The Council shall hold a public hearing for requests of interdepartmental transfers within 30 days of the receipt of the filing request with the Clerk of the Council. 
1:17 

E. 	The Council shall hold at least two readings for interdepartmentaltransfers. 
F. 	Notice of the public hearing for an interdepartmental transfer or supplemental appropriation shall be posted on the Town Bulletin Boardat least 10 days before the public hearing to consider the request. 
G. 	Interdepartmental transfer or supplemental appropriation requests of$25,000 or more shall be published once in a newspaper of generalcirculation in Greenfield. Said publication shall be at least seven days prior to the public hearing. 
H. 	Approval of said requests shall require a majority vote of the Council present. 
§ 27-7. Copies of requests to Councilors. 
The Clerk of the Council shall forward a copy of each intradepartmentaltransfer, interdepartmental transfer, and supplemental appropriation request to each Councilor. 
§ 27-8. Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the preceding sections will occur only during the last two months of a fiscal year and the first 15 days of the new fiscal year to apply tothe previous fiscal year. During that time, the Town Council may, by majorityvote, on recommendation by the Mayor, transfer an amount appropriated for the use of any department other than a Municipal Light Departmentor a School Department to the appropriation for any other departmentconsistent with MGL c. 44, § 33B. 
1:18 

ARTICLE III 
Departmental Revolving Funds
[Adopted 4-19-2017 by Order No. FY 17-117 (Ch. 59 of the 2002
Code)] 

§ 27-9. Purpose. 
This article establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Towndepartments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection withthe operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed byMGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2. 
§ 27-10. Expenditure limitations. 
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incurliabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this article without appropriation, subject to the followinglimitations: 
A. 	Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund. 
B. 	No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of thefund. 
C. 	The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amountauthorized by the Town Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the Town Council. 
§ 27-11. Interest. 
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this article shall be credited to the general fund. 
§ 27-12. Procedures and reports. 
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 and this article, the laws, Charter provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or proceduresthat govern the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditureand payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this article. The Town Auditor shall includea statement on the collections credited to the fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to each fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the Town Auditor provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations madefor its use. A copy of such report shall also be provided simultaneously to the Town Council. 
1:19 

§ 27-13. Authorized revolving funds.3 
The table attached to this article establishes: 
A. 	Each revolving fund authorized for use by a Town department, board,committee, agency or officer; 
B. 	The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from each fund; 
C. 	The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by thedepartment, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall becredited to each fund by the Town Auditor; 
D. 	The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used; 
E. 	Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund; 
F. 	Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and 
G. 	The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this article. 
§ 27-14. Approval process. 
The legislative body will vote on or before July 1 on the amount that may be spent from each fund during the upcoming fiscal year. 
3. Editor's Note: See the Table of Revolving Funds, included as an attachment to thischapter. 
1:20 
Chapter 45 
MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT 
§ 45-1. Creation; purpose; organization. 
Pursuant to Charter Rule 4.9.111, there is hereby established within theTown a Central Maintenance Department, which shall be responsible for all Town property and buildings. The Department shall be under the directionof a Director of Central Maintenance and shall consist of such administrative, clerical, maintenance, and technical staff as the Mayor and Town Council may authorize. Inclusion in the annual budget for theDepartment shall constitute such authorization. 
§ 45-2. Director of Central Maintenance. 
The Director of Central Maintenance shall be appointed by the Mayor. TheDirector shall be a person especially qualified by education, experience andtraining to perform the duties of the position. 
A. 	The Director of Central Maintenance shall oversee the care and maintenance of municipal property and municipal buildings, includingthe contents thereof, with the exception of those specific to the water and sewer funds of the Town. 
B. 	The Director of Central Maintenance shall supervise the administrative,clerical, custodial, and maintenance staff related to Town buildings. 
Chapter 49 
MEETINGS 
1:21 

ARTICLE I 
Lobbyist Disclaimer
[Adopted 5-19-2004 (Ch. 98 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 49-1. Duty of Chair. 
The Chairman of all multiple-member bodies shall be required to read the following statement. 
§ 49-2. Statement. 
The following statement shall be read by committee chairpersons: 
"Any persons appearing before this board shall disclose if they are paid to represent either proponents or opponents on the issue before us. Anyfailure to disclose may affect the decision of the board, including but notlimited to modification or rejection for up to a period of two years." 
1:23 

ARTICLE II 
Boards and Commissions; Continuation of Membership[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-106 (Ch. 34,Art. II, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 49-3. Posting of meetings.4 
All meetings of established boards, commissions, committees and subcommittees or any other multiple-member body of the Town shall beposted at least 48 hours in advance of the public meeting, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, and in accordance with the OpenMeeting Law, MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25, and Open MeetingRegulations, 940 CMR 29.00. In an emergency, the notice shall be posted as soon as reasonably possible prior to said meetings. All meetings shall besubject to the Open Meeting Law, MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25. 
§ 49-4. Continuation of members. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance of the Town of Greenfield andthe Greenfield Home Rule Charter, all members of board, commissions, committees, or subcommittees shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and/or qualified. 
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:25 
Chapter 56 
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

1:26 

ARTICLE I 
Treasurer-Collector 
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985 (Ch. 112, Art. I, ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 56-1. Powers and duties. 
In addition to those powers and duties given by law or the Greenfield HomeRule Charter, the Town Treasurer-Collector shall have the following powersand duties: 
A. 	The Treasurer-Collector of Taxes shall collect, under the title of the Town Treasurer-Collector, all sums and accounts due the Town, including taxes and fees, and shall have all powers and duties in relation to the collection of such sums and accounts as provided by theGeneral Laws of Massachusetts. 
§ 56-2. Rate of interest; due dates. [Amended 1-18-1989; approvedby AG 8-27-1992] 
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21E, relating to the establishment of duedates and the charging of interest rates, the rate of interest shall be fixed at the 14% per annum from the due date to date of payment, and the duedate shall be 30 days from the date of billing as appearing on the bill for thefollowing municipal charges: 
A. 	4M - Disposal of septic waste at treatment plant. 
B. 	5M - Drainage (labor and materials provided for sewer cleanout). 
C. 	6M -Water miscellaneous (labor and materials provided for the supplying of water service). 
D. 	7M -Traffic (damage to public ways, signs, guard rails, etc.), policeescort service, police outside duty. 
E. 	11M - Backflow prevention device testing. 
F. 	12M - Transfer station fees. 
1:27 

ARTICLE II 
Gas Inspector
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-114 (Ch. 112,
Art. II, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 56-3. Appointment; authority. 
The Mayor shall appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances inBuildings, who shall be subject to the terms and conditions of MGL c. 143,§ 3O. 
§ 56-4. Fees. 
The Mayor from time to time shall establish all fees for inspections made. 
1:29 

ARTICLE III 
Plumbing Inspector
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-114 (Ch. 112,
Art. III, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 56-5. Powers and duties. 
The Plumbing Inspector shall have the control of the supervision andinspection of all plumbing installations and shall issue all permits requiredfor residential, commercial, and industrial installations. 
§ 56-6. Fees. 
The Mayor from time to time shall establish all fees for inspections made. 
1:31 

ARTICLE IV 
Building Inspector
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-114 (Ch. 112,
Art. IV, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 56-7. Powers and duties. 
The Building Inspector shall investigate the construction, alteration, relocation, or use of any buildings, structures, or premises. 
§ 56-8. Reporting of violations. 
Said Inspector, on finding any violation of any provision of this article, shallreport the same to the Mayor. 
§ 56-9. Contents of report. 
Said report shall contain the name of the violator, the location of the premises, and the specific violation thereof. 
§ 56-10. Notice to violator. 
A copy of said violation shall be delivered by registered mail to the violator,his lawful agent, to the owner or to his duly authorized agent, and to theoccupant of the premises, and said notice shall order that any use of any premises contrary to the provisions of this article shall immediately cease. 
§ 56-11. Fees. 
The Mayor shall from time to time establish all fees for inspections made. 
1:33 

ARTICLE V 
Town Clerk 
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-114 (Ch. 112,Art. V, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 56-12. Powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers and duties given by the Greenfield Home RuleCharter and by law, the Town Clerk shall have such additional powers andduties as the Town Council President and from time to time the Mayor shall assign, consistent with law. 
§ 56-13. Official filing location. 
Unless otherwise specified by the Charter or by law, the Town Clerk's office shall be the official place for the filing of any document which may or shouldbe filed in the Town. 
§ 56-14. Availability of copies of laws; fees. 
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to have available copies of theGreenfield Home Rule Charter, ordinances and regulations of the Town ofGreenfield, Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Greenfield and all other rules and regulations of the Town of Greenfield for which a fee allowable by lawshall be charged. 
§ 56-15. Records retention.5 
The Town Clerk shall be responsible for Town permanent and all otherrecords pursuant to MGL c. 66, § 5, and any other applicable state laws. 
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:35 
ARTICLE VI 

Mayor
[Adopted as amended 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-204 (Ch. 30 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 56-16. Powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers and duties outlined in Article 3 of the GreenfieldHome Rule Charter, the Mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
A. 	The Mayor shall have the care, custody and control of all Town property which is not required by law, Greenfield Home Rule Charter, or theseordinances to be under the jurisdiction of any other department. 
B. 	The Mayor shall be the agent of the Town to institute, prosecute, defend and prosecute, defend and compromise any and all claims, actions, andproceedings by or against the Town or in which the rights or interestsof the Town are or may be involved. 
C. 	The Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term.6 
D. 	The Mayor may request that the Town Attorney assist in the prosecution of any violations of these ordinances and may, if it determines that anyrights or interests of the Town are or may be involved, request that theTown Attorney conduct the defense of any action or proceeding brought against any Town agency or Town officer. 
§ 56-17. Compensation. 
A. 	The Mayor shall receive an annual base salary of $70,000 as set forth in Section 3-1 of the Greenfield Home Rule Charter. The Mayor mayrequest in his/her budget submission to the Town Council an increasein the base salary; however, the increase shall be the lesser of: 
(1) 	
The average increase, including any COLA or step, in pay for thesame fiscal year negotiated with all bargaining units within theTown of Greenfield; or 

(2) 	
Five percent of the Mayor's salary for the prior fiscal year. 


B. 	Any increase voted by Town Council in any year shall then become thenew base for any future increase request. The base shall never exceed $100,000. 
C. 	The base salary shall reset to $70,000 upon election of a new Mayor. 
D. 	The Town Council shall take up the request to increase the Mayor's salary only in the annual budget each year, provided the Mayor includesa request for such increase. 
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:37 
E. 	Increase requests shall not be considered by the Town Council in anysupplemental budget unless: 
(1) 	
The request was made in the annual budget process and not approved by the Council due to nonsettled bargaining unit contracts. 

(2) 	
The Mayor includes in writing at the time of the annual budget thatas part of his/her overall budget plan he/she plans to wait to ask forthe increase until the supplemental budget process. 


1:38 

ARTICLE VII 

Stipend for School Board Members and Town Councilors
[Adopted as amended 9-17-2014 by Order No. FY 15-036 (Ch. 158 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 56-18. Annual stipend. 
The Town of Greenfield shall appropriate funds to compensate membersof the Greenfield School Committee and the Town Council with an annual stipend in the amount of $2,000, to be paid annually at the completion of each year of service. This section shall become effective three years fromthe date of final passage. 
§ 56-19. Training, continuing education and professionaldevelopment. 
The Town of Greenfield shall appropriate funds each fiscal year beginningin Fiscal Year 2015 for trainings, continuing education and/or professional development, including registration fees, mileage and travel expenses notto exceed $500 per person per fiscal year. This shall not entitle recipients toany other benefits from the Town. 
§ 56-20. Reduction in stipend for absences. 
Any board member or Councilor missing more than three regular meetingsin a fiscal year will have his/her stipend reduced at a percentage commensurate with his/her number of absences. 
1:39 

ARTICLE VIII 
Civil Rights Officer
[Adopted 5-17-2017 by Order No. FY 17-129 (Ch. 46 of the 2002
Code)] 

§ 56-21. Findings and purpose. 
A. 	The Town of Greenfield understands the importance of establishingdirect and personal relationships between law enforcement and members of our community. This is particularly true for members of groups who are sometimes the targets of harassment, discrimination,or hate crimes. 
B. 	In an effort to improve communication and to ensure that there are individuals in place who can serve as liaisons from law enforcement tothose groups or their members, the Town of Greenfield establishes anddefines the role of the Civil Rights Officer. The purpose of this position is to build relationships with the public so that law enforcement canbe of assistance in meeting the objectives of good and appropriatecommunication with victims and the community at large. 
§ 56-22. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CIVIL RIGHTS OFFICER — A police officer assigned by the Chief of Policeto serve as the liaison between the community, the victim and the PoliceDepartment where alleged hate crimes are concerned. 
HATE CRIME — Any crime defined as such under Massachusetts General Law. 
§ 56-23. Duties. 
The Civil Rights Officer shall: 
A. 	Receive regularly specialized training in the area of working withpeople from diverse backgrounds and with special needs. 
B. 	Act as the liaison to the Human Rights Commission.7 
C. 	Attend Human Rights Commission meetings as requested. 
D. 	Serve as a link between victims of hate crimes and victims and the Police Department. 
E. 	Update the community, through the Human Rights Commission, on thestatus of reported hate crimes in the community as is permitted by law and good law enforcement practice. 
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Human Rights Commission. 
1:41 
F. 	Keep track of hate crimes committed in Greenfield and assist in thereporting of the same as required by state and federal law. 
G. 	Assist in the training of other officers in how to respond to the needs ofvictims of hate crimes. 
H. 	Perform other duties as assigned by the Chief or Police or the Public Safety Commission. 
§ 56-24. Role of Chief of Police. 
Nothing in this article should be read as preventing the Chief of Police from designating himself or herself as Civil Rights Officer or designating morethan one Civil Rights Officer. 
1:42 

Chapter 60 PROCUREMENT 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Finances — See Ch. 27. 
1:43 

ARTICLE I 
Designer Selection Process
[Adopted 6-16-2010 by Order No. FY 10-098 (Ch. 59 of the 2002
Code)] 

§ 60-1. Purpose; statutory authority; scope. 
This article governs the selection of designers for any municipal or localpublic agency building project subject to the state designer selection law,MGL c. 7, §§ 38A 1/2 through 38O.8 Any other local law governing the procurement of services will be inapplicable to these procurements. 
§ 60-2. Administration. 
The Mayor has the authority to conduct the designer selection process for the Town of Greenfield. The Mayor may delegate any duties describedherein to the extent such delegation is permissible by law. 
§ 60-3. Designer Selection Committee. 
A. 	The Mayor, with the approval of the Town Council, shall designate thegroup of individuals (hereinafter referred to as "the Committee) whowill conduct the designer selection process. Appointees to the Designer Selection Committee shall serve for two years and may be consideredfor reappointment for one additional term. The Committee shall consistof five members: two Mayoral appointees, one Council appointee, and two members of the Planning and Construction Committee. The ChiefProcurement Officer shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Committee. 
B. 	No member of the Committee shall participate in the selection of adesigner for any project if the member, or any of the member's immediate family: 
(1) 	
Has a direct or indirect financial interest in the award of the designcontract to any applicant; 

(2) 	
Is currently employed by, or is a consultant to or under contract to, any applicant; 

(3) 	
Is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning future employment or contracting with any applicant; or 

(4) 	
Has an ownership interest in, or is an officer or director of, anyapplicant. 


§ 60-4. Request for qualifications and publication. 
8. Editor's Note: These sections regarding design services were repealed by St. 2012, c. 165,§ 66, effective 1-1-2013. 
1:45 
A. 	A request for qualifications (RFQ) for each contract subject to thisarticle shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the locality of the building project, in the Central Register published by theSecretary of the commonwealth, and in any other place required, atleast two weeks before the deadline for filing applications. 
B. 	The advertisement shall contain the following information: 
(1) 	
A description of the project, including the specific designerservices sought, the time period within which the project is to be completed, and, if available, the estimated construction cost. 

(2) 	
If there is a program for the building project, a statement of when and where the program will be available for inspection by applicants. 

(3) 	
When and where a briefing session (if any) will be held. 

(4) 	
The qualifications required of applicants. 

(5) 	
The categories of designers' consultants, if any, for which applicants must list names of consultants they may use. 

(6) 	
Whether the fee has been set or will be negotiated; if the fee has been set, the amount of the fee must be listed in the advertisement. 

(7) 	
When and where the RFQ can be obtained and the applicationsmust be delivered. 


§ 60-5. Request for qualification application. 
The RFQ shall include the current "Standard Designer Application Form forMunicipalities and Public Agencies not within DSB Jurisdiction," which is available for download from the Massachusetts Designer Selection Boardwebsite at Designer Selection Board (DSB) Procedures for Municipalities.The application form may be amended to include additional information on a project-specific basis. 
§ 60-6. Evaluation process. 
A. 	The Committee shall evaluate applicants based on the following criteria: 
(1) 	
Prior similar experience; 

(2) 	
Past performance on public and private projects; 

(3) 	
Financial stability; 

(4) 	
Identity and qualifications of the consultants who will work with theapplicants on the project; and 

(5) 	
Any other criteria that the Committee considers relevant to theproject. 

1:46 


B. 	
The Committee shall select at least three finalists, if possible. Finalistsmay be required to appear for an interview or provide additional information to the Committee, provided that all finalists are afforded anequal opportunity to do so. 

C. 	
List of finalists. 

(1) 	
The Committee shall rank the finalists in order of qualification,select the designer, negotiate the fee, and transmit its recommendation to the Mayor. No person or firm, including applicants' listed consultants, debarred pursuant to MGL c. 149,§ 44C shall be included as a finalist on the list. 

(2) 	
The list must be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for selection, including the recorded vote, if any. The written explanation and recorded vote, if any, shall be publicrecords and shall be maintained in the contract file. 



D. 	
If the fee was set prior to the selection process, the Mayor shall selecta designer from the list of finalists. If the Mayor selects a designerother than the one ranked first by the Committee, the Mayor shall file a written justification for the selection with the Committee and maintaina copy in the contract file. 

E. 	
If the fee is to be negotiated, the Mayor shall review the list of finalists and may exclude any designer from the list if a written explanation ofthe exclusion is filed with the Committee and maintained in the contract file. The Committee shall request a fee proposal from the first ranked designer remaining on the list and begin contract negotiations. If theCommittee is unable to negotiate a satisfactory fee with the first rankeddesigner, negotiations shall be terminated and undertaken with the remaining designers, one at a time, in the order in which they wereranked by the Committee until agreement is reached. In no event maya fee be negotiated which is higher than the maximum fee set prior to selection of finalists. 

F. 	
If the Committee is unable to negotiate a satisfactory fee with any ofthe finalists, the Committee shall recommend that the Committee select additional finalists. 

G. 	
The Mayor may allow a designer who conducted a feasibility studyto continue with the design of a project. However, the Mayor may commission, at his discretion, an independent review, by a knowledgeable and competent individual or business doing such work,of the feasibility of the designer's work to ensure its reasonableness and its adequacy before allowing the designer to continue on the project,provided the Mayor otherwise complies with the statutoryrequirements for selecting a designer under Chapter 7 of the General Laws, including those set forth in MGL c. 7, § 38K(a)(1).9 


9. Editor's Note: MGL c. 7, § 38K, regarding contracts exceeding $100,000, was repealed bySt. 2012, c. 165, § 66, effective 1-1-2013. 
1:47 
§ 60-7. Contract specifications. 
A. 	Design services. Every contract for design services shall include the following: 
(1) 	
Certification that the designer or construction manager has notgiven, offered, or agreed to give any person, corporation, or other entity any gift, contribution, or offer of employment as an inducement for, or in connection with, the award of the contract for design services; 

(2) 	
Certification that no consultant to, or subcontractor for, the designer or construction manager has given, offered, or agreed togive any gift, contribution, or offer of employment to the designer or construction manager, or to any other person, corporation, orentity as an inducement for, or in connection with, the award tothe consultant or subcontractor of a contract by the designer or construction manager; 

(3) 	
Certification that no person, corporation, or other entity, otherthan a bona fide full-time employee of the designer or construction manager, has been retained or hired by the designer or construction manager to solicit for or in any way assist the designer or construction manager in obtaining the contract for design services upon an agreement or understanding that such person,corporation, or other entity be paid a fee or other considerationcontingent upon the award of the contract to the designer; and 

(4) 	
Certification that the designer has internal accounting controls asrequired by MGL c. 30, § 39R, Subsection (c), and that the designerhas filed and will continue to file an audited financial statement as required by MGL c. 30, § 39R, Subsection (d). 


B. 	Fees. All fees shall be stated in design contracts, and in any subsequentamendments thereto, as a total dollar amount. Contracts may provide for equitable adjustments in the event of changes in scope or services. 
C. 	Liability insurance requirements for designer. The Town of Greenfieldshall not enter into a contract for design services unless the designer has obtained professional liability insurance covering negligent errors,omissions, and acts of the designer or of any person or business entityfor whose performance the designer is legally liable arising out of the performance of the contract. The total amount of such insurance shallat a minimum equal the lesser of one million dollars or 10% of theproject's estimated cost of construction, or such larger amounts as the Town of Greenfield may require, for the applicable period of limitations.A designer required by the Town of Greenfield to obtain all or a portionof such insurance coverage at its own expense shall furnish a certificate or certificates of insurance coverage to the Town of Greenfield prior tothe award of the contract. 
1:48 

D. 	Contract provisions for designer. Every contract for design servicesshall include a provision that the designer or its consultants shall not be compensated for any services involved in preparing changes thatare required for additional work that should have been anticipated bythe designer in the preparation of the bid documents, as reasonably determined by the individual responsible for administering the design contract. 
§ 60-8. Emergency provisions. 
A. 	In the event of an emergency that precludes the normal use of thesedesigner selection procedures, the Committee, with the approval ofthe Mayor, may elect to authorize expedited procedures to address the emergency. The Committee shall document in writing the reasons forthe emergency declaration, the proposed scope of work, the estimatedcost of construction, the established fee for the needed design services, and any other relevant information. 
B. 	The Committee may select three finalists from any standing list ofdesigners who have applied for projects of a similar nature, or may otherwise select three designers to be considered as finalists for theproject. The Committee shall rank the finalists in order of qualificationand select the designer for the emergency work. 
§ 60-9. Award publication. 
The Town of Greenfield shall publish the name of any designer awarded acontract in the Central Register. 
§ 60-10. Records. 
A. 	The following records shall be kept by the Town of Greenfield: 
(1) 	
All information supplied by or obtained about each applicant; 

(2) 	
All actions taken relating to the project; and 

(3) 	
Any other records related to designer selection. 


B. 	All records shall be available for inspection by the state Designer Selection Board and other authorized agencies. 
§ 60-11. Performance evaluation. 
The Town of Greenfield shall evaluate designers' performance on contracts using the Designer Selection Board evaluation form(s) in accordance withMGL c. 7, § 38E(g),10 and file completed evaluations with the Board and anyother agency named in MGL c. 7, § 38E(g). 
10.Editor's Note: MGL c. 7, § 38E, regarding project applications and written statements, wasrepealed by St. 2012, c. 165, § 66, effective 1-1-2013. 
1:49 
§ 60-12. Effect on other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require the establishment of a board or waive or reduce the requirements of any other applicable law orregulation. 
§ 60-13. Funding by commonwealth. 
For any municipal design or construction project that includes fundingprovided by the commonwealth, in whole or in part (such as reimbursements, grants and the like), cities and towns must incorporate minority-owned business enterprise and women-owned business enterpriseparticipation goals. If applicable, the Town of Greenfield shall take steps toassure that it complies with all State Office of Minority and Women Business Assistance requirements. 
1:50 

Chapter 68 
TOWN COUNCIL PARKING PERMITS 
§ 68-1. Purpose. 
This chapter shall govern the issuance and use of City Council parkingpermits. 
§ 68-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Mayor or his/her designee whoadministers the parking program within the Town of Greenfield. 
COUNCIL PRESIDENT — The duly elected sitting Town Council President. 
ISSUEE — The Town Councilor to whom the permit is issued. 
OFFICIAL BUSINESS — Any Town business being conducted by a Town Councilor. 
PARKING PERMIT — A placard, mirror hanger or the like, issued for thepurpose of identifying a vehicle parked in a parking space whose driver isengaged in official Town business. 
PARKING SPACE — Any designated parking spot that is owned or controlledby the Town and is: 
A. 	Not otherwise specifically marked "handicapped"; or 
B. 	Otherwise reserved for use by any Town department or departmenthead during said department's operating hours; or 
C. 	Not in violation of municipal parking prohibitions, including but not limited to the winter parking ban. 
TOWN COUNCILOR — A duly elected or appointed (pursuant to CharterSection 2-11) sitting precinct or at-large Town Councilor. 
VEHICLE — Any vehicle driven by a Town Councilor for use while on officialbusiness. 
§ 68-3. Administration. 
Upon election by the inhabitants of the Town of Greenfield and swearing inby the Town Clerk, the authority having jurisdiction shall issue or cause tobe issued a parking permit in accordance with this chapter. 
A. 	All permits issued under this section shall be valid through the lastday of the respective Councilor's elected term, with the expiration dateconspicuously marked on the front side of said permit. 
1:51 

B. 	While on official business, the permit shall be used only by the issueeand may not be used by, or transferred to, any other person(s). 
C. 	The permit shall be displayed conspicuously and in an unobstructedmanner either on the driver side front dashboard or hanging from therear view mirror while the vehicle is in a parking space and the Council member is on official business. 
D. 	In the event a parking ticket is issued on a vehicle covered by thischapter, the Town Councilor shall notify the Town Clerk forthwith, and the Town Clerk shall forward the ticket to the authority havingjurisdiction to be voided. 
§ 68-4. Revocation. 
Any permit issued under this chapter cannot be revoked unless: 
A. 	The Town Councilor resigns from office prior to the expiration of his/her term on the Town Council; 
B. 	The Town Councilor is recalled from office pursuant to Charter Section7-12; or 
C. 	The Council President, upon a majority vote of the Town Council, deems it necessary to revoke the permit due to use inconsistent with thischapters. 
§ 68-5. Removal of parking space; exclusive use prohibited. 
A. 	Removal of a Town Council parking space shall take place upon passageby the Town Council, and either: 
(1) 	
Signature by the Mayor; or 

(2) 	
A veto override. 


B. 	No parking space shall be designated for the exclusive use of TownCouncilors. 
Chapter 71 
TOWN PROPERTY 
1:52 

ARTICLE I 

Personal Property
[Adopted as amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-112 (Ch. 168 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 71-1. Personal property not exceeding $500 in value. 
The Mayor or his/her designee may sell, either at public auction or privatesale, any article of personal property of which he/she has custody or control,the fair market value of which does not exceed $500. 
§ 71-2. Personal property valued at more than $500.11 
The Mayor or his/her designee may sell at public auction any article ofpersonal property of which he/she has the custody and control, the fair market value of which exceeds $500. Notice of public auction shall beposted on the Town Bulletin Board and published in a newspaper of generalcirculation within the Town of Greenfield at least seven days before said auction is to be held. 
§ 71-3. Record of inventory. 
Each department of the Town shall at all times keep a complete inventory and appraisal of the personal property under its jurisdiction and control andan inventory of all real property including buildings under its jurisdictionand control. 
§ 71-4. Annual submission of inventory. 
Each department of the Town shall furnish such inventory and appraisalof personal property, including unfulfilled orders for personal property for future delivery, to be indicated as such, and inventory of real propertyincluding buildings for each fiscal year on or before July 15 of each year tothe Mayor and Town Council. 

11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:53 
ARTICLE II 
Naming of Municipal Buildings, Facilities and Public Places[Adopted 4-21-2010 by Order No. FY 10-072 (Ch. 104 of the 2002Code)] 
§ 71-5. Purpose; statutory limitations. 
A. 	The Town of Greenfield hereby establishes a policy and set of procedures to govern the naming or renaming of municipal buildings,other fixed facilities, and public places. A sound naming policy adds meaning, significance and uniformity to public facilities, minimizesconflict and provides a clear and meaningful forum for discussion. 
B. 	This article shall not govern the procedure for naming streets, and is subject to the terms and conditions of MGL c. 85, § 3. 
§ 71-6. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes but not limited to any building or a portionthereof, athletic fields, parking lot, municipal lot, sidewalk, trail, bike path, park, garden, playground, cemetery, or any such place owned or under thedominion of the Town which may reasonably be expected to be viewed byothers. 
§ 71-7. Request for action; review by Council. 
A. 	Requests to name or rename a municipal building, other fixed facilitiesor a public place shall be made in writing and filed with the Town Clerk of the Town Council. Such requests may be made by the Mayor, a TownCouncilor, or by petition of at least 100 registered voters of the Townof Greenfield. The written request shall also include the rationale and background information explaining why the request is being made atthat time. 
B. 	Upon receipt, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the next Town Council meeting, which may by majority vote agree to forward therequest to the Planning and Construction Committee for hearing andrecommendation back to the Town Council. 
§ 71-8. Planning and Construction Committee review and action;final vote by Council. 
A. 	Within 45 days of receipt of the Town Council vote, the Planning and Construction Committee shall hold a public hearing on each nominationreferred to it. 
B. 	At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Construction Committee shall deliberate and vote. Upon agreement of a majority 
1:55 

of the Committee, the written decision and recommendation shall be delivered in writing to the Town Clerk within five days of the public hearing. The request, along with the written decision of the Planningand Construction Committee, shall, within 30 days after receipt by theTown Clerk, be sent to the Town Council for deliberation and vote at the next available meeting. 
C. 	It shall require an affirmative vote by majority vote of the Town Councilto name or rename municipal buildings, other fixed facilities, and public places. Should the vote fail to secure the support of a majority of theTown Council, the name shall not again be considered as the name to beaffixed to a municipal buildings, other fixed facilities, and public places until after the expiration of 12 months from the Town Council vote. 
§ 71-9. Applicability. 
This article shall not apply to the naming and renaming of municipal buildings, other fixed facilities, and public places which were donated tothe Town contingent upon assignment of a specific name or to any facilityconstructed or purchased from money or property donated to the Town for the purpose of securing a name. Further, this article does not apply to thenaming or renaming of school buildings, fixed facilities and public places orany other property under the jurisdiction of the School Committee. 
§ 71-10. Existing names to be retained. 
Municipal buildings, other fixed facilities, and public places shall retainthe names as named by the Town Council. The Town Council may, by a two-thirds vote of the whole Council, change the name of any municipalbuildings, other fixed facilities, and public places in the Town, providedthat, whenever renaming is considered, the matter is first referred to the Planning and Construction Committee and sent back to the Town Council inaccordance with the requirements of this article. 
§ 71-11. Severability. 
Should any section or portion thereof of this article herein be rendered ordeclared invalid, unlawful, or unenforceable by reason of any existing orsubsequently enacted legislation or by a court of competent jurisdiction, such legislation or decision shall apply only to the specific sections orportion thereof directly specified in the legislation or decision. All otherprovisions, sections, or portions thereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
1:56 



Part II: Boards, Commissions, Committees and Other 
Governing Bodies 
Chapter 103 
AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Farming — See Ch. 265. 
§ 103-1. Duties and responsibilities.12 
Members of the Agricultural Commission, once appointed, shall: 
A. 	Serve as facilitators for encouraging the pursuit of agriculture inGreenfield. 
B. 	Act as educators in matters of farming. 
C. 	Promote agricultural-based economic opportunities in Town. 
D. 	Inform and advise the Mayor, Town Council, and Town boards and commissions on projects and activities involving agricultural land inTown. 
E. 	Engage in projects and activities to promote the business of farming, farming practices, activities and tradition, and farmland protection inTown. 
F. 	Advocate for the "right to farm" but not engage in land use planning or zoning that is the right, by statute, of any other municipal department or agency. 
§ 103-2. Members; terms; filling of vacancies. 
A. 	The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor. 
B. 	All members shall be Greenfield residents. Whenever possible,members should be involved in farming in this community or have some background/knowledge of agricultural pursuits in Greenfield. 
C. 	Two members shall be appointed for a term of three years. Twomembers shall be appointed for a term of two years, and three years thereafter. One member shall be appointed for a term of one year, andthree years thereafter. 
D. 	The Mayor shall fill a vacancy based on the unexpired term of the vacancy in order to maintain the cycle of appointments. 

12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:57 
Chapter 110 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLANNING COMMITTEE 
§ 110-1. Appointment; membership. 
The Mayor shall establish and appoint a committee to be known as the"Capital Improvement Planning Committee," composed of one member of the Planning and Construction Committee, one member of the Ways andMeans Committee of the Town Council, and the School Superintendent orhis/her designee. The Town Accountant and/or the Director of Municipal Finance and Administration shall be an ex-officio staff member without the right to vote. The Committee shall choose its own officers. 
§ 110-2. Duties; information on proposed capital projects. 
A. 	The Committee shall study proposed capital projects and improvementsinvolving major nonrecurring tangible assets and projects which: 
(1) 	
Are purchased or undertaken at intervals of not less than five years; 

(2) 	
Have a useful life of at least five years; and 

(3) 	
Cost over $10,000. 


B. 	All officers, boards and committees, including the Mayor and the SchoolCommittee, shall, by February 1 of each year, give to the Committee,on forms prepared by it, information concerning all anticipated projects requiring Town Council attention during the ensuing six years. TheCommittee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing and costof these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of the Town. No appropriation shall be voted for a capitalimprovement requested by a department, board or commission unlessthe proposed capital improvement is considered in the Committee's report or the Committee shall first have submitted a report to theMayor explaining the omission. 
§ 110-3. Capital improvement budget and program. 
The Committee shall prepare an annual report recommending a capitalimprovement budget for the next fiscal year, and a capital improvementprogram, including recommended capital improvements for the following five fiscal years. The report shall be submitted to the Mayor for consideration and approval. The Board shall submit its approved capitalbudget to the Town Council for adoption. 
§ 110-4. Permitted expenditures. 
Such capital improvement program, after its adoption, shall permit theexpenditure on projects included therein of sums from departmental 
1:58 

budgets for surveys, architectural or engineering advice, options or appraisals; but no such expenditure shall be incurred on projects which have not been so approved by the Town through the appropriation of sumsin the current year or in prior years, or for preliminary planning for projectsto be undertaken more than five years in the future. 
§ 110-5. Publication and availability of reports. 
The Committee's report and the Mayor's recommended capital budget shallbe published and made available in a manner consistent with the distribution of the Ways and Means Committee report. The Committee shalldeposit its original report with the Town Clerk. 
Chapter 114 
CEMETERY COMMISSION 
§ 114-1. Board created; use of Town employees. 
In accordance with MGL c. 41, § 21, and Section 6-1(b) of the Greenfield Charter, there is hereby created a Board of Cemetery Commissioners underthe supervision and control of the Mayor for the purpose of maintainingthe public cemeteries in the Town, and it shall, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such employees as are necessary, utilize Department ofPublic Works department employees, or contract for such services to ensurethe proper maintenance of such cemeteries. 
§ 114-2. Composition; officers. 
The Board shall consist of three members, one of whom shall be the Chairman and one of whom shall be the Clerk. 
§ 114-3. Administration of cemeteries. 
The Board shall maintain all plans and records necessary for the properadministration and maintenance of the public cemeteries and shall coordinate with the Town Clerk, Town Treasurer, and the Department ofPublic Works as delineated in MGL c. 114. 
§ 114-4. Annual reports. 
The Board shall annually make a written report of its official acts, ofthe condition of such cemeteries, and render an account of its receipts,expenditures, and of the funds subject to its order. 
§ 114-5. Rules and regulations. 
The Board is authorized to make such rules and regulations as it deems necessary, consistent with laws, for the proper administration of the cemeteries. 
1:59 

§ 114-6. Maintenance of cemeteries. 
The Board is hereby authorized to take whatever additional action may be necessary for the maintenance, improvement, or expansion of a cemeterywith the approval of the Mayor and the Town Council as required by law. 
Chapter 118 
COUNCIL ON AGING 

§ 118-1. Term of office.13 
Appointees to the Council on Aging shall hold office until successors are designated. 
§ 118-2. Annual report. 
The Council shall submit an annual report to the Town and shall send a copy thereof to the Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs. 
§ 118-3. Staff. 
The Council may appoint such clerks and such employees as it may require, subject to the appropriation therefor. 
Chapter 132 
HISTORICAL COMMISSION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Demolition delay — See Ch. 241. 
§ 132-1. Membership; terms.14 
The Mayor shall appoint seven members to the Historical Commission forterms of three years. The terms of said members shall be so arranged that approximately 1/3 of the members shall expire each year. 
§ 132-2. Powers and duties. 
The Historical Commission and its members shall have all the duties and carry out all functions as outlined in MGL c. 40, § 8D. 
Chapter 136 
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:60 


HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
§ 136-1. Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the Town to protect andpromote the constitutional, civil and human rights of all people within theTown from any actions or incidences occurring within the Town. Further, the Town asserts that: 
A. 	All people have certain inalienable rights, including the rights to life,liberty, property, the pursuit of happiness and equal justice under the laws of the United States, the commonwealth and the Town of Greenfield. 
B. 	No person shall have these rights constrained, reduced, ignored or violated; all people shall be protected in the exercise of these humanand civil rights. 
C. 	No person shall be unlawfully discriminated against, in matters of housing, employment, education, or public accommodations, on thebasis of: age, ancestry, color, disability, national origin, race, religiouscreed, sex or sexual orientation. 
D. 	The Greenfield Human Rights Commission shall work toward mutualrespect and understanding among all individuals and groups of theTown through improving the quality of public discourse and eliminating unlawful discrimination. 
§ 136-2. Membership; terms; vacancies. 
A. 	There shall be in the Town a commission known as the "Greenfield Human Rights Commission," hereinafter called the "Commission," which shall consist of nine members appointed by the Mayor. 
B. 	The Commissioners shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that of the members first appointed to the Commission, threeshall be appointed to a term of one year, three shall be appointed toa term of two years, and three shall be appointed to a term of three years. Thereafter the Mayor shall appoint each successor to a termof three years. In the event of death or resignation of any member, asuccessor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which the member has been appointed. 
§ 136-3. Qualifications of Commissioners; compensation. 
A. 	The Commission at all times shall strive to be representative of all socioeconomic and racial segments of the Town as well as differentneighborhoods. 
B. 	Commissioners must be residents of the Town at the time of their appointment and throughout their tenure and serve without compensation. 
1:61 

§ 136-4. Officers; rules of procedure; quorum. 
A. 	The members of the Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among their members who shall not hold thatoffice for more than two consecutive terms. The Commission may electother officers with the permission of the Mayor. 
B. 	Subject to the approval of the Mayor, the Commission shall adopt a setof rules for its administration which are consistent with the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the Town. 
C. 	Five members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conductingbusiness. 
§ 136-5. Functions.15 
The Human Rights Commission is established: 
A. 	To improve the quality of life of the Town by enlisting community-basedgroups in educational programs and campaigns to increase mutual self-respect, harmonious intergroup relations and the peaceful enjoymentof life in our diverse community. 
B. 	To respond to complaints by persons who believe that their human or civil rights, as defined by existing local, state and federal law, have beenviolated in Greenfield. 
C. 	To initiate investigations into circumstances for which a formal complaint is received or where cases of alleged discrimination arebrought to the Commission by other Town boards, commissions or officials. 
D. 	To work with municipal government departments, the School Department, commissions and boards, to increase compliance withappropriate local, state and federal laws and to raise the level of awareness and sensitivity to human rights issues in municipal businesswith the public through workforce-wide required training programs. 
§ 136-6. Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Commission shall include the following: 
A. 	To obtain information and documents, request staff support and otherhelp as necessary from other Town departments, including the School Department. 
B. 	To publish reports and other documents. 
C. 	To initiate investigations into the existence of unlawful discrimination in the Town which may deny or tend to deny equal access or opportunity inmatters of housing, employment, education, or public accommodations 
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:62 
on the basis of: age, ancestry, color, disability, national origin, race,religious creed, sex or sexual orientation, and in connection therewith to hold administrative hearings.16 
D. 	To attempt by negotiation to resolve all complaints that come beforeit and recommend to all appropriate governmental agencies, federal, state or local, such action as will resolve such complaint. 
E. 	To refer complaints, when appropriate, to the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination, or other agency, for resolution. 
F. 	To raise funds, subject to the Commission's internal rules of conductand conflict of interest, for the use of the Commission and to acceptmoney, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same. 
G. 	To publish as a public document its bylaws, policies, and practicesfor both internal functions and external activities, excluding those documents which are confidential under federal or state law. 
H. 	To publish its rules of procedure for the conduct of its investigations,hearings, and negotiations. Said rules shall ensure the due process rights of all persons and/or entities involved in an investigation. At anyhearing before the Commission, or any committee thereof, a witnessshall have the right to be advised and represented by counsel. 
I. 	To render to the Mayor a full written report of its activities and itsrecommendations, not less than once a year. 
J. 	To expend, with approval of the Mayor, such funds as are appropriated for the aforementioned purposes. The Commission shall annuallyprepare an operating budget in a timely manner. 
§ 136-7. Records. 
All Commission records shall be public except those that are necessaryto ensure privacy rights under state or federal laws and those that areexcluded under MGL c. 4, § 7(26). 
§ 136-8. Applicability. 
This chapter shall not apply to the official actions of Town of Greenfieldofficers or employees or any members of boards or commissions of the Town. 

16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:63 
§ 136-8 GREENFIELD CODE 	§ 160-3 
Chapter 160 
PARKING AND TRAFFIC COMMISSION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Traffic regulations — See Ch. 555, Art. I. 
§ 160-1. Members; terms; filling of vacancies; removal of members. 
A. 	The Parking and Traffic Commission, consisting of five members, shallbe appointed by the Mayor, which members shall hold office for the term for which they are appointed and until their successors have beenappointed and have qualified. 
B. 	The original appointments shall be for the terms of one, two, three, four and five years; and thereafter, in the month of May of each year, theMayor shall appoint a Greenfield citizen as a member of said board tohold office for a term of five years from the first Monday of June next. 
C. 	Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term, and any membermay be removed for cause by the Mayor. 
§ 160-2. Organization. 
The Commission shall organize annually in the month of July and elect aChair and Clerk. 
§ 160-3. Duties and responsibilities. 
A. 	The Commission shall survey and study all transportation-relatedconditions in the Town of Greenfield, utilizing other studies and plansif it determines those plans and studies to be relevant, and make such recommendations to the Mayor as it deems advisable. 
B. 	The Commission shall advise the Mayor on matters related to the regulation of street traffic, parking, parking meters, traffic accident prevention, traffic lights and signage. It shall have such other powersor duties as provided by law, ordinance or mayoral charge. 
C. 	The Commission, with mayoral approval and subject to appropriation, may apply for grants and funds to conduct research and gather fact-based evidence for its recommendations. 
D. 	The Commission shall have all powers that are conferred upon parking commissions by MGL c. 40, § 22, and such powers and duties as may beprovided by Charter or ordinance.17 

17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:64 
E. 	The Commission shall report to the Mayor annually of its meetings andrecommendations; and, additionally, in even numbered years, report to the Mayor and Town Council the condition of the Town's parking andcirculation in the following manner: 
(1) 	
Enumerate the number of parking spaces owned by the Town and those parking spaces owned privately in the Commercial C Zone. 

(2) 	
The quantity of revenue-generating meters. 

(3) 	
The revenue generated by those meters in sum year to date, annually and by meter per day.18 

(4) 	
The quantity of malfunctioning meters. 

(5) 	
The amount of revenue generated by paid parking ticket violations. 

(6) 	
The amount of revenue lost to parking spaces non-metered. 

(7) 	
The amount of revenue unpaid from parking ticket violations. 

(8) 	
The amount of revenue generated by fines, court actions, prepaid parking permits and any other parking-related revenue. 

(9) 	
The cost to maintain meters and space, enforce parking regulationsand collect revenue. 


(10)The number of parking meter spaces that accommodate handicapped individuals and vehicles. 
§ 160-4. Administration. 
A. 	The Commission shall have powers relative to the holding of publichearings on any matter within its area of review. 
B. 	The Mayor shall provide adequate municipal administrative support to facilitate the mission of the Commission. 
Chapter 164 
PLANNING BOARD 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Development review — See Ch. 244. Water — See Ch. 415. 
Sewer use — See Ch. 355. 	Wetlands protection — See Ch. 423. 

Stormwater management — See Ch. 381. Regulations — See Ch. 550. 
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:65 
§ 164-1. Terms and conditions; officers; staff. 
The Planning Board is subject to the terms and conditions as outlined in Greenfield Home Rule Charter Section 6-20, and said Board shall elect annually a Chairman, Vice Chairman and a Clerk from among its regularmembers, and it may employ experts, clerical and other assistants. 
§ 164-2. Residency requirements; service on other boards.19 
Members serving on the Planning Board must be Greenfield residents and are prohibited from serving on the following Town boards: School Committee, Town Council, Greenfield Redevelopment Authority, GreenfieldHousing Authority, Zoning Board of Appeals, Conservation Commission,Greenfield-Montague Transportation Authority, Board of Assessors, and the Recreation Commission; or while serving as Mayor. 
Chapter 173 
RECREATION COMMISSION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322. 
§ 173-1. Terms and conditions.20 
Recreation Commission members shall be subject to the terms and conditions as outlined in Greenfield Home Rule Charter Section 6-10, entitled "Recreation Commission." 
§ 173-2. Compensation; residency requirements. 
Recreation Commission members shall serve without remuneration and shall be residents of the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 173-3. Advisory and supervisory duties.21 
The Commission shall advise the Mayor in the control, development and management of a system of public playgrounds and recreation areas andfacilities, and shall be charged with the supervision of ballfields, swimmingpools and bathing beaches, summer and winter recreation programs, and development or alterations of facilities or programs which shall meet withthe approval of the Mayor. 
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:66 
§ 173-4. Power to employ.22 
The Commission, subject to Town rules and regulations, shall have the power to employ persons, including but not limited to the RecreationDirector for the Town of Greenfield, who are properly qualified in experience and education in recreation to direct or work in said programs. The salaries of personnel shall be within the framework of the Town'scollective bargaining agreements. 
§ 173-5. Annual report.23 
The Commission members shall be requested to make an annual inspectionof recreation functions and to bring the report before the Mayor. 
§ 173-6. Master plan. 
The Recreation Commission shall develop a continuing "master plan"involving the proposed development of new recreation areas and programswhich will be of interest to the citizens of Greenfield. This long-range plan should include recommended land takings and a priority listing. TheCommission should seek out federal and state funds whenever it feels that the Town qualifies for such. 
Chapter 177 
REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:67 
ARTICLE I 
Establishment 
§ 177-1. Creation and authority. 
There is hereby established, according to a vote at Annual Town Meeting dated March 14, 1970, an Urban Redevelopment Authority according to theprovisions of MGL c. 121B, § 4, as amended. 
§ 177-2. Purpose and title.24 
The Authority will engage in urban renewal projects and arrangegovernment and other participation to this end, and the Authority should beknown as the "Greenfield Redevelopment Authority." 
§ 177-3. Appointment of members; terms. 
A. 	Four members of the Authority shall be appointed by the Mayor, subjectto confirmation by the Town Council and consistent with MGL 121B, § 5, with staggered terms starting at five years, four years, two yearsand one year, with three-year appointments following the initial term. 
B. 	One member of the Redevelopment Authority shall be appointed by the Governor's Office for an initial term of three years. Thereafter, asthe term of a member of the Redevelopment Authority expires, his/hersuccessor shall be elected/appointed for a term of five years from such expiration. 

24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:69 
ARTICLE II 
Membership 
§ 177-4. Residency requirements. 
Members of the Greenfield Redevelopment Authority shall be restricted to residents of the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 177-5. Powers and duties; staff.25 
The Greenfield Redevelopment Authority shall have all the powers and duties as outlined in the laws and statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and said Authority may employ experts, clerical help andother employees, subject to the appropriation therefor. 

25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:71 
Chapter 182 
SCHOOL COMMITTEE 
§ 182-1. Powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers and duties outlined in Article 4 of the GreenfieldHome Rule Charter, the School Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
A. 	The School Committee shall have the care and management and controlof the school buildings, school grounds, and all other school property. 
B. 	No new public school building or no addition or alteration to any publicschool building shall be constructed unless the plans for such newbuilding, addition or alteration are approved by the School Committee. 
Chapter 186 
SUSTAINABLE GREENFIELD IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE 
§ 186-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 7-13-2016 by OrderNo. FY 17-009] 
The Mayor shall establish an eleven-member body called the "SustainableGreenfield Implementation Committee" (SGIC) comprised of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, the Energy/Sustainability Manageror his/her designee, the Director of Planning and Development or his/herdesignee, one Town Councilor appointed by the Town Council President, a representative of a youth-serving organization or school appointed bythe Mayor, a member of the Planning Board appointed by the Chairpersonof the Planning Board, and five members of the public appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town Council. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member with voting rights in the case of a tie vote. The Mayor andother appointing officials will endeavor to create a SGIC that accurately represents the gender, class, age, and racial backgrounds of all Greenfieldresidents. 
§ 186-2. Purpose and goals. 
A. 	The Sustainable Greenfield Implementation Committee shall be theentity responsible for coordinating the implementation of SustainableGreenfield, the Town's master plan. Additionally, the Sustainable Greenfield Implementation Committee's purpose is to assist the Townin meeting its Green Community obligations and 2050 goals byidentifying, recommending and implementing programs that foster a vital, sustainable and resilient community, by addressing the oil depletion and climate change crisis, and the three interlocking aspectsof sustainability: the economy, the environment, and society. 
1:72 

B. 	To achieve its purpose, the Committee will work toward: 
(1) 	
Community self-sufficiency; 

(2) 	
Economic vitality and resilience with living wage jobs; 

(3) 	
Quality, energy-efficient housing for diverse people and needs; 

(4) 	
Energy reduction and development of clean energy sources; 

(5) 	
Responsible use of natural resources such as land and water; 

(6) 	
Food security; 

(7) 	
Sustainable transportation options; 

(8) 	
Zero waste; 

(9) 	
Excellent quality of life for all; 


(10)Ecosystem health; and 
(11)Other matters as the Mayor or Town Council or the SustainableGreenfield Implementation Committee deems necessary. 
§ 186-3. Appointment of citizen members; terms and vacancies;staff liaison. 
A. 	The Mayor shall appoint five citizen members of the SustainableGreenfield Implementation Committee. Citizen members will hold three-year terms, with staggered reappointments. Initially, of the fivemembers, two shall be appointed for three-year terms, two shall beappointed for two-year terms, and one will be appointed for a one-year term. Any vacancy in the membership of the Committee appointed bythe Mayor shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of such member. [Amended 7-13-2016 by Order No. FY 17-00926] 
B. 	The Mayor shall appoint a staff liaison to the Sustainable GreenfieldImplementation Committee. 
§ 186-4. Recommended member knowledge and skills. 
Environmental sustainability is inherently a comprehensive and wide-reaching area of knowledge. Ideally, Committee members will possess a breadth and depth of knowledge from across related disciplines. Followingis a list of knowledge and skills that are important to have in the skill setof those on the Committee in addition to skills brought to the Committee by Town staff: 
A. 	Project management and public relations. 
(1) 	Expertise in collaborating with project stakeholders. 

26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:73 
(2) 	
Creative problem-solving skills. 

(3) 	
Skill at researching and analyzing pertinent issues, including, at times, technical information. 


B. 	Economic. 
(1) 	
Expertise in business, especially in supporting and expanding a vibrant local economy. 

(2) 	
Expertise in fund-raising and grant research and writing. 


C. 	Environment. 
(1) 	
Knowledge of solutions to energy and climate change issues such as land use, infrastructure, energy reduction opportunities,transportation, housing and local zero carbon energy production. 

(2) 	
Knowledge of natural resources and how best to conserve them. 

(3) 	
Expertise in one or more areas of sustainability not yet widelyrepresented on the Committee, such as biodiversity, water, food, recreation, education and the arts. 


D. 	Quality of life issues. 
E. 	Food: knowledge of food systems and ways to build local food security. 
§ 186-5. Annual report. 
The Committee shall present an annual report to the Mayor on or nearDecember 31, highlighting its major activities and initiatives and progress toward its mission. 
§ 186-6. Rules and regulations. 
The Committee shall adopt its own rules and regulations. 
Chapter 193 
WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE 

§ 193-1. Establishment; membership. 
There shall be a Ways and Means Committee consisting of five memberswho shall reside in the Town and be registered voters therein. 
1:74 

§ 193-2. Appointment of members.27 
The Council President shall appoint five Council members to serve as the Ways and Means Committee until the next Town Council reorganizationmeeting. 
§ 193-3. Vacancies. 
In the event vacancies cause the Committee to fall below five members, the President of the Town Council shall forthwith make appointments toreturn the membership to a minimum of five until the next Town Council reorganization meeting. 
§ 193-4. Officers. 
The President of the Council shall appoint the Ways and Means Chairman, and the Ways and Means Committee will elect its Secretary. 
§ 193-5. Powers and duties. 
The Ways and Means Committee shall consider all municipal questions relating to appropriations and may consider any municipal questions. 
Part III: General Legislation 
Chapter 205 


ALARMS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Key lock boxes — See Ch. 224, Art. II. 
§ 205-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated by a criminal act, fire or other emergency calling for Fire Department response: 1) transmits asignal to Fire Department Headquarters; 2) transmits a signal to a personwho relays information to Police or Fire Headquarters; or 3) produces an audible or visible signal to which the Fire Department responds. Excludedfrom this definition and the scope of this chapter are devices which aredesigned to alert or signal only persons within the premises in which the device is installed and devices which are activated by the release of waterfrom a sprinkler system. 

27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:75 
ALARM USER — The owner of any premises on which an alarm device isused shall be deemed an "alarm user." 
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or attachment that mechanically or electronically selects a telephone line to Fire Headquartersand reproduces a prerecorded voice message to report a fire or other emergency calling for Fire Department response. Excluded from this definition are devices which relay a digital-coded signal to Fire Headquarters. 
CONTRACTOR — Any firm or corporation in the business of supplying andinstalling alarm devices or servicing the same. 
FALSE ALARM — 
A. 	An alarm raised without genuine cause. 
B. 	An alarm transmitted to the Fire Department that does not require thesaving of human life, extinguishment of a fire, control of hazardous situations, service, rescue, salvage or other related duties. 
C. 	An automated device that transmits an alarm without genuine causedue to said device's malfunction. 
§ 205-2. Registration of devices; fee. 
A. 	Alarm device registration shall be accomplished by contacting theGreenfield Fire Department, Fire Prevention Division, prior to the initial start-up of the construction or renovation project. Each alarmuser shall complete a form provided by the Administrator, to includesuch information concerning the identity of the prospective alarm user and the identity of the alarm user's contractor, if any. The Administratorshall issue the alarm user written acknowledgment of properregistration. There shall be no fee for the registration of any fire alarm system. 
B. 	It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify the FireDepartment in writing of changes in registration information. 
§ 205-3. Approval required for automatic dial alarm installation. 
No automatic dial alarm may be installed after the effective date of thischapter without the prior approval of the Fire Department. 
§ 205-4. False alarm charges. 
When the Chief/Deputy Chief of the Fire Department determines that theFire Department has responded to a false alarm, he/she shall impose a charge on the responsible alarm user according to the following schedule: 
A. 	First false alarm in any one year: no charge. 
B. 	Second false alarm in any one year: no charge. 
1:76 

C. 	Third false alarm in any one year: $100. 
D. 	Subsequent alarms in any one year: $250. (NOTE: Fees established by the Mayor.) 
§ 205-5. Notification of false alarm; appeals. 
A. 	The Fire Chief/Deputy Chief shall notify the responsible alarm user of any false alarms charged by first-class mail, postage prepaid. Within 15days after receiving such notice, the alarm user may file with the FireChief an appeal in writing showing that the alarm was not false within the meaning of this chapter. 
B. 	The Fire Chief shall consider such information, reaffirm or rescind the false alarm charge, and notify the alarm user of his/her decision by first-class mail, postage prepaid. Within 15 days after mailing of such notice,the alarm user may file with the hearings officer an appeal in writing. 
§ 205-6. Hearing and decision on appeal. 
Upon receipt of a timely appeal from a false alarm charge, the hearingsofficer shall hold a hearing to consider it and shall mail notice (first-classmail, postage prepaid) of the time and place of said hearing to the alarm user making the appeal at his/her last known address at least 15 days beforethe hearing. The hearings officer may affirm or return the decision to theFire Chief. 
§ 205-7. Disposition of charges and fees. 
The Greenfield Fire Department shall act as agent to collect said fees. Allmonies collected shall be turned over to the Town Treasurer at the end of each month for inclusion into the general fund. 
§ 205-8. Nonliability of Town for alarm devices. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Town, its departments, officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation whatsoeverconcerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm device or of the alarm monitoring facilities at Fire Headquarters. No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of such alarm devices or monitoringfacilities, or for failure to respond to alarms or for any other act or omissionin connection with such alarm devices. Each alarm user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless the Town, its departments, officers, agents andemployees from liability in connection with the alarm user's alarm device. 
§ 205-9. Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alarm devices on premisesowned or controlled by the Town, nor to alarm devices installed in a motorvehicle. 
1:77 

Chapter 209 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217. Peace and good order — See Ch. 333. Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322. Public lands — See Ch. 346. 
1:78 

ARTICLE I 
Public Consumption
[Adopted as amended 12-19-2012 by Order No. FY 13-067 (Ch. 13,
Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 209-1. Town-controlled property.28 
In order to preserve peace and good order, no person will publicly consumealcoholic beverages or possess an opened or unsealed container full orpartially full of any alcoholic beverages as defined by MGL c. 138, § 1, in or on any property owned or controlled by the Town, including parks,public schools or property under the jurisdiction of the Greenfield SchoolCommittee, cemeteries, commons or any public ways, including but not limited to sidewalks or tree belts in the Town of Greenfield, unless a license for such an activity is issued by the Board of License Commissioners. Theprovisions of this section shall not be deemed to preclude a patron of a duly licensed restaurant or hotel to retain and take off the premises only so muchas may remain of a bottled wine purchased by the patron in conjunction witha meal and not totally consumed by the patron during such meal; provided, further, that the bottle shall be resealed in accordance with regulationspromulgated by the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission in 204 CMR
2.18 and transported in a manner authorized in MGL c. 90, § 24I when carried in a motor vehicle, as defined in MGL c. 90, § 1. 
§ 209-2. School property; violations and penalties. 
In the case of Greenfield public school property, authorization must also be given by the Greenfield School Committee. Anyone violating this articleshall be subject to arrest in accordance with MGL c. 272, § 59, and a fine notto exceed $200 for each offense which may be recovered upon complaint before district court and shall inure to the Town, all in accordance with MGL 
c. 40. 
§ 209-3. Businesses. 
In order to preserve peace and good order, no person will consume alcoholicbeverages or possess an opened or unsealed container full or partially full ofany alcoholic beverages as defined by MGL c. 138, § 1 on any premises open to the public for business, including restaurants, dance halls, video arcades,grocery stores, supermarkets, and pool halls, unless a license for such anactivity is issued by the Board of License Commissioners. 

28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:79 
ARTICLE II 
Operation of Retail Establishments
[Adopted 6-5-1990 (Ch. 348, Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 209-4. Last call. 
"Last call" shall be given to patrons at least 15 minutes before the legally prescribed closing hour. 
§ 209-5. Removal of glasses and bottles. 
All glasses and bottles shall be removed from tables, bars and patrons by 10 minutes past the legally prescribed closing hour. 
§ 209-6. Removal of patrons. 
No persons shall be allowed to remain on the premises after 20 minutes past the legally prescribed closing hour except the bartender and/or otherperson(s) duly employed by the business solely for the purpose of cleaningand closing the business. No alcoholic beverage will be consumed during that time. 
§ 209-7. Employee identification required. 
Any person employed by a business licensed by the Town of Greenfield to sell alcoholic beverages shall be required, upon request of any lawenforcement officer, to identify him-/herself to that law enforcement officerand shall further be required to produce positive identification verifying such information if requested by that officer. 
§ 209-8. Immediate admission of police officer required. 
All private clubs will admit a police officer immediately after the officer has identified him-/herself. Any undue delays will be considered a violation ofMGL c. 138, § 63, and subject to revocation of license. 
§ 209-9. Keg sales. 
A. 	The sale of a keg, in any size, shall require positive identification of thepurchaser, a deposit of $50, and placement of a numbered band on thehandle of the keg. 
B. 	The name, address, date of birth of purchaser, and band number shallbe recorded in a journal. The journal shall be available at all times forinspection by a police officer. 
C. 	All "keg" customers shall be informed that if the keg is returned withoutthe same numbered band intact, the deposit of $50 is forfeited. 
1:81 

ARTICLE III 
Inactive Licenses 
[Adopted 9-7-1993 (Ch. 348, Art. II, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 209-10. Lack of use for three months or more.29 
Any person, corporation or any other legal entity holding any license issued by the Board of License Commissioners to sell or serve liquor, either onpremises or off premises, pursuant to MGL c. 138, who or which fails touse said license for a period of three months or more during any calendar year shall surrender said license to the Board of License Commissioners,and failure to use said license for a period of three months or more duringany calendar year shall be sufficient grounds for the Board of License Commissioners to refuse to reissue or renew said license at the end of each calendar year after affording the license holder a hearing. 

29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:83 
§ 209-10  Chapter 213 ANIMALS GREENFIELD CODE  § 213-3  
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Noise — See Ch. 311.  Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322.  

§ 213-1. Scope; violations and penalties. 
A. 	This chapter is not intended to derogate or limit any powers, rights, orobligations set forth in MGL c. 140, but is in addition thereto. 
B. 	The penalty fee imposed upon an owner or keeper of a dog which hasviolated this chapter shall be $25 for the first offense, $50 for thesecond offense, and $75 for each subsequent offense. 
§ 213-2. License required. 
Any owner or keeper of a dog six months of age or older shall cause thatdog to be licensed as required by MGL c. 140, § 137, commencing on April 1 of each year. 
§ 213-3. License fees. 
A. 	The fee for licensing of dogs and kennel licenses shall be set by the Town Clerk in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 22F. The license fee forneutered/spayed dogs shall be less than the license fee charged fordogs that are not neutered or spayed. The owner or keeper must present a spay/neuter certificate or written statement from a veterinarian. [Amended 2-20-2013 by Order No. FY 13-076] 
B. 	No license fee will be charged for specially trained service dogs asdefined in Section 11.30 
C. 	No license fee or part thereof shall be refunded because of subsequentdeath, loss, spaying, neutering, removal from the Town of Greenfield,or other disposal. 
D. 	Should any owner or keeper fail to license a dog by June 1, the owneror keeper shall pay a late charge of $25 before obtaining said license,excepting a dog brought into the Town as provided in MGL c. 140, § 138. This late fee shall be applicable after the 45th day after thearrival of such dog. [Amended 2-20-2013 by Order No. FY 13-076] 
E. 	Any owner or keeper who, during any licensing period, moves into theTown of Greenfield shall register his/her dog forthwith. Failure to do so 

30.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 140, § 139. 
1:84 
by the 45th day after the arrival of such dog shall result in a late fee asstated in this section. 
§ 213-4. Kennel licenses. 
A. 	Anyone maintaining or keeping a pack or collection of dogs on a singlepremises, whether maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other purposes, including any shop where dogs are on sale,which are not covered under MGL c. 129, § 39A, and also includingevery pack or collection of more than three dogs, three months old or over, owned or kept by a person on a single premises, irrespective ofthe purpose for which they are maintained, shall be required to obtaina kennel license in compliance with the Town Zoning Ordinance. 
B. 	Inspection of kennels. Upon application for a kennel license, the AnimalControl Officer may inspect the facility prior to the issuance of anykennel license. The Animal Control Officer may deny the application if the facility is not in compliance with any or all sections of this chapter,state law, and state regulation. The Greenfield Animal Control Officermay at any time inspect or cause to be inspected any kennel and if, in her/his judgment, the same is not being maintained in a sanitaryand humane manner, or if records are not properly kept as required bylaw, the Animal Control Officer, with approval of the hearings officer, shall revoke or suspend, and in case of suspension, may reinstate suchlicense. 
§ 213-5. Rabies vaccine. 
All dogs six months or older shall be licensed and have a current rabiesinoculation as required by MGL c. 140, § 137, and MGL c. 140, § 145B,and any subsequent amendments thereto. When applying for a license, the applicant must show proof of rabies vaccination by presenting a currentrabies certificate from a veterinarian. 
§ 213-6. Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal ControlOfficer and any police officer of the Town. 
§ 213-7. Control of dogs in estrus cycle. 
If an Animal Control Officer determines that a dog in her estrus cycle isattracting other dogs to the area, which conditions cause disturbances onor damage to neighboring property or public areas, he/she may impound the dog for the duration of the estrus cycle, releasing it thereafter to theowner or keeper upon payment of penalty fees, if applicable, pickup fees,confinement fees, and/or other expenses incurred during the impoundment, in order to provide for the health and well-being of the dog. As an alternative, an Animal Control Officer may require the owner, or keeper, toplace and keep such a dog, while in the estrus cycle, in a kennel or remove it from the area. Failure to comply with the removal order of the Animal 
1:85 

Control Officer shall be a violation of this chapter, and the dog will then beimpounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
§ 213-8. Disturbing the peace. 
No person shall keep any dog which by biting, barking, howling or inany other manner disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or endangers the safety of any person. 
§ 213-9. Dogs at large. 
A. 	Unrestrained dogs. 
(1) 	
No dog shall be permitted to be unrestrained while in or near anyschoolyard, public park, public playground, public building, retailstore, public highway or street, or public or school recreational field or facility. 

(2) 	
No person shall permit a dog under that person's control to defecate on any schoolyard, public park, public playground, or public school or recreational field or facility. 

(3) 	
Exceptions. 

(a) 	
Further, no dog shall be permitted to be at large in any other public area not designated within this section except if: 

[1] 	The dog is attached to a leash held by a person who iscapable of controlling the dog or puppy. 
[2] 	The dog is in a vehicle from which it cannot escape whilethe vehicle is driven, parked, or stopped. 
[3] 	The dog is within 100 feet or within calling or whistling distance, mechanical or otherwise, for the purposes ofhunting in an area where hunting is allowed and dogs arelegally allowed for hunting purposes. 
[4] 	The dog is in a public area where dogs or puppies areallowed. 

(b) 	
These exceptions shall apply to public parks and recreational fields designated by the Town of Greenfield allowing dogs to beoff leash. 




B. 	Any dog found to be at large within the grounds of any school property, public park, public playground, public building, public highway or street, or public or recreational field or facility, retail store, apartmentor commercial building of the Town of Greenfield, except as allowed in Subsection A, shall be apprehended and confined by the Animal ControlOfficer and/or police officers, who shall notify forthwith the licensedowner or keeper of said dog, giving the owner or keeper a period of seven days within which to recover the dog. 
1:86 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 

The Animal Control Officer or his/her agent having custody of a dogconfined under this chapter shall be allowed the sum of $15 per day of confinement for the care of such dog, payable by the owner or keeperto the Animal Control Officer or his/her agent before retrieval of suchdog shall be allowed. 
For each and every dog picked up, the Animal Control Officer or his/heragent shall be entitled to a pickup fee of $15 for the first occurrence,$20 for the second, $30 for the third and $50 for the fourth occurrence in any one calendar year. 
Restraining; exceptions. 
(1) 	
No person owning or keeping a dog shall permit such dog to be at large elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or keeper, except if it be on the premises of another person with the permission of such other person. Such owner or keeper of a dog, which is not on the premises of the owner, or upon the premisesof another person with the permission of such other person, shallrestrain such dog with a chain or leash not exceeding eight feet in length. No dog or puppy may be restrained by a fixed-point chain ortether for more than eight hours in a twenty-four-hour period. Anytethering employed shall not allow the dog or puppy to leave the owner's or keeper's property. No chain or tether shall weigh morethan 1/8 of the dog's or puppy's body weight. Any chain or tetherused must be attached to a properly fitting collar or harness worn by the animal. 

(2) 	
Exceptions: 

(a) 	
The dog is attached to a leash held by a person who is capable of controlling the dog or puppy. 

(b) 	
The dog is in a vehicle from which it cannot escape while thevehicle is driven, parked, or stopped. 

(c) 	
The dog is within 100 feet or within calling or whistlingdistance, mechanical or otherwise, for the purposes of huntingin an area where hunting is allowed and dogs are legally allowed for hunting purposes. 

(d) 	
The dog is in a public area where dogs or puppies are allowed. 



(3) 	
These exceptions shall apply to public parks and recreational fields designated by the Town of Greenfield allowing dogs to be off leash. 


In any prosecution hereunder, the presence of such dog at large uponpremises other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog shall be prima facie evidence that such permission was not obtained. 
§ 213-10. Animal abuse and neglect. 

1:87 

A. 	It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, or use, or be in any mannerconnected with, or financially interested in, the management of, or to receive money or other thing of value for the admission of any personto, a house, apartment, pit or place procured or permitted to be usedor occupied for baiting or fighting of animals; or to instigate, promote, arrange, or carry on a fight between animals, or in aid of or calculatedto encourage or further any fight between animals. 
B. 	Except where indicated for the health or welfare of a dog or puppy, the owner or keeper of such dog or puppy shall provide it with adequate,clean, fresh, and wholesome food and water supplied at least onceevery 24 hours. Food and water containers shall be kept clean. Outside shelter shall be provided and shall be constructed so as to give fullprotection from the elements of weather and from the extremes of heator cold. 
C. 	Animals left in motor vehicles. 
(1) 	
The owner of an animal left unattended in a motor vehicle shall ensure: 

(a) 	
The animal is restrained in a manner that prevents contactbetween the animal and any member of the public; and 

(b) 	
The animal has suitable ventilation. 



(2) 	
The owner of an animal shall not leave an animal unattended in a motor vehicle if the weather conditions are not suitable for containment of an animal. This includes weather extremes of excessive hot or cold conditions that may cause suffering or thepotential for death. 


§ 213-11. Dog waste. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having care, custody or controlof a dog or puppy to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercisedue care or control of such animal, any animal to excrete any solid waste upon any sidewalk, any public street or public park, or to excrete any solidwaste upon any real property under the control or in the possession of anyother person, or upon any place to which the public has normal access or right of ingress or egress; provided, further, that no violation of this sectionshall occur if the owner of the offending animal promptly and voluntarilyremoves the animal waste. 
§ 213-12. Motor vehicle operator responsibilities for strikingdomestic animals. 
Any motor vehicle operator who knowingly strikes a domesticated animal must immediately stop and make an attempt to make him-/herself known toanimal's owner. If unable to locate the owner, the motor vehicle operatorshall notify the Animal Control Officer and/or the Police Department within 24 hours. 
1:88 

§ 213-13. Violations and penalties. 
Whoever shall offend against or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, unless some other penalty is provided by law or by anordinance of the Town, for each and every offense forfeit and pay a penaltyof not less than $25 and not more than $300, all pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D. All fines recovered under this section shall inure to the benefit of theTown. 
Chapter 217 
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Noise — See Ch. 311. Streets, sidewalks and public places — See 
Ch. 385. Peace and good order — See Ch. 333. 
1:89 

ARTICLE I 
Public Demonstrations 
§ 217-1. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
FIRST AMENDMENT ASSEMBLY — A demonstration, rally, parade, march,picket line, or other similar gathering conducted for the purpose of persons expressing their views. 
LICENSING COMMISSION — The License Commission for the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 217-2. Policy on First Amendment assemblies. 
It is the declared public policy of the Town of Greenfield ("Town") thatpersons and groups have a right to organize and participate in peaceful First Amendment assemblies on the streets, sidewalks, and other publicways, and in the parks of the Town of Greenfield, and to engage in FirstAmendment assembly near the object of their protest so they may be seen and heard, subject to reasonable restrictions designed to protect publicsafety, persons, and property, and to accommodate the interest of personsnot participating in the assemblies to use the streets, sidewalks, and other public ways to travel to their intended destinations, and use the parks forrecreational purposes. 
§ 217-3. Reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions. 
A. 	The License Commission shall recognize and implement the Townpolicy on First Amendment assemblies established in § 217-2 whenenforcing any restrictions on First Amendment assemblies held on Town streets, sidewalks, or other public ways, or in Town parks, andthere is a presumption that an application shall be approved by theLicense Commission, subject to Subsection B. 
B. 	The License Commission may enforce reasonable time, place, andmanner restrictions on First Amendment assemblies by establishingreasonable restrictions which may be applied on a proposed assembly prior to its planned occurrence through the approval of a plan, wherethe organizers of the assembly give notice. 
C. 	No time, place, or manner restriction regarding a First Amendment assembly shall be based on the content of the beliefs expressed oranticipated to be expressed during the assembly, or on factors suchas the attire or appearance of persons participating or expected to participate in an assembly, nor may such restrictions favor non-FirstAmendment activities over First Amendment activities. 
§ 217-4. Notice and plan approval process. 

1:91 

A. 	It shall not be an offense to assemble or parade on a Town sidewalk, orin a Town park, without having provided notice or obtained an approved assembly plan. 
B. 	The purpose of the notice and plan approval process is to avoid situations where more than one group seeks to use the same space at the same time and to provide the License Commission and other Towndepartments the ability to provide appropriate police protection, trafficcontrol, and other support for participants and other individuals. 
C. 	Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, a person or groupwho or which wishes to conduct a First Amendment assembly on a Townsidewalk, street, the Town Common or a Town park shall give notice and apply for approval of an assembly plan before conducting the assembly. 
D. 	A person or group who or which wishes to conduct a First Amendmentassembly on a Town sidewalk, the Town Common or in a Town park is not required to give notice or apply for approval of an assembly planbefore conducting the assembly where: 
(1) 	
The assembly will take place on public sidewalks and crosswalks and will not prevent other pedestrians from using the sidewalksand crosswalks and will not illegally interfere with pedestrian orvehicular traffic; 

(2) 	
The person or group reasonably anticipates that the number ofpersons participating in the assembly will not illegally interferewith pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the space has not already been reserved through the submission of an assembly plan by anothergroup and the assembly will not occur on a Town street; or 

(3) 	
The assembly is for the purpose of an immediate and spontaneous expression of views in response to a public event. 


E. 	The License Commission shall not enforce any user fees on persons orgroups that organize or conduct First Amendment assemblies. 
F. 	The Mayor or License Commission shall not require, separate from orin addition to the requirements for giving notice of or applying forapproval of an assembly plan for a First Amendment assembly, that persons give notice to, or obtain a permit or plan from, the Chiefof Police, or other district officials or agencies, as a prerequisite formaking or delivering an address, speech, or sermon regarding any political, social, or religious subject in any Town street, sidewalk, otherpublic way, or park, except to implement reasonable time, place andmanner restrictions. 
§ 217-5. Processing applications; appeals; rules. 
A. 	Authority to approve. 
1:92 

(1) 	
Subject to the appeal process set forth in Subsection D of thissection, the authority to receive and review a notice of and an application for approval of a plan for a First Amendment assemblyon Town streets, sidewalks, and other public ways, and in Townparks, and to grant, deny, or revoke an assembly plan, is vested exclusively with the License Commission. 

(2) 	
Persons or groups providing notice to and applying for approval ofa plan from the Town government to conduct a First Amendment assembly on a Town street, sidewalk, or other public way, or in a Town park, shall not be required to obtain approval for theassembly from any other official, agency, or entity in the Town government; however, the License Commission may seek approvalfrom other Town departments before issuing a decision in orderto implement time, place and manner restrictions as provided in § 217-4F. 


B. 	Action on application. 
(1) 	
The License Commission shall take final action on a notice of and an application for approval of a plan for a First Amendmentassembly at its next regular meeting following receipt of thecompleted application and in any event prior to the date of the proposed assembly, considering such factors as the anticipated sizeof the assembly, the proposed date and location, and the number ofdays between the application date and the proposed assembly date, and shall establish specific timetables for processing an applicationby rules issued pursuant to Subsection E of this section. 

(2) 	
Except as provided in Subsection B(3), where a complete application for approval of a First Amendment assembly plan isfiled 60 days or more prior to the proposed assembly date, theapplication shall receive final action no later than 30 days prior to the proposed assembly. 

(3) 	
Following the approval of an assembly plan in response to an application pursuant to Subsection B(2), the License Commission may, after consultations with the person or group giving notice ofthe assembly, amend the plan to make reasonable modificationsto the assembly location or route up until 10 days prior to the assembly date, based on considerations of public safety. 


C. 	The License Commission shall inform the person or group giving noticeof an assembly, in writing, of the reasons for any decision to: 
(1) 	
Deny an application for approval of a First Amendment assemblyplan; 

(2) 	
Revoke an assembly plan prior to the date of the planned assembly; or 


1:93 

(3) 	Approve an assembly plan subject to time, place, or manner restrictions, notwithstanding the applicant's objections. 
D. 	Appeals. 
(1) 	
Any applicant whose proposed assembly plan has been denied inwhole or part, revoked prior to the date of the planned assembly, or granted subject to time, place, or manner restrictions deemedobjectionable by the applicant may appeal such decision to theMayor or the Mayor's designee, who shall concur with, modify, or overrule the decision of the License Commission. 

(2) 	
The Mayor shall make a decision on appeal within two days afterreceiving written notice and prior to the date and time the assembly is planned to commence, and shall explain in writing thereasons for the decision. 


E. 	Rules and regulations. 
(1) 	
Within 180 days of the passage of this article by the Town Councilof Greenfield, the License Commission, in accordance with this article, shall issue procedural rules for implementation of this article, including but not limited to specific rules for the TownCommon. 

(2) 	
Existing procedures for the issuance of permits to persons or groups seeking to conduct a First Amendment assembly on Townstreets, sidewalks, or other public ways, or in Town parks, thatare not inconsistent with this article shall remain in effect pending the issuance of the procedural rules promulgated under SubsectionE(1) of this subsection. 


§ 217-6. Exceptions. 
A. 	Funeral processions pursuant to MGL c. 85, § 14A, shall be exempt fromthe provisions of this article.31 
B. 	In order to protect and preserve the sanctity of the home and assure that members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings afeeling of well-being, tranquility, and privacy, no demonstrations shallbe permitted that are targeted at an individual's residence. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing or otherprotest activities within 300 feet of or about any location at which afuneral is held, within one hour prior to the commencement of any funeral, and until one hour following the cessation of any funeral. 

31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:94 
§ 217-7. Violations and penalties. 
Violation of this article shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed $100 for each offense, which shall inure to the benefit of the Town, all pursuant toMGL c. 40, § 21. 
§ 217-8. Conflicts arising from assemblies without prior planapproval occurring at same time and space. 
If notice and application for approval of an assembly plan is not provided tothe License Commission before such assembly and more than one assembly occurs at the same time and space, then neither assembly has a superiorright to the space. 
1:95 

ARTICLE II 
Parades 
§ 217-9. Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to cover all sections not covered by Article I, Public Demonstrations, of this Chapter 217 (First Amendment right ofassembly and applicable portions of the Massachusetts Constitution), theintent of this article being to cover non-First Amendment situations and to allow the License Commission the discretion to issue permits in such cases.A parade shall consist of a non-First Amendment procession, assembly, orother organized formation. 
§ 217-10. Permit required. 
No person shall take part in any parade of persons or vehicles, other thana funeral procession or a picket line, in or upon any street, way, highway, road, or parkway or other public property under the control of the Townunless the License Commission has granted a permit for such parade. 
§ 217-11. Criteria for approval; fee. 
The License Commission may issue such permit in all cases except wherethe time, place, and manner are not in conformity with the rules set forthbelow and except where the permit would be in conflict as to time or place with a permit previously issued. No fee shall be charged for any suchpermit. 
§ 217-12. Time of filing; information required. 
The written request for the permit shall be filed with the License Commission at least seven days prior to each occurrence, and said Commission may waive this seven-day requirement. The request shall include the following: 
A. 	The date and starting time; 
B. 	The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the name of the organization involved; 
C. 	The formation or assembly area and the time therefor; 
D. 	The route of the parade or motorcade and what portions, if any, of the streets traversed may be occupied by such parade or motorcade; and 
E. 	The approximate number of persons and vehicles in the parade ormotorcade, if applicable. 
§ 217-13. Police protection. 
When it is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the Town to properly police the line of 
1:97 

movement in areas involved and areas contiguous thereto that the paradewould deny reasonable police protection to the Town. 
§ 217-14. Authority to modify place, time and route. 
The License Commission shall have the authority to modify the place, timeand route of a parade to facilitate crowd control in the interest of relieving congestion and promoting public safety. 
§ 217-15. Violations and penalties. 
Violation of the above article (§§ 217-9 through 217-14, inclusive) shall result in a criminal penalty not to exceed $100 for each offense, which shallinure to the benefit of the Town, all pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21. 
1:98 

Chapter 224 
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 

1:99 

ARTICLE I 
Building Permits
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-113 (Ch. 39,
Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 224-1. Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or demolish a building or structure; or to change the use or occupancy ofa building or structure; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by 780 CMR, theMassachusetts State Building Code, without first filing a written applicationwith the office of the Inspector of Buildings/Building Commissioner and obtaining the required permit. 
§ 224-2. Fees. [Amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-099] 
Fees for building or use and occupancy permits will be established and revised from time to time by the Mayor. The fee for a "permit to erect abuilding" shall be returnable to the applicant only when the applicationis not approved, and the reason for disapproval clearly stated in writing. No permit of any kind shall be issued by the Building Inspector until therequired fee has been paid in full. 
§ 224-3. Application for permit. [Amended 3-21-2012 by Order No.FY 12-099] 
Applications for building permits shall be submitted in accordance with theState Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance. 
1:101 

ARTICLE II 

Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted as amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-103 (Ch. 86 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 224-4. Purpose and findings. 
This article requires structures to have a key lock box installed on theexterior of the structure for fire safety purpose. 
A. 	The Mayor and Town Council have determined that the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Greenfield are promotedby requiring certain structures to have a key lock box installed onthe exterior of the structure to aid the Greenfield Fire Department in gaining access to the structure when responding to calls for emergencyservice. 
B. 	The key lock box system is being adopted nationally and will operate on a master key basis that will expedite entry into a structure during an emergency. 
C. 	The key lock system will eliminate forced entries into structures, thereby avoiding costly, time-consuming efforts in gaining access tolocked structures during an emergency. 
D. 	The Town of Greenfield is authorized to pass this article. 
§ 224-5. Structures required to have lock boxes. 
The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or nearthe main entrance or such other location required by the Fire Chief: 
A. 	Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarmsystem or automatic suppression system, or structures that are securedin a manner that restricts access during an emergency. 
B. 	Residential structures with six or more units, or units that have restricted access through locked doors that enter a common hallway. 
C. 	Governmental structures, health care and nursing facilities, schools, and any structure that is deemed by the Fire Chief as high risk. 
§ 224-6. Time frame for compliance. 
All newly constructed structures subject to this article shall have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.All structures in existence on the effective date of this article shall have one year from the effective date to have a key lock box installed and operational. 
1:103 

§ 224-7. Permissible types of boxes. 
The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the Town. 
§ 224-8. Access key required. 
The owner or operator of any structure required to have a key lock system shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure. 
§ 224-9. Rules and regulations. 
The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations forthe use of the key lock box system. 
§ 224-10. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who owns or operates a structure subject to this article shall besubject to penalties set forth in this article for violation of this article, whichpenalties shall be set at $100 for each month that the structure is not in compliance with this article. 
1:104 

Chapter 230 
CONTRACTORS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 224. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
Excavations — See Ch. 259. 
1:105 

ARTICLE I 

Insurance Requirements
[Adopted as amended 5-16-2012 by Order No. FY 12-143 (Ch. 615 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 230-1. Contractor to file certificate of insurance.32 
Before starting and until completion of the work, the permittee shallprocure, deposit, and maintain with the Town of Greenfield, hereinaftercalled the "Town," insurance satisfactory to the Town as follows: 
A. 	Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance as requiredby the workers' compensation laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
B. 	General liability insurance. 
(1) 	Comprehensive general liability insurance covering bodily injuryand property damage as follows: 
Limits of Liability: Bodily injury* $500,000 Each person Each occurrence Property$500,000 Each occurrence 
damage* $500,000 Aggregate operations $500,000 Aggregate protective $500,000 Aggregate contractual $500,000 Aggregate completed 
operations 
* Or $1,000,000 single limit combined bodily injury and property 
(2) 	The comprehensive general liability policy shall provide insurancefor the permittee for bodily injury and property damage to thirdpersons arising out of: 
(a) 	
Work performed by the permittee himself/herself with his/herown employees, called "premises operations." 

(b) 	
Work performed by his/her subcontractors, called "sublet work" or independent contractors. (This is referred to as "contractor's protective liability.") 

(c) 	
The contractor's liability assumed under this contract, called "hold harmless" clauses or indemnity agreement. (This isreferred to as "contractual liability insurance.") To avoid the 



32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:107 
necessity of arranging for this coverage on each permit, it isrecommended that the certificate of insurance indicate that "blanket" coverage is provided for the full policy term.** 
** Underground insurance coverage will be furnished on a"blanket" basis. Collapse and explosion coverage shall be required under certain circumstances by the Director of PublicWorks. 
C. 	Automobile insurance. Comprehensive automobile liability insurance for non-Massachusetts contractors and standard automobile liabilityinsurance for Massachusetts contractors covering bodily injury andproperty damage as follows: 
Limits of Liability:  
Bodily injury  $500,000  Each person  
$1,000,000  Each accident  
Property damage  $1,000,000  Each accident  
§ 230-2. Insurance required; limits. 


Before starting and until completion of the work, the permittee shall procure, deposit, and maintain with the Town of Greenfield, hereinaftercalled the "Town," insurance satisfactory to the Town. 
A. 	Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance as required by the workers' compensation laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
B. 	Comprehensive general liability insurance covering bodily injury and property damage with the following: 
(1) 	
Limits of liability: 

(a) 	
Bodily injury: 

[1] 	Each person: $300,000. 
[2] 	Each occurrence: $500,000. 

(b) 	
Property damage: 

[1] 	Each occurrence: $100,000. 
[2] 	Aggregate operations: $100,000. 
[3] 	Aggregate protective: $100,000. 
[4] 	Aggregate contractual: $100,000. 
[5] 	Aggregate completed operation: $100,000. 
1:108 


(2) 	
The comprehensive general liability policy shall provide insurancefor the permittee for bodily injury and property damage to third persons arising out of: 

(a) 	
Work performed by the permittee himself/herself with his/herown employees, called "premises operations." 

(b) 	
Work performed by his/her subcontractors, called "sublet work" or "independent contractors." (This is referred to as"contractors' protective liability.") 

(c) 	
The contractor's liability assumed under this contract, called"hold harmless" clauses or indemnity agreement. (This isreferred to as "contractual liability insurance.") To avoid the necessity of arranging for this coverage on each permit, it isrecommended that the certificate of insurance indicate that "blanket" coverage is provided for the full policy term. 

(d) 	
Products liability covering the completed building or installation or products furnished. (This is called "productsliability insurance" for the manufacturer and "completed operations liability insurance" for the contractor.) 

(e) 	
Underground insurance coverage will be furnished on a "blanket" basis. Collapse and explosion coverage shall be required under certain circumstances by the Director of PublicWorks. 






C. 	
Comprehensive automobile liability insurance covering bodily injury and property damage, with the following: 

(1) 	
Bodily injury: 

(a) 	
Each person: $300,000. 

(b) 	
Each accident: $500,000. 



(2) 	
Property damage: $100,000 each accident. 


§ 230-3. Coverage of vehicles; nonownership protection. 
This insurance is to apply with respect to all owned or hired vehicles of thecontractor and nonownership protection for all employees of the contractorengaged in the performance of work in Town ways or commons. 
§ 230-4. Notification of cancellation or amendment of policy. 
All policies shall be so written that the Town will be notified of cancellationor restrictive amendment at least 15 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation or amendment. 
1:109 

§ 230-5. Certificate from carrier to be filed. 
Certificates from the insurance carrier stating the limits of liability and expiration date shall be filed with the Town before operations are begun. 
§ 230-6. Criteria for certificates. 
Such certificates not only shall name the types of policy provided, but also shall refer specifically to this permit and the above sections in accordancewith which insurance is being furnished, and shall state that such insuranceis as required by such sections, and shall be sufficiently comprehensive as to permit the Town to determine that the required insurance coverage hasbeen provided without the necessity of examining the individual insurancepolicies. 
§ 230-7. Renewal certificates. 
If the initial insurance expires prior to the completion of the work, renewalcertificates shall be furnished by the date of expiration. 
1:110 

Chapter 235 
CURFEW 
§ 235-1. Enactment. 
This Youth Protection Ordinance is established to impose certain restrictions upon juveniles in the Town of Greenfield between the hours of 
12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
§ 235-2. Purpose. 
The Youth Protection Ordinance is intended to promote parental control and responsibility for their children under the age of 17 and protect juvenilesfrom victimization and exposure to criminal activity. 
§ 235-3. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Greenfield or a designated representative. 
DIRECT ROUTE — The shortest reasonable path of travel to reach a finaldestination without any detour or stop along the way. 
EMERGENCY — A fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or anyunforeseen situation requiring immediate action to prevent or care for aserious bodily injury or loss of life. 
ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business to which the public is invited,including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
HOLDING LOCATION — A place designated by the Chief of Police to which a juvenile taken into custody for a violation of this chapter may be deliveredto await pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities. 
JUVENILE — Any person under the age of 17. 
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporationoperating, managing, or conducting business within any establishment, orany employees thereof. 
PARENT — A person who is: 
A. A natural, adoptive, or foster parent of another person; or 
B. A court-appointed guardian of another person. 
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, highway, parking lot, sidewalk,playground, park, plaza, building or other property owned or controlled bya government entity. 
RESTRICTED HOURS — 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
1:111 

TOWN SOLICITOR — The Town Attorney of the Town of Greenfield or adesignated representative. 
§ 235-4. Prohibited acts; duty of parents and guardians. 
A. 	Except as provided in § 235-5, a juvenile shall not enter or remain inany public place during the restricted hours. 
B. 	The owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall not allowany person to enter or remain upon the premises of the establishmentduring restricted hours unless the person: 
(1) 	
Has proper identification demonstrating that such person is 17years of age or older. 

(2) 	
Can demonstrate that such person is otherwise exempt from this chapter. 


C. 	The custodial parent(s) or guardian of juveniles under the age of 17shall provide due care and supervision to ensure juveniles are aware of and comply with the provisions of this chapter. Further, the custodialparent(s) or guardian will take appropriate actions to ensure compliance by juveniles under the age of 17. 
§ 235-5. Exceptions and defense. 
A. 	It shall not be a violation of § 235-4 if the juvenile is: 
(1) 	
Accompanied by the juvenile's parents; 

(2) 	
Engaged in an employment activity or using a direct route to orfrom a place of employment; 

(3) 	
Reacting or responding to an emergency; 

(4) 	
Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, an official school,religious, or recreational activity that is supervised by adults and issponsored by a governmental entity, civil or religious organizations or other similar entity that accepts responsibility for the juvenile asan invitee. 


B. 	It shall be a defense to prosecution under § 235-4 that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the PoliceDepartment that a juvenile was on the premises of the establishmentduring the restricted hours and that such juvenile refused to leave. 
§ 235-6. Enforcement. 
A. 	A law enforcement officer, upon finding a juvenile in violation of thischapter, shall: 
(1) 	
Order the juvenile to leave the restricted area for the remainder ofthe restricted hours; or 

1:112 

(2) 	
Take the juvenile into protective custody if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the juvenile has been abandoned or neglected, or is in immediate danger from his/hersurroundings and that his/her removal is necessary for his/herprotection; or 

(3) 	
Issue a trespass warning of specific duration. 



B. 	
When a juvenile is taken into custody under Subsection A(2) by alaw enforcement officer, he/she shall deliver the juvenile to a holding location or other facility provided for by the Town of Greenfield. 

C. 	
The Chief of Police and his/her officers, agents, and designees arehereby granted the authority to issue trespass warnings in any public place within the Town of Greenfield, for the purpose of enforcing thischapter. 


§ 235-7. Violations and penalties. 
Following three or more violations of this chapter by a juvenile, the TownAttorney or a designated representative may contact the appropriate stateagency and request an investigation of the juvenile's home as provided for by law. 
Chapter 241 
DEMOLITION DELAY 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Historical Commission — See Ch. 132. 
§ 241-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect, through advancenotice of their proposed demolition, significant buildings within the Town of Greenfield which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic, or social history of the Town, toencourage owners of preferably preserved significant buildings to seek out persons who might be willing to purchase and to preserve, rehabilitate, orrestore such buildings rather than demolish them, to alert residents of theTown to impending demolitions of significant buildings, and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare, to preserve the resourcesof the Town, and to make the Town a more attractive and desirable placein which to live. To achieve these purposes, the Greenfield Historical Commission is empowered to advise the Greenfield Inspector of Buildingswith respect to the issuance of permits involving demolition, and theissuance of demolition permits for significant buildings is regulated as provided in this chapter. 
1:113 

§ 241-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
APPLICATION — An application for a permit involving demolition, as defined in this chapter, of a significant building on the historic inventory. Every application shall include the address of the building to be demolished,the owner's name, address and telephone number, photographs of all sidesof the building visible from a public way taken within the past year, plans, a narrative description of the building and justification of the proposeddemolition, and a brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction orreplacement. 
BUILDING — Any combination of materials capable of providing shelter forpersons, animals or property. 
COMMISSION — The Greenfield Historical Commission. 
DEMOLITION — Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing astructure or portion thereof, or commencing the work of total or substantialdestruction with the intent of completing the same. 
DEMOLITION PERMIT — A permit issued by the Inspector of Buildingsunder the State Building Code for the demolition of a building or structure. 
INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS — The administrative chief of the building department in a municipality who is charged with the administration andenforcement of 780 CMR, the Massachusetts State Building Code. 
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — 
A. 	Any building or structure individually listed on the National Register ofHistoric Places; or 
B. 	Any building or structure evaluated by Massachusetts Historical Commission to be a contributing building within a National Register orState Register District; or 
C. 	Any building or structure which has been certified by the Massachusetts Historical Commission to meet eligibility requirementsfor individual listing on the National Register of Historical Buildings; or 
D. 	A building submitted by the Commission to the Town Council, and approved by the Town Council, that contributes to the historical orarchitectural heritage or resources of the Town in accordance with thestandards for designation as a significant building. 
§ 241-3. Preferably preserved significant buildings. 
A. 	A preferably preserved significant building is any significant buildingwhich the Greenfield Historical Commission determines, after a public hearing, is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated ratherthan to be demolished. A preferably preserved significant building issubject to the six-month delay period of this chapter.33 
1:114 

B. 	The Greenfield Historical Commission shall determine that a structure be designated as a significant structure if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1) 	
It is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register ofHistoric Places, or is the subject of a pending application for listing on said National Register; or 

(2) 	
The Greenfield Historical Commission determines that the structure meets one or more of the following three criteria: 

(a) 	
Historical importance. The structure meets the criteria of historical importance if it: 

[1] 	Has character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of theTown of Greenfield, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the nation; or 
[2] 	Is the site of an historic event; or 
[3] 	Is identified with a person or group of persons who hadsome influence on society; or 
[4] 	Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or historic heritage of the community. 

(b) 	
Architectural importance. The structure meets the criteria of architectural importance if it: 

[1] 	Portrays the environment of a group of people in an era ofhistory characterized by a distinctive architectural style; or 
[2] 	Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type; or 
[3] 	Is the work of an architect, master builder or craftsman whose individual work has influenced the development ofthe Town; or 
[4] 	Contains elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significantinnovation. 

(c) 	
Geographic importance. The structure meets the criteria ofgeographic importance if: 




[1] 	The site is part of, or related to, a square, park, or other distinctive area; or 

33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:115 
[2] 	The structure, as to its unique location or its physical characteristics, represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, or the community as awhole. 
§ 241-4. Procedure. 
A. 	The Inspector of Buildings, on the day of receipt of an applicationfor demolition of a listed significant building or within seven days,shall cause a copy of each such permit application to be forwarded to (or shall satisfy himself that a duplicate of such application has beensubmitted to) the Greenfield Historical Commission. No demolitionpermit shall be issued at that time, unless the Inspector of Buildings deems the building is in need of emergency demolition and theemergency demolition provisions of this chapter have been met. TheGreenfield Historical Commission may make preliminary determinations of significance for discussion with the BuildingInspector. 
B. 	The Greenfield Historical Commission shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of receiving a copy of such application, and shall give publicnotice thereof by publishing notice of the time, place, and purpose ofthe hearing in a local newspaper at least 14 days before said hearing. The Greenfield Historical Commission shall mail a copy of said noticeto the applicant and shall, at least seven days prior to said hearing,notify the Inspector of Buildings, Department of Public Works, Planning Department, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, ConservationCommission and such other persons as the Greenfield Historical Commission shall deem entitled to notice. The applicant shall notify all abutting landowners as they appear on the most recent local tax list nolater than seven days prior to said hearing. 
C. 	If, after such hearing, the Greenfield Historical Commission determines that the demolition of the significant building would not be detrimentalto the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the Town,the Greenfield Historical Commission shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings and Mayor within seven days of such determination. Uponreceipt of such notification, or after the expiration of 21 days fromthe date of the close of the public hearing, if he has not received notification from the Greenfield Historical Commission, the Inspector ofBuildings may, subject to the requirements of the State Building Codeand any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, issue the demolition permit. 
D. 	If the Greenfield Historical Commission determines that the demolition of the significant building would be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the Town, such building shall beconsidered a preferably preserved significant building. The GreenfieldHistorical Commission's determination remains in effect for six months from the date of decision. Upon a determination by the GreenfieldHistorical Commission that the significant building which is the subject 
1:116 

of the application for a demolition permit is a preferably preservedsignificant building, the Greenfield Historical Commission shall, within seven days, so advise the applicant by registered mail, and the Inspector of Buildings, and no demolition permit may be issued until atleast six months after the date of designation as a preferably preserved significant building. The applicant shall, upon notice of said designation, secure the building or site against vandalism, fire or otherdestruction and post a copy of said designation on the building in a place visible from the nearest public way. The applicant shall givereasonable access to the building or site to the Greenfield HistoricalCommission and to parties interested in preserving it. 
E. 	Notwithstanding the preceding section, the Inspector of Buildings mayissue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved significant building at any time after receipt of written advice from the Greenfield Historical Commission to the effect that either: 
(1) 	
The Greenfield Historical Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore suchbuilding; or 

(2) 	
The Greenfield Historical Commission is satisfied that for at least six months the owner has made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a purchaser to preserve, rehabilitateor restore the subject building, and that such efforts have been unsuccessful. This may be extended an additional six months uponrecommendation of the Greenfield Historical Commission and a majority vote of the Town Council. 


§ 241-5. Emergency demolition. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to derogate in any way from theauthority of the Inspector of Buildings derived from Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 143. However, before acting pursuant to this chapter, theInspector of Buildings shall provide the Greenfield Historical Commissionwith a memorandum describing the condition of the building and the basis for his decision. 
A. 	If a building poses an immediate threat to public health or safety due toits deteriorated condition, the owner of such building or structure may request issuance of an emergency demolition permit from the Inspectorof Buildings. 
B. 	Upon receipt of any application for an emergency demolition permit, the Inspector of Buildings shall within five days transmit a copy thereofto the Greenfield Historical Commission. 
C. 	As soon as is practicable, but within 14 days after receipt of such an application, the Inspector of Buildings shall inspect the buildingwith an inspection team consisting of the Inspector of Buildings, Town 
1:117 

Engineer, Fire Chief, Greenfield Historical Commission Chair and twoother members of the Greenfield Historical Commission selected by the Chair, or the designees of said officials. 
D. 	Within five days after inspection of the building and after consultationwith other members of the inspection team, the Inspector of Buildings shall determine: 
(1) 	
Whether the condition of the building or structure represents aserious and imminent threat to public health and safety; and 

(2) 	
Whether there is any reasonable alternative to the immediatedemolition of the building which would protect public health andsafety. 


E. 	If the Inspector of Buildings finds 1) that the condition of the buildingor structure poses a serious and imminent threat to public health andsafety, and 2) that there is no reasonable alternative to the immediate demolition of the building or structure, then the Inspector of Buildingsmay issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner of the building. 
F. 	If the Inspector of Buildings finds 1) that the condition of the building does not pose a serious and imminent threat to public health andsafety, and/or 2) that there are reasonable alternatives to the immediatedemolition of the building which would protect public health and safety, then the Inspector of Buildings may refuse to issue an emergencydemolition permit to the owner of the building or structure. 
G. 	Upon issuing an emergency demolition permit under the provisions of this section, the Inspector of Buildings shall submit a brief writtenreport to the Greenfield Historical Commission describing the conditionof the building and the basis for his/her decision to issue an emergency demolition permit. Nothing in this section shall be inconsistent withthe procedure for the demolition and/or securing of buildings andstructures established by MGL c. 143, §§ 6 through 10. 
§ 241-6. Enforcement and remedies. 
The Inspector of Buildings is specifically authorized to institute any and allactions and proceedings, in law or equity, as he/she may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter orto prevent a threatened violation thereof. 
A. 	No permit for erection of a new structure on the site of an existing preferably preserved significant building may be issued prior to issuance of a permit for demolition of such existing building. 
B. 	No permit for erection of a new building, paving of drives or for parking shall be issued for one year from the commencement of such work if astructure is demolished in violation of this chapter. 
1:118 

C. 	Any owner of a building and/or structure subject to this chapter whoknowingly acts to demolish said building and/or structure, or damage a portion of a building or structure in a way which increases its likelihoodof total failure, without first obtaining a building permit for demolitionin accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or who likewise by some causative action contributes to the deterioration of said buildingor structure during the demolition review period, shall be in violationof this chapter and subject to enforcement by a noncriminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended. 
D. 	Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.45, the fine for any suchviolation shall be $300 for each offense. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense until the demolished building isrebuilt or recreated as directed by the Greenfield Historical Commission, or unless otherwise agreed to by the Greenfield Historical Commission. 
§ 241-7. Historic Districts Act. 
If any provision of this chapter conflicts with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, the Historic District Act, that Act shall prevail. 
Chapter 244 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Sewer use — See Ch. 355.  Wetlands protection — See Ch. 423.  
Stormwater management — See Ch. 381.  Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V.  
Water — See Ch. 415.  

§ 244-1. Purpose of impact statements and review. 
The purpose of an impact statement is to provide the special permitgranting authority with sufficient information to conduct a detailed reviewof uses which have the potential for significant impact on the Town. The impact review process is intended to promote and protect the naturalresources and aesthetic qualities of the Town and to mitigate any adverseimpact to Town services, traffic patterns, abutting properties, the economy of the Town, the character of the Town, or the public health, safety, andwelfare of Town residents. 
§ 244-2. Applicability and procedure. 
A. 	These rules and regulations are applicable to impact statements required and submitted in accordance with the Greenfield ZoningOrdinance and the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations.34 
1:119 

B. 	The most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers(ITE) Trip Generation Manual shall be used to determine if the proposed project meets the 500 vehicle trips per day threshold requiring major development review under § 200-7.12B(1) of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. If the ITE trip generation rates are not applicable or the use is not included in the manual, the estimatedvehicle trips per day shall be verified by the Greenfield Department ofPublic Works. 
C. 	Ten copies of the impact statement shall be submitted along withall other forms, plans and information required for special permitapplications under major development review, § 200-7.12 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance, and for subdivision applications under§ 550-43 of the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations. 
D. 	The special permit granting authority may waive strict compliance with the submittal requirements of these rules and regulations by a majorityvote of the Planning Board ("Board") if, in its opinion, the informationrequired is deemed unnecessary or inapplicable to the review of the project. Request for waivers shall be made in writing to the Boardand shall state the reasons and supporting justification for grantingthe waiver. Public notice and public hearing, which may be combined with the notice and public hearing on the special permit application,shall be required before a decision is made on the waiver request. TheEconomic Development and Planning Committee of the Town Council shall receive a copy of the application, plans and a request for a waiverand shall have the opportunity to comment on whether the waivershould be granted or denied. Applicants are encouraged to discuss the requirements of the impact statement with the Board or PlanningDepartment staff prior to preparation of the statement. 
E. 	The impact statement shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of professionals qualified to evaluate all facets of the proposed project,which may include but is not limited to engineers, architects, landscapearchitects, environmental scientists, and planners. 
§ 244-3. Contents of impact statements. 
A. 	The impact statement shall include the following elements: 
(1) 	
A detailed description of the proposed project and its design features, including existing conditions on the site and in the vicinityof the project. 

(2) 	
Identification and assessment of the impacts of the proposed project, including positive, negative, direct and indirect impacts. 

(3) 	
An evaluation of how the project will meet the design standardsrequired in these rules and regulations. 



34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Art. V, Subdivision Regulations. 
1:120 
(4) 	Proposed measures to mitigate adverse impacts and/or maximizepositive impacts, including design modifications and provision of infrastructure or public service improvements sufficient to supportthe project. Any adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated shallbe identified. Mitigation measures to be implemented by the applicant shall be identified. 
B. 	Impact assessment. The impact statement shall assess the followingareas of potential impact: 
(1) 	
Traffic impact. 

(a) 	
Existing traffic conditions. Average daily and peak-hour volumes, sight distances, street capacity, level of service, physical characteristics of the streets, number and locationof driveways and intersections, average and peak speeds,accident data, pedestrian movement, and public transportation and traffic controls for streets and intersections adjacent to theproject and for streets and intersections which will experiencea ten-percent increase in peak-hour traffic as a result of the project or which will experience a reduction in the level ofservice as a result of the project, and for failing streets andintersections which will experience an increase in traffic as a result of the project as required by the Board. 

(b) 	
Projected traffic conditions. Average daily and peak-hourtraffic projections and directional distribution of site-generated traffic, sight distances at proposed driveway intersections with streets, on-site traffic circulation and parking layout,pedestrian movement and background traffic conditions for the design year, including any planned roadway/trafficimprovements and other proposed projects in the vicinity ofthe site. 

(c) 	
Projected traffic impact. Evaluate how the proposed projectwill affect traffic conditions on streets and intersections adjacent to and those likely to be affected by the proposed project, including level of service, traffic flow, turning movements, sight distances, traffic controls, pedestrianmovement, and public transportation. 



(2) 	
Impact to municipal utilities/services. 

(a) 	Water supply. Describe the proposed water supply system,including average daily and peak water demand; location, sizing, and accessibility to municipal water mains; and waterpressure and flows available at the site. Evaluate the capacityof the Town's water supply and distribution system to adequately service the projected water and fire flow needsof the project; the need for pumping stations, standpipes, orother improvements to the water system required to service the project. Estimate the cost and discuss the responsibility 
1:121 

(b) 


(c) 


(d) 


(e) 


(f) 



for construction of improvements and ongoing maintenance.Consultation with the Department of Public Works is required. 
Sewage disposal. Describe the proposed sewage disposal system, including average daily and peak wastewater discharges to the municipal sewer system; composition and concentration of wastewater; location, sizing, and accessibilityto municipal sewer mains; the need for pumping stations, forced mains or other system improvements required to adequately service the project. Evaluate the capacity of the sewage treatment plant and the sewerage system to accommodate the wastewater flows. Evaluate the need for pretreatment of wastewater to achieve compliance with theGreenfield Sewer Use Regulations.35 Estimate the cost and discuss the responsibility for construction of system improvements and ongoing maintenance. Consultation withthe Department of Public Works and the Department of Environmental Protection is required. 
Storm drains. Describe the proposed surface drainage system,including pre-and post-runoff calculations; the location, sizing,accessibility, and proposed discharges to the municipal storm drains. Evaluate the capacity of the existing storm drains toaccommodate projected stormwater runoff. Estimate the costand discuss the responsibility for construction of storm drain improvements and ongoing maintenance. Consultation withthe Department of Public Works is required. 
Solid waste disposal. Describe the quantity and composition of projected solid wastes to be generated by the project,including average weekly volume in cubic yards of refusegenerated; recycling potential; method of on-site storage and collection. Evaluate the impact to the municipal landfill, recycling facility, and transfer station, including available landfill capacity and costs of collection and disposal. Consultation with the Department of Public Works is required. 
Emergency services. Describe the anticipated fire and policeprotection needs, including time and demand on municipal personnel; provision for alarms or warning devices; on-site firefighting and security capabilities; need for increased municipalpersonnel or equipment. Estimate the cost and discuss the responsibility for providing emergency protection to the project. Consultation with the Police and Fire Departments isrequired. 
Schools. Describe the projected impact to the public schoolsystem, including kindergarten, primary, and secondary levels.Identify the schools to be affected; projected number of 

35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 355, Sewer Use. 
1:122 
students by housing type (i.e., single-family, apartments,townhouses) and number of bedrooms (i.e., one-bedroom, two-bedroom, etc.); the ability of the schools to absorb the additional enrollment, including impact on classroom size, school bus routing changes, and the annual cost per student to the school system. Projected number of students shall bebased on relevant data for the region, Massachusetts, or thenortheast. Consultation with the School Department is required. 
(3) 	
Environmental impact. 

(a) 	
Describe the existing physical and ecological characteristics of the site and in relation to surrounding land, includingtopography, slope, soils, wetlands, surface water, vernal pools,floodplains, depth to groundwater, drainage patterns, type and coverage of vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, identification of any rare or endangered plant or animal species, relationships to public or private water supply wells and recharge areas or public water supply reservoirs. Consultation with the Conservation Commission, Departmentof Public Works, and the Massachusetts Natural Heritage Program is required. 

(b) 	
Identify and evaluate the potential impacts of the project onair quality, surface water, wetlands, groundwater, plant and wildlife species, temperature, wind, and noise levels on-siteand off-site which will be affected by the project. 

(c) 	
Specifically evaluate the impact of stormwater, runoff, flooding, erosion, sedimentation, grading changes, increasedimpervious surface, discharges to groundwater, pumping ofgroundwater, wetlands disruption, and changes to vegetative cover. Provide the location and results of any test pits, soilborings, and percolation tests performed on the site. 

(d) 	
Describe the types, quantities, use and storage methods for hazardous materials and wastes to be used or generated by theproject. What measures will be taken to prevent a release intothe environment? 

(e) 	
Describe proposed mitigation measures for impacts identifiedabove. 



(4) 	
Community impacts. 

(a) 	Describe the surrounding neighborhood and any scenic, unique geological, historical, or archaeological features andrecreational areas on the site or in the vicinity of the site which could be affected by the project. 
1:123 


(b) 	
Describe the layout of the proposed project in detail (siteplans may be used), including scale, placement, and design of buildings and structures; lighting; parking areas; open space;relationship to scenic views from the site; views of the projectfrom distant vantage points and from adjacent properties and public ways. 

(c) 	
Evaluate the proposed architectural design in relationship tosurrounding land uses and prevailing architectural style, including major design elements such as scale, materials, color, setbacks, roof lines. 

(d) 	
Identify the impacts to historic properties, districts, or areas, and any archaeological sites on the property or in the vicinityof the project. Consultation with the Historical Commission isrequired.36 

(e) 	
Describe any recreational facilities proposed for the site andprovision of public recreational or open spaces. Estimate theoff-site recreational demands of the proposed project and its impact to municipal recreational facilities and programs.Consultation with the Recreation Commission is required. 

(f) 	
Residential projects should be evaluated in relationship to the type and scale of surrounding residential uses. Evaluate theproject in meeting the housing needs of Greenfield and discussany provision for affordable housing. Consultation with the Greenfield Housing Partnership and the Office of Planning andCommunity Development is required. 

(g) 	
Nonresidential projects should estimate the number and types of jobs to be created by the project, estimate the amount oflocal labor to be used, and evaluate the impact of the projecton existing employers in the community. 

(h) 	
Estimate the amount, type, and location of spin-offdevelopment resulting from construction of the project andits likely impact on the community, including changing land use patterns, development pressure on surroundingneighborhoods, impact to the downtown business district, impact to important natural resources, traffic, and Town services. 

(i) 	
Identify and evaluate the potential impacts to neighboringcommunities resulting from the project. 


(5) 	Fiscal impact. 
(a) 	Evaluate the projected costs and benefits to the communityresulting from the project, including: 

36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:124 
[1] 	Projected costs arising from increased demand for andrequired improvements to public services and infrastructure. 
[2] 	Value of improvements to public services and infrastructure to be provided by the project. 
[3] 	Projected tax revenues to be generated by the project. 
[4] 	Projected impact of the project on surrounding land valuesand any potential loss or increase in tax revenues to the Town. 
[5] 	Short-term and long-term projection of increased Townrevenues and costs resulting from the proposed project. 
(b) 	Evaluate the market and financial feasibility of the project.Include any market studies prepared for the project and anyplans for phased construction. 
§ 244-4. Development impact standards. 
The special permit granting authority shall consider the following standardswhen reviewing development impacts in addition to the special permit and site plan criteria required in §§ 200-8.3 and 200-8.4 of the Greenfield ZoningOrdinance: 
A. 	Traffic standards. 
(1) 	
The level of service (LOS) of all streets and intersections evaluatedunder § 244-3B(1) shall not be reduced. Level of service shall bedetermined in accordance with the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual, Highway Research Board, NationalAcademy of Science -National Research Council. See attached appendix for summary description of LOS.37 

(2) 	
The design goal for all streets, signalized intersections, and turningmovements at unsignalized intersections shall be LOS C or better.For streets and intersections currently functioning at LOS C or better, mitigation measures shall be provided to maintain or improve the existing LOS. Where the existing LOS is D, mitigationmeasures shall, at a minimum, maintain the existing conditions or upgrade the LOS to C or better. 

(3) 	
For all streets and intersections which are currently failing (LOSE or worse), the goal of mitigation measures is to provide a LOS D or better. At a minimum, existing conditions at failing streetsand intersections shall not be further degraded as a result of theproject. 



37.Editor's Note: The appendix is on file in the Town offices. 
1:125 
(4) 	
Driveways shall be located to limit conflict points with existingdriveways and intersections and shall meet intersection design standards for secondary roads required in the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations.38 

(5) 	
Shared driveways and service roads shall be used to control access onto existing streets. 

(6) 	
The impact of increased turning movements shall be mitigated. 

(7) 	
The project shall be sited and driveways located to prevent routing of nonresidential traffic to and through residential streets. 

(8) 	
Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be separated from motorvehicle circulation as far as practicable. 


B. 	Municipal utilities/services standards. 
(1) 	
The public water, sewer, and drainage systems in the vicinity ofthe site shall be adequate to serve the proposed project. If public utilities are not adequate to serve the project, the reviewing authority may require, as a condition of approval, off-site improvements to increase the capacity of such utilities sufficient to serve the project. 

(2) 	
All utilities shall be placed underground where physically feasible. 

(3) 	
All commercial and industrial discharges to the sewage treatment plant shall be pretreated if required by the Water Departmentof the Department of Public Works to prevent overloading of thetreatment plant. All discharges shall be in compliance with the Greenfield Sewer Use Regulations.39 

(4) 	
On-site stormwater management measures in accordance with Chapter 381, Stormwater Management, of the Town Code shall be required to ensure that the rate of runoff from the site to themunicipal storm sewer is not increased. Provision shall be made forongoing maintenance of on-site stormwater management facilities connected to the public storm drains.40 

(5) 	
The Town may require recycling and/or commercial refuse disposal to prevent overloading of the municipal landfill and transfer station. 

(6) 	
Municipal police and fire services shall not be strained by theproposed project. Adequate fire flows shall be available at the site. Improvements to the water system may be required to provide 



38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Art. V, Subdivision Regulations. 
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 355, Sewer Use. Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,General Provisions, Art. I). 

40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:126 
adequate service, or on-site alternatives owned and maintained bythe landowner may be required. 
(7) 	Provision of school bus service shall not require additional routes or buses at the expense of the Town. Phasing of residentialdevelopments may be required to ensure that the public school system can meet the increased enrollment resulting from the project. 
C. 	Environmental standards. 
(1) 	
The project shall not create any significant emission of noise, dust,fumes, noxious gases, radiation, water pollutants, or any similarsignificant adverse environmental impact. 

(2) 	
The project shall not cause erosion, flooding, sedimentation, orincrease the rate of runoff from the site. Provision shall be made for attenuation of runoff pollutants. Groundwater recharge shall be provided where the Town deems it important. 

(3) 	
The project shall be designed to minimize the destruction of wetlands, unique natural features, wildlife habitat, and rare or endangered species. Special effort shall be made to maintain wetlands, wetland buffer zones and corridors between wetlands and wooded uplands; wildlife travel corridors; existing diversity of plant communities; and to avoid alteration of areas most difficult toreplicate. 

(4) 	
The project shall not result in a reduction of groundwater recharge, deteriorate surface water or groundwater, or negatively impact anypublic water supply recharge area or watershed. Commercial andindustrial discharges of process wastewater to the ground shall not be permitted. 

(5) 	
Best available measures shall be used to prevent a discharge orspill of hazardous materials or wastes into the environment. 

(6) 	
Buffers, setbacks, landscaping, and traffic circulation patterns shallbe used to mitigate noise and air pollution impacts. 


D. 	Community standards. 
(1) 	
Provision shall be made for preserving historical features of thesite. The project shall be compatible with the character and scaleof neighboring properties, especially historic structures or areas. 

(2) 	
Building materials, architecture, and building placement shallminimize the visibility of buildings from distant vantage points,minimize obstruction of scenic views visible from public ways, and ensure compatibility with neighboring properties. 

(3) 	
On-site recreation areas shall be provided for residential developments in areas where public recreational facilities are not 


1:127 

available or if the capacity of nearby recreational facilities wouldbe overburdened by the project. 
(4) 	
Project siting and design shall be consistent with existing localplans and policies adopted by the Planning Board, RecreationCommission, Conservation Commission, or Town Council.41 

(5) 	
Adverse impact to the downtown business district shall be minimized through the use of joint marketing, hours of operation,products offered, and other measures to collaborate with downtown businesses. 


E. 	Fiscal impact standards. 
(1) 	
The proposed project shall not have a significant adverse impact on the Town in terms of balancing as near as possible the costof public services and public revenue provided through taxes andother income. The reviewing authority may require phasing of the project to minimize negative fiscal impacts to the Town over theshort term. 

(2) 	
The project shall be designed to minimize any negative impacts to adjoining property values. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall demonstrate the financial ability to completethe project and to achieve long-term financial stability. 


Chapter 248 
DRAINAGE 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
§ 248-1. Discharge of water restricted. 
No person shall cause or allow the discharge of water or other liquidsfrom his/her property onto or across the public ways and sidewalks, which discharge creates a hazardous condition, a nuisance or damage to saidpublic ways and sidewalks. 
Chapter 254 
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS 

41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:128 
§ 254-1. Inspector of Wires. 
The Inspector of Wires, hereinafter called the "Inspector," shall have control of the supervision and inspection of electrical wiring and shall enforce alllaws, ordinances, and regulations that relate thereto. 
§ 254-2. Powers and duties of Inspector. 
The Inspector shall have full charge and supervision of all electrical wiresand apparatus of the Town, except the fire alarm, police signal, and trafficsignal systems. 
§ 254-3. Recordkeeping. 
The Inspector shall keep careful and comprehensive records of applicationsreceived, of permits granted, of certificates issued, of reports rendered, and of notices and orders issued. 
§ 254-4. National standards. 
It shall be the further duty of the Inspector to keep informed on the revisions of the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code and Massachusetts Electrical Code. 
§ 254-5. Preservation of wiring system specifications. 
The Inspector shall preserve all copies of the plans and specifications of thewiring systems which are required to be filed in his office, and the sameshall be indexed with the names of the owner of the property or the name of the building in order that reference may be readily made thereto. 
§ 254-6. Inspection of new construction and repair of buildings. 
The Inspector shall examine all buildings in the course of erection, construction or repair, and except as otherwise forbidden or restrained bylaw, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises atany reasonable hour in the discharge of his official duties for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of electrical equipmentcontained therein, or of its installation; and shall see that the provisionsof the statutes of the commonwealth and the ordinances of the Town in relation to the electrical wires and electrical wiring are fully complied withas the building progresses. 
§ 254-7. Report of violations. 
The Inspector shall immediately report every violation thereof, with thename or names of the violator or violators, to the Office of the Inspectorof Buildings/Building Commissioner. It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or demolish a building or structure; orto change the use or occupancy of a building or structure; or to install oralter any equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which 
1:129 

is regulated by this code without first filing a written application with theBuilding Official and obtaining the required permit. The Inspector shall also make a report of such violation. 
§ 254-8. Notification of dangerous or defective conditions. 
When any electrical equipment or wiring is found by the Inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectivelyinstalled, the persons responsible for the electrical equipment or wiringshall be notified in writing to make changes or repairs which, in the judgment of the Inspector, will put such equipment in safe condition. 
§ 254-9. Failure to comply. 
If such changes or repairs are not completed within 15 days, or within the time period specified by the Inspector in said notice, the Inspector shallhave the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of use of suchelectrical equipment or wiring. 
§ 254-10. Emergencies. 
In cases of emergency where necessary for safety to persons or propertyor where electrical equipment and wiring may interfere with the work of the Fire Department, the Inspector shall have authority immediately todisconnect or to cause the disconnection of any electrical equipment orwiring. 
§ 254-11. Annual report. 
The Inspector shall file annually a report with the Town. 
§ 254-12. Inspection required for certificate of approval. 
When any work which requires a certificate of approval is completed orready for inspection, the Inspector shall be notified, and a time shall be setfor inspection. 
§ 254-13. Work not to be concealed prior to approval. 
Conductors, raceways, cables or fittings shall not be lathed in or concealedfrom view until approved by the Inspector. 
§ 254-14. Completion of work. 
If, upon inspection, the work is found to conform to the requirements ofthese ordinances, the wiring may then be lathed in or concealed and a certificate of approval shall be issued by the Inspector giving authorizationto the electric utility company for connection to the electrical service linesand the energizing of the wiring installations. But if the work is defective, all defects shall be remedied before such certificate is issued. 
1:130 

§ 254-15. Liability of owners or operators of electrical equipmentand wiring. 
These ordinances shall not be construed to relieve responsibility or liabilityof any party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electricalequipment or wiring for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, or to lessen such responsibility or liability, nor shall theTown of Greenfield be held as assuming any such liability by reason of theinspection or reinspection authorized herein or the certificate of approval issued as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of anyequipment authorized herein. 
§ 254-16. Permit required. 
Before any person shall install any electrical wiring, said person shall makeapplication to the Inspector for a permit for that purpose and shall file withthe Inspector such information and specifications as may be required. 
§ 254-17. Application for permit. 
Such application shall be made upon a form approved by the Inspector,except that no application or permit will be required to execute any of the classes of electrical work defined in Subsections A, B and C next following,except that these exemptions shall not apply to permanent wiring: 
A. 	The replacement of lamps, fuses, or the connection of portable electrical appliances to suitable permanently installed outlets. 
B. 	The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment installed byor for an electric utility company for the use of such company in the generation, transmission, distribution, or metering of electricity. 
C. 	Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, or repairingof electrical equipment or apparatus. 
§ 254-18. Grant of permit. 
If it shall appear from said application that the statutes of the commonwealth and provisions of these ordinances are and will be complied with, a permit shall be granted by the Inspector authorizing such electricalwiring. 
§ 254-19. Work not to commence prior to grant of permit. 
No electrical wiring requiring a permit shall be started until a permit hasbeen granted. 
§ 254-20. Emergency repairs and maintenance. 
A. 	For emergency repairs and maintenance of electrical wiring in establishments or power plants where a licensed electrician is 
1:131 

employed continuously on the premises, permits will be issued for stated periods. 
B. 	The period for such a permit shall not exceed one year. 
§ 254-21. Temporary permit. 
A. 	The Inspector may issue a temporary permit allowing the use of certain specified circuits or parts of an installation while the work of constructing, altering, or repairing the same is in progress; or for temporary work, experimental or emergency work, and work for fairs, exhibitions and similar purposes. 
B. 	Such a permit may be renewed or canceled at the discretion of theInspector, subject to the considerations of public safety and public welfare. 
§ 254-22. Compliance required; exceptions. 
All materials, fittings or apparatus used in a system of electrical wiring for light, heat or power, or in a signaling system, not including that used inthe installation, alteration or repair of equipment employed by a railroad,electric or communication utility company in the exercise of its functions as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for thatpurpose, and not including the fire alarm, police signal and traffic signalsystems, shall conform to the provisions of these ordinances. 
§ 254-23. Scope of electrical wiring. 
"Electrical wiring" shall include the installation of conductors, raceways,apparatus, fixtures or other appliances within or on a building or other structure for carrying or using electricity for light, heat or power, or fora signaling system, and the repair, extension or alteration of conductors,raceways, and fixtures within or on a building or other structure for carrying or using electricity for light, heat or power, or for a signalingsystem; except, unless otherwise provided by law, in county, state andfederal buildings and in stations, substations and vaults where such are under the sole control of the electric utility company. 
§ 254-24. Compliance with national standards required. 
Except as otherwise provided by these ordinances, all installations, repairs and maintenance of electrical wiring and electrical fixtures used for light,heat and power purposes in buildings and structures shall conform to theregulations set forth by the National Electrical Code, as accepted by the commonwealth and on file with the Secretary of the commonwealth. 
1:132 

§ 254-24  GENERAL PROVISIONS  § 259-5  
Chapter 259  
EXCAVATIONS  
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Sewer use — See Ch. 355.  Streets, sidewalks Ch. 385.  and  public places — See  

§ 259-1. Permit required. 
Any excavation within a public way, on public property or on private property requires the filing of an "excavation/trench permit" with the Department of Public Works. 
§ 259-2. Permitting authority. 
The Director of Public Works shall be the "permitting authority" for theissuance of excavation/trench permits in accordance with MGL c. 82A and520 CMR 14.00. A copy of the form is included in Appendix D of Chapter 355, Sewer Use.42 
§ 259-3. Securing unattended trenches. 
A. 	In the event the Director is notified of an unattended trench, meeting the definition under 520 CMR 14.00, during a time when the permitholder is unavailable, for example, after work hours, the Director hasthe authority to require a police detail for purposes of making the trench safe. In the event a police detail is required, the permit holderwill be assessed the cost of providing the detail by the Town. 
B. 	As an alternative to hiring a police detail for an unattended trench and assessing the cost to the permit holder, the Director has the discretionto have DPW staff take action to backfill, barricade, or cover the trench and assess the costs associated with the action, including overtime for DPW employees, to the permit holder. 
§ 259-4. Violations. 
If a permit holder of an excavation/trench permit fails to pay the assessed costs for the Town securing an unattended trench, as defined under 520CMR 14.00, the Director may withhold the issuance of additional excavation/trench permits to the violator until such time as the assessed costs are paid. 

42.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices. 
1:133 
§ 259-5. Fee.43 
The Town reserves the right to charge a fee for the permit required by this chapter, which shall be set by the Mayor. 
Chapter 265 
FARMING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. 
§ 265-1. Purpose and intent; scope. 
A. 	The purpose and intent of this chapter is to state with emphasis theright to farm accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulationsthereunder, including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph1; MGL c. 90, § 9, MGL c. 111, § 125A and MGL c. 128, § 1A. We, the citizens of Greenfield, restate and republish these rights pursuantto the Town's authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles ofAmendment of the Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment"). 
B. 	This chapter encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotesagriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Greenfield by allowing agricultural uses and relatedactivities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town agencies. 
C. 	This chapter shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town. 
§ 265-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
FARM — Includes any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodiesused for the primary purpose of agriculture, or accessory thereto. 
FARMING OR AGRICULTURE OR THEIR DERIVATIVES — 
A. 	Includes but is not limited to the following: farming in all its branchesand the cultivation and tillage of the soil; dairying; production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural,floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities; composting;growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry or lumbering operations; raising of livestock, including 

43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:134 
horses; keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and keepingand raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes,including bees and fur-bearing animals. 
B. 	Farming encompasses activities including, but not limited to, the following: operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipmentover roads within the Town; control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organisms of plants andanimals; community responsible application of manure, fertilizers andpesticides; conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities, including agritourism, provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or servicesof the farm; processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, includingsignage thereto; maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment,or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management, orsale of the agricultural products; and on-farm relocation of earth andthe clearing of ground for farming operations. 
§ 265-3. Right to farm declaration. 
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Greenfield. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include theattendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normallyaccepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to others through the normal practice of agricultureis more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this chapter are intended to apply exclusively to those agricultural and farmingoperations and activities conducted in accordance with generally acceptedagricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation,which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoninglaw, nor is it intended hereby that the creation of an implementation of this chapter supersedes, replaces, modifies, alters or changes any existing orfuture Greenfield Town ordinance or zoning ordinance, or state or federallaw related to agricultural uses within Greenfield. 
§ 265-4. Disclosure notification. 
The Town of Greenfield shall be responsible for providing a copy of thefollowing notice annually to Greenfield property owners/residents through an annual legal notice in the local newspaper. Moreover, the Town will posta copy of this notice prominently at the Town Hall, and will include thenotice and a copy of this chapter on the Town's official website. 
1:135 

"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encouragethe maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the productionof food, and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies withina Town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Anyconcerns or complaints regarding agricultural practices in Greenfield shallbe addressed to the Mayor, who shall forward them to the appropriate Town authorities and the Agricultural Commission for resolution." 
§ 265-5. Resolution of disputes. 
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Mayor or his/her designee. The filing of the grievance does not suspendthe time within which to pursue any other available remedies that theaggrieved may have. The Mayor or his/her designee shall forward a copy of the grievance to the appropriate Town authorities, including but not limitedto the Board of Health and/or Zoning Board of Appeals. The Mayor or his/her designee shall also forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolutionof the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Mayor or his/herdesignee within an agreed-upon time frame. 
Chapter 270 
FIREARMS 
§ 270-1. Discharge restricted. 
No person shall, except as authorized or required by law, fire or dischargeany gun, fowling piece, or other firearm or any air rifle in the Town. 
§ 270-2. Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the use of such weapons by police officers inthe performance of their duties, to the use of such weapons at any lawfuldefense military exercise, to the use of such weapons in the lawful defense of his/her person or family or legally hunting or target practicing. 
§ 270-3. Violations and penalties. 
Whoever violates this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100. 
§ 270-4. Rights of landowners and lessees. 
Nothing in this chapter shall derogate from the rights and privileges of an owner or lessee of land as set forth in MGL c. 131. 
1:136 

Chapter 274 
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

1:137 

ARTICLE I 
Single-Use Expandable Polystyrene Foam Packaging
[Adopted 6-15-2016 by Order No. FY 16-170 (Ch. 28 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 274-1. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PACKAGING — All food-and beverage-related wrappings, bags, boxes and containers. 
PREPARED — Ready for immediate consumption. 
RETAIL FOOD AND/OR BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, food operation, public or private, or any other place, other than a privateresidence, where food and drink are prepared or served, with or withoutcharge for consumption on or off the premises, including any catering establishment or any eating place, whether fixed or mobile, restaurant, bar,cafe, cafeteria, public or private school, hospital, private club, coffee shop,sandwich stand, or any other type of food service operation. 
STYROFOAM — Single-use expandable polystyrene foam products,including cups, bowls, plates, takeout containers and trays. 
§ 274-2. Prohibited use. 
No retail food and/or beverage establishment located and doing businesswithin the Town of Greenfield shall sell or convey food or beverage directlyto consumers within the Town of Greenfield if such food and/or beverage is placed, packaged, or wrapped in styrofoam. 
§ 274-3. Regulations. 
The Department of Health of the Town of Greenfield may issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implementand carry out the provision of this article. 
§ 274-4. Enforcement. 
The Health Department or any entity serving as such or its authorizedagent may enter any retail food or beverage establishment in the Town ofGreenfield where there is just cause to suspect the use of any packaging prohibited by this article and abate or cause to be abated such use. 
1:139 

§ 274-5. Violations and penalties.44 
Any retail food and/or beverage establishment failing to comply with § 274-2 of this article shall be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided inMGL c. 40, § 21D of $25 for each day such violation continues to exist. 
§ 274-6. When effective. 
This article shall become effective four months from the date of passage. 

44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:140 
Chapter 282 
JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Denial or revocation of licenses for Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 337. nonpayment of taxes — See Ch. 288, Art. I. 
Signs — See Ch. 359. Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 328. 
Tag sales — See Ch. 394. 
§ 282-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure public safety, protection of theenvironment, deterrence and aid in detection of sale of stolen goods,protection of visual/aesthetic qualities of the neighborhood and Town, and to provide means of recourse for concerns regarding these by neighbors orthe Town. 
§ 282-2. Authority; fees. 
A. 	This chapter is adopted under authority of MGL c. 140, § 54. 
B. 	In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 54 and the Town of Greenfield HomeRule Charter Section 6-9, the Greenfield Board of License Commissioners is the licensing and regulatory authority for the purposes of this chapter, and as such may make rules and regulationsrelative to the business of junk dealers and junk collectors, may provide supervision thereof, may make additional rules and restrictions particular to any junk dealer or junk collector business, and saidlicenses may be revoked after a hearing for cause. 
C. 	In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 202, the Board of License Commissioners shall set reasonable license fees for junk dealers andjunk collectors. 
§ 282-3. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ANTIQUE SHOP — An establishment for the sale of antiques, secondhandarticles, or collectible items. 
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — In accordance with MGL c. 140B, § 1(b), an automobile graveyard is deemed to be any establishment or place ofbusiness or any area of any lot, whether inside or outside of a building,which is maintained, operated, or used for collection, storage, keeping, abandonment, buying, or selling of wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or 
1:141 

dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts and/or for the dismantlingor demolition of such. 
JUNK — In accordance with MGL c. 140B, § 1(a), junk is deemed to beany article or material that will no longer be used for its original intendedpurpose, but instead will be discarded, collected, stored, or sold for salvage, recycling, or conversion to another article, product, or material. This includes but is not limited to items such as old, scrap, or used copper, brass,iron, steel or other ferrous materials; old, scrapped, or used paper, lumber, rope, rags, plastic, rubber, glass, or other nonferrous material; junked,dismantled, wrecked, or inoperative automobiles/motor vehicles, or partsthereof; old, scrapped, or used machinery, batteries, electronics; or trash, waste, etc. Any motor vehicle that is unregistered and inoperative and thathas been stored outside for more than six months shall be considered junk. 
JUNK COLLECTOR — Any person who, by going from place to place, collects, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals, or secondhand articles,whether or not by previous contract or arrangement. 
JUNK DEALER — Any person who deals in or keeps a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or secondhand articles, as these itemsare defined in this chapter and the Massachusetts General Laws. 
JUNKYARD — In accordance with MGL c. 140B, § 1(c), a junkyard is an establishment or place of business or any area of any lot, whether insideor outside of a building, which is maintained, operated, or used for thecollection, storage, keeping, abandonment, buying, or selling of junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, including fordismantling, demolition, processing, or conversion of such, and the termshall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
OLD METALS — Any metalwares, including but not limited to silverware,pewter, stainless steel, copper, or brass, or precious metals of extraordinaryvalue such as gold, silver, etc. 
SECONDHAND ARTICLES — Any item being resold for use that will maintain the original intended purpose of the product. This includes butis not limited to items such as clothing, furniture, antiques, household items, appliances, collectibles, etc. In keeping with MGL c. 140, § 55, books,prints, coins, and postage stamps shall not be deemed to be within themeaning of this definition nor within that of this chapter. Also not included in this definition are motor vehicles. 
TOWN — The Town of Greenfield. 
§ 282-4. License required; exceptions; categories. 
A. 	Anyone collecting, storing, dealing in, or keeping a shop or yard forthe purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or secondhand articlesmust first obtain a junk dealer and/or junk collector license from the Board of License Commissioners. This does not include pawnbrokers ortag sales, which are regulated elsewhere, nor those dealing exclusively 
1:142 

in secondhand books, prints, coins, postage stamps or used clothes.
[Amended 10-19-2016 by Order No. FY 17-052] 
B. 	The Board may issue different categories of junk dealer or junkcollector licenses; i.e., for secondhand articles, for old metals, for junk/salvage yards or auto graveyards, or any combination thereof. 
§ 282-5. License conditions. 
A. 	Junk dealer and junk collector licenses may only be issued to suitable persons. 
B. 	Issuance of junk dealer and junk collector licenses is contingent oncompliance with all municipal and commonwealth requirements. 
C. 	Junk dealer and junk collector licenses are nontransferable, site-specific, and expire on May 1 of each year. 
D. 	The Board of License Commissioners may make rules, restrictions, orconditions for all junk dealer and junk collector businesses or particular restrictions for individual businesses. 
E. 	Automotive graveyards are required to post an environmental remediation bond in the amount of $10,000,000. 
§ 282-6. Records. 
Every junk dealer and junk collector shall keep a record containing thefollowing information: 
A. 	A description of each item purchased, traded for, or otherwise obtainedor collected for this business; 
B. 	The name of the person or business from whom or which the item was obtained; 
C. 	The residence or place of business of the person or business from whomor which the item was obtained; and 
D. 	The date when the transaction was made. 
§ 282-7. Right of entry and inspection. 
Such records shall, upon reasonable request, be made available for inspection by any Town of Greenfield inspector, enforcement officer, orpolice officer and to the Board of License Commissioners. 
§ 282-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any available meansin law or equity, including, but not limited to, enforcement bynoncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D and Town of Greenfield Code Chapter 1, Article II. When enforced through 
1:143 

noncriminal disposition, the penalties shall be $100 per each violation,with each calendar day constituting a separate violation. 
B. 	In addition to noncriminal disposition, any licensee violating anyprovision of this chapter or any of the conditions or restrictions of itslicense will be subject to a civil penalty of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense, and $300 for the third and subsequentoffense(s), and/or suspension or revocation of its license. 
C. 	Anyone who collects, deals in, or keeps a shop or yard for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or secondhand articles without alicense or after notice that his/her junk dealer or junk collector licensehas been revoked or suspended will be in violation of this chapter. 
Chapter 288 
LICENSING 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 282. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 337. 
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 328. 
1:144 

ARTICLE I 
Denial or Revocation for Nonpayment of Taxes
[Adopted as amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-104 (Ch. 90,
Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 288-1. List of delinquent taxpayers. 
Each year, the Tax Collector shall furnish to the Mayor and the Boardof License Commissioners a list of any person, corporation or businessenterprise (hereinafter the "party") who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges fornot less than a twelve-month period and that such party has not filed ingood faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board. 
§ 288-2. Authority to deny, revoke or suspend license or permit. 
The Board of License Commissioners or any other licensing authority of the Town may deny, revoke, or suspend any local license or permit, includingrenewals and transfers, of any person, corporation, or business enterprisewho or which has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges or with respect to anyactivity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permitand which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglectedor refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or othermunicipal charges, but only after written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector as required by any laws and the party is given a hearing notearlier than 14 days after said notice. 
§ 288-3. Inclusion on list prima facie evidence. 
Appearance of a name of a party on a list from the Tax Collector as mentioned in § 288-1 shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation orsuspension of any license or permit to any party. 
§ 288-4. Reissuance or renewal of license. 
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this article shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standingwith respect to any and all taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or othermunicipal charges, payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate. 
§ 288-5. Payment agreements. 
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating saidlimitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license shall 
1:145 

be conditioned upon satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failureto comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder isgiven notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
§ 288-6. Waivers. 
The Board of License Commissioners may waive such denial, suspension orrevocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by theproperty owner, its officers and stockholders, if any, or members of his/her immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activityconducted in or on said property. 
§ 288-7. Exemptions.45 
The following licenses and permits are not subject to this article: 
A. Permits for open burning: MGL c. 48, § 13. 
B. Permits to sell articles for charitable purposes: MGL c. 101, § 33. 
C. Work permits for children: MGL c. 149, § 69. 
D. Food and beverage licenses: MGL c. 140, § 21E. 
E. Dog licenses: MGL c. 140, § 137. 
F. Fishing and hunting licenses: MGL c. 131, § 12. 
G. Marriage licenses: MGL c. 207, § 28. 
H. Theatrical and public exhibit permits: MGL c. 140, § 181. 

45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:146 
Chapter 293 
LITTERING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 

Solid waste — See Ch. 372. 
§ 293-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
GARBAGE — Biodegradable animal and vegetable wastes resulting from thehandling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
LITTER — "Garbage" and "refuse" as defined herein and all other wastematerial, which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to createa danger to public health, safety and welfare, amounts to a nuisance, or impairs the environment. 
LITTER RECEPTACLES — Includes any container which is designed toreceive litter and to prevent the escape of litter therein, which is of such a size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between collectionperiods and which is acceptable by the Town of Greenfield for collection. 
PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PREMISES — Includes any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed to be used, either wholly or in part, for privateresidential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuouslyuninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox, or other structure belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, tree belts, or other public ways, and parks, squares, plazas, groundsand buildings frequented by the general public, whether publicly or privately owned. 
REFUSE — All biodegradable and nonbiodegradable solid wastes (exceptbody wastes), including garbage, combustible and noncombustible wastessuch as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials, street cleanings, dead animals, abandonedautomobiles or trucks (except as otherwise allowable by the GreenfieldZoning Ordinance), abandoned furniture, abandoned stoves, abandoned sinks, abandoned toilets, abandoned refrigerators, abandoned freezers, andany other abandoned appliances, and the following items remaining onproperty longer than three months: partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicles (except as otherwiseallowed by the Zoning Ordinance, or by an extension granted by the Building Inspector). 
1:147 

§ 293-2. Failure to remove litter upon notice.46 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or person occupying property who has been duly notified in writing (first-class mail, postage prepaid)to fail to remove litter, refuse, or garbage from said property within twobusiness days after receipt of said notice. 
§ 293-3. Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
Every owner or person occupying a house or building used for residence,business or commercial purposes shall keep his/her property free of litter; maintain litter collection and storage areas; and ensure that all litter is putin a litter receptacle or litter receptacles. Failure to comply with this sectionshall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
§ 293-4. Maintenance of vacant buildings and lots. 
Any person owning or occupying a house or other building or vacant lot(s)visible from any public place or private premises shall keep the house, building, vacant lot or premises free from litter, except in allowable litterreceptacles. 
§ 293-5. Maintenance of sidewalks, tree belts and alleys. 
A person owning or occupying any premises shall keep the sidewalks, treebelts, and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter. In residential areas, ownersor persons occupying houses or buildings shall sweep, rinse off sidewalks, remove garbage, litter, or refuse abutting their premises as often as may berequired to keep the walk, tree belt, and street reasonably free from dirt,litter, and paper. All owners or persons occupying premises in the central commercial district of the Town shall, at least once every 24 hours, exceptwhen the business is closed, sweep the sidewalks in front of their premisesdown to the curb and gather up and remove all loose paper, dirt and litter. 
§ 293-6. Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the Town in anymanner authorized by law. 
§ 293-7. Violations and penalties. 
If owners or those occupying property allow litter, refuse, or garbage toexist or fail to abate said litter, refuse, or garbage, they and each of them shall be fined in any one calendar year as follows: $50 for the first offense;$100 for the second offense or noncompliance with enforcement order;$200 for the third offense or noncompliance with enforcement order; $300 for the fourth offense or noncompliance with enforcement order; $400 forthe fifth or more offense or noncompliance with enforcement order; and a 

46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:148 
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on whichsuch nuisance (litter, refuse, or garbage) is permitted to exist. 
Chapter 300 
MERCURY THERMOMETERS 
§ 300-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — Any hospital, nursing home, extended-care facility, long-term care facility, clinic or medical laboratory, state or privatehealth or mental institution, clinic, physician's office or health maintenanceorganization. 
MANUFACTURER — Any person, firm, association, partnership,corporation, governmental entity, organization, combination, or joint venture that produces a mercury fever thermometer. If the mercury thermometer is produced in a foreign country, the manufacturer is theimporter or domestic distributor. 
MERCURY THERMOMETER — A mercury-containing product that is used to measure body temperature. A "mercury-containing product" is a product,device, instrument or equipment into which elemental mercury or mercurycompounds are intentionally added during its formulation or manufacture and in which the continued presence of mercury is desired to provide aspecific characteristic or to permit a specific function. 
§ 300-2. Retail sale prohibited. 
No person or business shall sell or supply (including on-line retail) mercuryfever thermometers to consumers and patients, except by prescription.The manufacturers of mercury fever thermometers shall supply clear instructions on the careful handling of the thermometer to avoid breakageand proper cleanup should a breakage occur, with all mercury fever thermometers sold through prescriptions. 
§ 300-3. Manufacturing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to manufacture a mercurythermometer in the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 300-4. Importation, purchase and distribution prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any facility to import, purchase, or distribute amercury thermometer in the Town, except in the case of medical necessity as determined by a licensed physician. 
1:149 

§ 300-5. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 per violation. 
Chapter 307 
NATIVE AMERICAN BURIAL GROUNDS 
§ 307-1. Preservation of burial places. 
The Town of Greenfield recognizes, to the extent provided for in state andfederal law, any known place where American Indian remains have been buried or reburied as an American Indian burial ground, and as such, itshall be accorded the treatment and protections specified by federal or statelaws, including but not limited to 25 U.S.C. Chapter 32 (Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation), 42 U.S.C. § 1996 (The American IndianReligious Freedom Act), and Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, MGL c. 38, § 6, and MGL c. 114, § 17. It is, furthermore ordered that as soon as human remains of a Native American and/or aNative American burial ground is discovered and reported, and which fallswithin the jurisdiction of state and federal law, a local advocate for Native Americans shall immediately be appointed by the Mayor and the Narragansett Indian Tribes, who shall have local jurisdiction over and participate with others having jurisdiction in the enforcement of state and federal law relating to the treatment and protection of American Indianburial grounds within the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 307-2. Scope. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land,or as imposing any land use regulation which is properly the subject ofstate and federal law, nor is it intended by the creation and implementation of this chapter to supersede, modify, alter, change, or enlarge any existingGreenfield Town ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, or state and federal lawrelated to Native American burial grounds. 
Chapter 315 
NUCLEAR-FREE ZONE 
§ 315-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
COMPONENT OF A NUCLEAR WEAPON or COMPONENT — Any device which forms part of a nuclear weapon or which guides, propels or triggersit and is destroyed when the weapon explodes. 
1:150 

NUCLEAR WEAPON — Any device the sole purpose of which is thedestruction of human life and property by the explosive release of atomic fusion or fission energy. 
PRODUCTION OF A NUCLEAR WEAPON — The research, design,development, testing, storage, maintenance or construction of nuclear weapons or their components, or the storage or disposal of radioactivewaste derived from such weapons or components. 
§ 315-2. Restrictions on production of nuclear weapons. 
A. 	No person, corporation or other entity shall engage in the productionof nuclear weapons or their components within the Town of Greenfieldwithout first giving at least six months' advance notice of the intention to do so to the Mayor. 
B. 	Upon receipt of such a notice, the Mayor shall schedule and hold a public hearing to determine whether the proposed activity is in compliance with state, federal and local law and regulations. 
§ 315-3. Exclusions. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to restrict the exercise of any right guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States or the Commonwealthof Massachusetts. 
§ 315-4. Violations and penalties. 
Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $300 for eachday of the violation. 
Chapter 322 
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 209, Art. I.  Noise — See Ch. 311.  
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217.  Peace and good order — See Ch. 333.  
Littering — See Ch. 293.  

1:151 

ARTICLE I 
Use of Greenfield Conservation Land 
[Adopted as amended 1-18-2012 by Order No. FY 12-073 (Ch. 967 ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 322-1. Passive recreation. 
The Town of Greenfield conservation areas are open all year from sunriseuntil sunset for the purposes of walking, cross-country skiing, snow­shoeing, biking, horseback riding, nature viewing, or other passive recreation. 
§ 322-2. Vehicles prohibited. 
The use of cars, trucks, or other powered vehicles or tools, except for municipal and maintenance vehicles, is not permitted. 
§ 322-3. Alcoholic beverages; glass containers. 
The use of alcoholic beverages and glass containers is not permitted. 
§ 322-4. Dogs.47 
Dogs are permitted if leashed and under control at all times. The owner orperson in charge and control of the dog must remove any waste left behind by his/her dog and properly dispose of it in a receptacle appropriate for that purpose. 
§ 322-5. Damage to trees and vegetation. 
The removal, cutting, defacing, or damaging of trees, shrubs, flowers orother vegetation is prohibited. 
§ 322-6. Damage to property. 
The cutting, breaking, removal, defacing, or other ill use of any structure,fences, or sign is prohibited. 
§ 322-7. Construction activities. 
The cutting of trails, the erection of signs, or the construction of dams,shelters, bridges, handrails, towers, or other structures is not permittedwithout written permission from the Conservation Commission. 
§ 322-8. Commercial activities. 
The use of conservation land for commercial activities is not permittedwithout written permission from the Conservation Commission. 

47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:153 
§ 322-9. Camping.48 
Permission for overnight camping may be granted to adults or groups having an adult leader(s) present at all times. Camping shall require priorwritten permission from the Conservation Commission or its designee. All open fires shall require a permit obtained from the Conservation Commission and the Fire Department. All persons camping must notify theChief of Police of both the exact dates of occupancy and the identity of all persons present. 
§ 322-10. Hunting, trapping and fishing. 
Hunting, trapping, and fishing are not permitted. 
§ 322-11. Noise; disturbing the peace. 
Loud noise or other disturbance of the peace is not permitted. 
§ 322-12. Carry-in, carry-out; removal of trash. 
Bring out what you bring in. All trash or other materials shall be removed from the premises upon leaving. Littering or dumping of garbage or othermaterials is prohibited. 
§ 322-13. Open fires. 
Fires are not permitted without written permission of the ConservationCommission and Fire Department. 
§ 322-14. Overnight parking. 
Parking overnight is not permitted without written permission from theConservation Commission. 
§ 322-15. Violations and penalties. 
Violations of these regulations shall be punished by fines of $100 for afirst offense, $200 for a second offense and $300 for a third or subsequentoffense. 
§ 322-16. Amendments. 
These regulations may be changed by the Conservation Commission fromtime to time. 

48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:154 
ARTICLE II 

Facility Use Regulations
[Adopted 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-20849 (Ch. 1302 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

The Facility Use Request Form is available from the Town offices and on the Town website: www.greenfield-ma.gov. 
§ 322-17. Requirements and restrictions. 
Parks and recreation facilities of the Town of Greenfield shall be used by a user in accordance with the following policies and procedures: 
A. 	Reservations must be made with the Recreation Department, with anoutline of event plans, no later than two weeks prior to the proposed use of facility. 
B. 	The applicant hereby assumes responsibility and liability for any andall injury or damage to the person or property of the user or others connected therewith, whether business or personal invitees, and further shall indemnify and hold the Town of Greenfield harmless fromany and all claims, awards or attorneys’ fees in the event of any such injury or damage. 
C. 	The applicant will abide by all county, Town and other ordinances, rulesof the Board of Health, Police and Fire Departments regarding public assemblies. 
D. 	In the event the user wishes to provide amplified music, the music shallbe at a volume that cannot be heard beyond the park boundaries and shall not be used before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. 
E. 	The restrooms will be locked at 8:00 p.m. (where available). Additionalcharges may apply for use of temporary facilities at Energy Park if additional cleaning is necessary. 
F. 	No glass bottles or containers are allowed on Town park/recreationalfacilities. 
G. 	The user shall be responsible for its own clean up immediately followingthe event; the user must leave the area in the same condition in which it was found. 
(1) 	The user will remove any and all streamers, balloons, ribbon, tape,posters, signs, etc. from pavilion and picnic tables. Only bluepainter's tape is permitted for hanging decorations. 
49.Editor's Note: Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, GeneralProvisions, Art. I). 
1:155 
(2) 	In the event that the Town must clean up the area following theevent, the user shall be charged that expense. The Director of Recreation will determine "same condition," and the Director's decision is final. 
H. 	A refundable damage deposit of $50 must be paid with the application. The deposit shall be returned in full following the event, providedthat the park/recreational facility was left as set forth in Subsection Gabove. 
I. 	Special events attracting more than 75 people may necessitate having apolice officer(s) on duty, at the expense of the user, to assist with trafficcontrol and parking, at the discretion of the Director of Recreation. 
J. 	Additional stipulations may be set forth by the Town in the permitapplication. 
§ 322-18. Limitations on Town liability; insurance required forsports organizations. 
A. 	The user assumes full responsibility for any damages to Town of Greenfield property and/or equipment that occur as a result of the requested use. Furthermore, the user understands that the Town ofGreenfield, its staff, and members of the Recreation Department willnot be held liable for any injury or damage which may occur to the user, his/her guests, and/or members of the organization named in theapplication and/or property during the requested use of the property. 
B. 	Sport groups and organizations not sponsored by the Recreation Department must provide a certificate of insurance, naming the Townof Greenfield, its agents, servants and employees as additional insured,evidencing the following: certificate of general liability insurance with per-occurrence and aggregate limits of not less than $1,000,000. 
§ 322-19. Revocation of permit. 
A permit may be revoked at any time by the Director of Recreation, Mayor, or members of the Town of Greenfield Police Department for violation of theabove or any other park, Town or state ordinance. 
§ 322-20. Cleaning fees. 
A minimum additional fee of $50 will be assessed for cleaning that isrequired due to failure of the reserving party to thoroughly police and cleanareas after use. This fee will be itemized and billed to the reserving party once the duration of the facility reservation is completed. In addition tocleaning charges, the security/damage deposit will not be returned. 
§ 322-21. General facility and swim area rules. 
A. 	Alcoholic beverages are not allowed on premises. 
1:156 

B. 	Smoking is prohibited on the beach and within 30 feet of the playground. 
C. 	Pets are not allowed in the swimming and recreation area June 1 through November 1. 
D. 	Coast-Guard-approved flotation devices only. 
E. 	Glass containers are prohibited on the beach area. 
F. 	Children should be watched carefully; lifeguards cannot babysit. 
G. 	Bicycles are not allowed in the waterfront areas; use the rack provided near the bath-house. 
H. 	Fishing in or near the swimming area is prohibited. 
I. 	Keep the waterfront and park areas clean; throw trash in containers. 
J. 	Throwing sand, stones, mud or sticks is not allowed. 
K. 	Motorized vehicles are not allowed on the beach, bridge or picnic areas. 
L. 	Loitering around or in guard chairs, restrooms, the guardroom or concession stand is prohibited. 
M. 	Due to shallow depth, diving or jumping off of the bridge and walls areprohibited. 
N. 	Walk in all waterfront areas. 
O. 	Climbing, playing, or swimming around the dam and bridge is prohibited. 
P. 	Rough play, running, splashing, shoving or dunking is not permitted. 
Q. 	Balls and throwing objects may be used in the athletic fields only. 
R. 	Parking is only allowed in designated parking areas. 
S. 	Nonswimmers must have a competent adult swimmer in the water withthem and no further than one arm's length away. 
§ 322-22. Supervision guidelines. 
A. 	A minimum of one person per 25 participants per area shall be assignedby a user for purposes of supervision. 
B. 	Youth groups shall have a designated coordinator, with a ratio of not less than one chaperone per 10 youth ages eight and older; not lessthan one chaperone per six children under age eight. 
C. 	Chaperones must be with the youth at all times, including but not limited to the beach, playground, restroom areas, parking lots, etc. 
1:157 

Recreation Department staff, including lifeguards, are not responsiblefor supervision of visiting groups, individuals or children in the park. 
D. 	Lifeguards must be notified before youth groups enter the water; waterevents must be scheduled with the Recreation Department in advance,and group chaperones must supervise groups. Per state law, camps must provide certified lifeguards. 
E. 	It is the group supervisor’s responsibility to prevent disruptive or disrespectful behavior, vandalism and excessive noise, and to remove those causing disturbances or contact police to have offenders removed. 
F. 	Groups must leave the area in the same condition in which it was found. Groups are encouraged to bring their own trash bags. 
G. 	Children are never to be left alone at any park. 
§ 322-23. Energy Park rules. 
A. 	All animals must be leashed at all times. Pet owners are responsible forcleaning up after pets. 
B. 	Skateboarding is not allowed in the park, on the stage or stairs or in the parking lot. 
C. 	All food vendors, distributors, and special events must obtain permits. 
D. 	Smoking is prohibited in the park. 
E. 	Gas grills, charcoal grills and hibachis are prohibited. 
F. 	Limited parking is available in adjacent lot; other parking is availableon Miles Street, Main Street, and Hope Street. 
G. 	All signage for or during events must be approved by the EventsDirector. Posters are to be hung on the designated board in the parkand on the kiosk at the main entrance. The use of duct tape is prohibited on light posts, fences or the stage. Only blue painter's tapeis permitted. 
H. 	All other park and supervision rules apply. 
I. 	Public events can be posted on the Energy Park website and on theevents calendar which is printed at the beginning of the season. Thedetails and a brief explanation (include highlights) of events can be provided. All additional advertising is the responsibility of the organizers. 
1:158 

Chapter 328 
PAWNBROKERS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 282. 	Denial or revocation of licenses for nonpayment of taxes — See Ch. 288, Art. I. 
§ 328-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PAWNBROKER — Any person, corporation or other legal entity engaged inthe business of lending money secured by taking possession of personal property, with the right to sell the personal property if it is not redeemed.A person, corporation or other legal entity shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker whether the transaction takes the form of a loan the pawnbroker secured by the property, or a sale to the pawnbroker with theright to repurchase within a stated period of time. 
§ 328-2. Scope. 
This chapter shall not cover persons, corporations or other legal entitiesthat sell items covered by this chapter but purchase the same from dealers,manufacturers or wholesalers and do not purchase such items from the public nor to the provisions of MGL c. 140, §§ 76 and 86 to 112, inclusive. 
§ 328-3. Authority to issue and revoke licenses; fees; bond. 
The Board of License Commissioners may license suitable persons to carry on the business of pawnbrokers. The fee shall be $100. Each licensee shallfile a bond with the Board of License Commissioners in the sum of $300, with two sureties approved by the Board of License Commissioners. The Board of License Commissioners may revoke any license at its pleasure. 
§ 328-4. Retention of articles. 
All nonperishable articles deposited in pawn with a pawnbroker shall be kept at least four months after the date of deposit. All perishable articlesshall be kept at least one month after the date of deposit. The provisions ofMGL c. 140, § 71 shall apply to all items held beyond the above time periods. 
§ 328-5. Identification of persons pawning articles. 
Pawnbrokers shall photograph and thumbprint any person pawning articles,which shall be kept as part of the records of the pawnbroker. 
1:159 

§ 328-6. Inspection of books and articles. 
The Chief of Police or the Board of License Commissioners may at reasonable times enter a pawnbroker's premises and inspect his books andarticles taken into pawn. 
§ 328-7. Records. 
A. 	A pawnbroker shall keep a book when a loan is made that keeps alegible account and description of the articles pawned, the amount ofmoney loaned, the time of pawning, the rate of interest paid on the loan, and the name and residence of the person pawning any articles. 
B. 	Copies of such records shall be delivered to the Chief of Police eachweek, and said records shall be open to inspection by the Board of License Commissioners. 
C. 	A pawnbroker shall also deliver at no cost at the time of making a loan,a memorandum to the person pawning any articles. Said memorandum shall be signed by the pawnbroker and contain all of the information inSubsection A. 
Chapter 333 
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217.  Noise — See Ch. 311.  
Curfew — See Ch. 235.  Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385.  

1:160 

ARTICLE I 
Disorderly Behavior
[Adopted as amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-108 (Ch. 121,
Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 333-1. Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall behave in a disorderly manner, or use threatening languagein any public place, near any dwelling house or other building in the Town,on any sidewalk, upon any doorstep or other projection from any house or other building, and every person being or remaining as aforesaid whenordered by any constable or police officer, or by the owner or occupant ofsuch building, shall immediately and peacefully depart. 
1:161 

Chapter 337 
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 282. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 

Noise — See Ch. 311. 
§ 337-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Includes any person who has obtained a validcertificate of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
RESIDENCE — Includes every separate living unit occupied for residentialpurposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
SOLICITING — Includes any one or more of the following activities: 
A. 	Seeking to sell or offering to sell by sample, list, catalog or otherwise for future delivery, or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase ofgoods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, characteror description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or 
B. 	Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase ofinsurance of any type, kind, or publication; or 
C. 	Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious,political action, or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, orproject. 
§ 337-2. Certificate of registration required. 
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from personsin residences within this Town is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. Suchcertificate shall be carried by the solicitor. 
§ 337-3. Application for certificate. 
A. 	Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a formprovided by the Board of License Commissioners of the Town. Theapplicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, including: 
1:162 

(1) 	
Name and address of present place of residence of the applicantand business address. 

(2) 	
Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or associationwhom the applicant is employed by or represents. 

(3) 	
Purpose of solicitation. 

(4) 	
Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of thesoliciting in which the applicant will engage. 

(5) 	
Period of time for which the certificate is applied; in any event not to exceed the end of the calendar year, said time period to be at thediscretion of the Board of License Commissioners. 

(6) 	
Date, or approximate date, of latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any. 

(7) 	
Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under thischapter ever been revoked? 

(8) 	
Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of a felonyunder the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of theUnited States? 

(9) 	
Names of magazines, journals, or books. 


(10)Proposed method of operation. 
(11)Signature of the applicant. 
B. 	All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be made under the penalties of perjury. 
C. 	No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of thecommonwealth or any other state or federal law of the United States, nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose certificate ofregistration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as hereinprovided. 
D. 	All applications for a certificate of registration shall be made at least 21days before the desired date of initial soliciting. 
E. 	The Police Department shall keep a permanent record of all applicants and issuance of certificates of registration for soliciting. 
§ 337-4. Revocation of certificate; expiration date. 
A. 	Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the Board of License Commissioners if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter orhas made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise 
1:163 

becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registrationunder the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Board of License Commissioners to the holder of the certificate in person or by certifiedmail addressed to his or her residence as set forth in the application. 
B. 	Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
C. 	The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
§ 337-5. Residence notice preventing solicitation. 
A. 	Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter may comply with the following directions: 
(1) 	
Notice of the determination of the occupant of the refusal ofinvitation to solicitors, to any resident, may be given in the manner following: A weatherproof card or sign, approximately three inchesby four inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the mainentrance door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words as follows: NO SOLICITORS INVITED. 

(2) 	
The letters shall be at least one inch in height. 


B. 	A card or sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to anysolicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of theinformation contained thereon. 
§ 337-6. Duties of solicitors. 
A. 	It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises inthe municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is located, to first examine the notice provided for in this chapter, if any is attached,and to be governed by the statement contained on any notice. 
B. 	Upon reading the sign, the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart fromthe premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
§ 337-7. Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to go upon any premisesand ring the doorbell upon or near any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of suchresidence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupantthereof and engaging in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of§ 337-5 of this chapter. 
1:164 

§ 337-8. Fees. 
Upon approval by the Board of License Commissioners of the application for a certificate of registration, the applicant shall pay the Town a fee inthe amount determined by the Board of License Commissioners, exceptthat the Board of License Commissioners shall waive said fee for any charitable, religious, social, political action, or nonprofit group, including,but not limited to, veterans' groups, hospitals, the United Way, YMCA, andthe American Red Cross. In the event that any organization or group shall have more than one solicitor, the fee shall be per solicitor unless such fee iswaived by the Board of License Commissioners as provided above. 
§ 337-9. Time restrictions. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, whether registeredunder this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbellupon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose ofsecuring an audience with the occupant thereof, and engage in soliciting asherein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after dusk of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. 
§ 337-10. Badge permits to be displayed. 
The Town shall provide each solicitor with a badge-size permit for solicitation, which must be displayed conspicuously on the outer garment ofthe solicitor unless the Board of License Commissioners otherwise waives this requirement. The actual cost of such badge-size permit(s) shall be in addition to the cost of the license fee. 
§ 337-11. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates this chapter or the conditions of his/her permit may be arrested without a warrant in the place where the offense is committedpursuant to MGL c. 272, § 59. The penalty for such a violation of thischapter shall be a fine not to exceed $200, which may be recovered upon complaint before the District Court and shall inure to the Town, all in accordwith MGL c. 40, § 21. 
Chapter 346 
PUBLIC LANDS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 209, Art. I.  Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322.  
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217.  Smoking — See Ch. 364.  
Littering — See Ch. 293.  Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385.  

1:165 

§ 346-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PUBLIC LANDS — Any land and buildings thereon under the control of anydepartment, commission or committee of the Town of Greenfield, includingbut not limited to parks and playgrounds. 
§ 346-2. Hours of operation.50 
All posted public lands, with the exception of the Town Common, and conservation lands, which are regulated by Chapter 322, Article I, of the Town Code, shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00a.m., except as authorized by permit. No persons are allowed on publiclands during the hours which they are closed, and this prohibition against trespassing will be strictly enforced during said hours. 
§ 346-3. Littering. 
No littering of any kind shall be allowed on public lands. 
§ 346-4. Destruction of land. 
Any destruction, defacing, removing or damaging of any public lands or anypublic property of any nature is strictly prohibited. 
§ 346-5. Violations and penalties. 
A violation of this chapter relating to public lands will subject the offenderto arrest without a warrant in the place where the offense is committed pursuant to MGL c. 272, § 59, and a fine not to exceed $200 for eachoffense, which may be recovered upon complaint before the District Courtand shall inure to the Town, all in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21. 
Chapter 355 
SEWER USE 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Excavations — See Ch. 259. Water — See Ch. 415. 

Stormwater management — See Ch. 3831. Wells — See Ch. 419. 
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. Ch. 385. 

50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:166 ARTICLE I 
Purpose and Policy 
§ 355-1. Purpose. 
These regulations set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system (POTW)for the Town of Greenfield, Massachusetts, and enable the Town to complywith all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
§ 355-2. Objectives; applicability. 
A. 	The objectives of these regulations are: 
(1) 	
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipalwastewater system which will interfere with the operation of thesystem or contaminate the resulting sludge; 

(2) 	
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system,inadequately treated, into receiving water or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 

(3) 	
To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters andsludges from the system; and 

(4) 	
To prevent organic and hydraulic overloading of the Town's sewer system. 


B. 	These regulations provide for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through enforcementof general requirements for the other users, authorize monitoring andenforcement activities, require user reporting, assume that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provide for the settingof fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programestablished herein. 
C. 	These regulations shall apply to the Town of Greenfield and to personsoutside the Town who are, by contract or agreement with the Town,users of the Town POTW. 
1:167 

ARTICLE II 
Terminology 
§ 355-3. Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in these regulations, shall have the meanings hereinafterdesignated: 
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act (CWA)," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Environmental Protection Agency. 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
A. 	A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President, if theindustrial user is a corporation. 
B. 	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership orproprietorship, respectively. 
C. 	A duly authorized representative, as outlined at 40 CFR 403.12(l)(3), of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible forthe overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect dischargeoriginates. 
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilizedin the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratoryprocedure, five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight and concentration [milligrams per liter(mg/l)]. 
BOARD OF HEALTH — That duly appointed board of the Town of Greenfieldcharged with enforcing state and local health and sanitary regulations and the Massachusetts State Plumbing Code. It shall also include the authorizedagent or representative of said Board.51 
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system, which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other draindrainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the buildingsewer, beginning 10 feet (3.0 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the publicsewer or other place of disposal. 
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — Any regulation containing pollutantdischarge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through
471. 

51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:169 
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. COMPOSITE SAMPLE — 
A. 	SIMPLE COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A timed, sequential collection ofequal-volume grab samples collected in a single reservoir. 
B. 	FLOW-PROPORTIONED COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The collection of incremental samples with volumes proportional to flow. Influent and effluent operational data shall be obtained through twenty-four-hourflow-proportional composite samples. Sampling may be done manually or automatically, and discretely or continuously. For discrete sampling,at least 12 aliquots shall be composited. Discrete sampling may beflow-proportioned either by varying the time interval between each aliquot or the volume of each aliquot. All composites must be flow-proportional to each stream flow at time of collection of influent aliquotor to the total influent flow since the previous influent aliquot. Volatile pollutant aliquots must be combined in the laboratory immediatelybefore analysis. 
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Director of Public Works. 
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant addedis heat. 
DILUTION — The introduction or increase in use of potable, cooling, orprocess water into the process waste stream. Except where expresslyauthorized to do so by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any otherway attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute foradequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard. The control authority (as defined in this section) may impose masslimitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicablepretreatment standards or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewaterdirectly to the waters of the State of Massachusetts. 
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Greenfield or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
DPW or DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — That department established by vote of the Town on March 4, 1963, which has jurisdiction over sewerageworks and sewage disposal. 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency; or where appropriate, the term may alsobe used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorizedofficial of said agency. 
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale ofproduce. 
1:170 

GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a period of time notexceeding 15 minutes. Where composite sampling is to obtain influent and effluent operational data, collection of influent grab samples should precedecollection of effluent samples by approximately one detention period. Thedetention period is be based on a twenty-four-hour average daily flow value. The average daily flow used will be based upon the average of the dailyflows during the same month of the previous year. Grab samples will berequired, for example, where the parameters being evaluated are those such as cyanide and penology, which may not be held for any extendedperiod because of biological, chemical or physical interactions which takeplace after sample collection and affect the results.52 
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tanktrucks. 
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of anypollutants from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b) or
(c) and (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODES — 
A. 	SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Defined as: 
(1) 	
Any categorical industrial user (CIU). A categorical industrial useris any industry that must meet specific pretreatment standards thatspecify quantities or concentrations and are established by the EPA under authority of Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act. 

(2) 	
Any other industrial user which: 

(a) 	
Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (process wastewater excludes sanitary, noncontactcooling, and boiler blowdown wastewaters). 

(b) 	
Contributes a process water waste stream which makes up 5% or more of average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacityof the treatment plant. 

(c) 	
Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the Director, to adversely affect the POTW's operation or to violate a pretreatment standard or requirement. 




B. 	NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Small industries and some commercial users whose individual discharges do not significantlyimpact the treatment system, degrade receiving water quality, or contaminate sludge. Requires a permit for discharge to the POTW from the control authority. 

52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:171 
C. 	INSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industry that does notdischarge to the POTW or discharge any nondomestic wastewater. A "dry" process industry requires a permit for discharge to the POTWfrom the control authority. 
INDUSTRIAL USERS — Any discharger of pollutants into the POTW from a nondomestic source. 
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturingprocesses, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
INSPECTOR — The Local Plumbing Inspector or the State Inspector asdetermined in 248 CMR 3.05(1)(a), who is responsible for granting or denying permit applications and performing inspections of plumbing or gas fitting work. 
INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS/BUILDING COMMISSIONER — That agent forthe Mayor of the Town of Greenfield who is responsible for enforcing 780 CMR, the Massachusetts State Building Code, and the Town of Greenfield'sZoning Ordinance. 
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
A. 	Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, orits sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
B. 	Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW'sNPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or durationof a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to asthe "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, theToxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Defined in 40 CFR 403.3(j) asany regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPAin Section 307(b) and (c) of the CWA applicable to industrial users (IUs), including the general and specific prohibitions found in 40 CFR 403.5 andthe standards set forth in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405through 471. 
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authorityof 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
1:172 

NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake orother body of surface water or groundwater. 
NEW SOURCE — Any source, as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k), from whichthere is, or may be, a discharge of pollutants, construction of which beganafter the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards pursuant to Section 307(c) of the CWA, which will apply to the facility if the standardsare promulgated, provided certain location and construction criteria are met. 
OWNER — The person legally and lawfully possessing the land across whicha particular building sewer lays or will lay. 
PASS-THROUGH — The term used to define a discharge which exits the POTW into the receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which, aloneor in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, isa cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents orassigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shallinclude the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions ingrams per liter of solution. 
PLANNING BOARD — That Board fully appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield and responsible for the administration of Chapter 550, ArticleV, of the Town Code, Subdivision Regulations. 
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biologicalprocesses, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or proceduralrequirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food which have been shredded 
1:173 

to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flowconditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the Town. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not includepipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this regulation, "POTW" shall also includeany sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside theTown who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the Town's POTW. 
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties haveequal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, togetherwith such groundwater, surface water, and stormwaters as may be present,whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
SEWER MAIN — The principal pipe artery to which building sewers may beconnected. 
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — For the purposes of these regulations,an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets oneor more of the criteria set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii) and summarized as follows: 
A. 	Chronic violations. 
B. 	Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations. 
C. 	Any discharge violation which, alone or in combination with discharges,causes pass-through or interference. 
D. 	Any discharge which, alone or in combination with other discharges, causes imminent danger to human health or the environment. 
E. 	Ninety days late on a compliance schedule milestone in an enforcementorder or permit. 
1:174 

F. Thirty days late on required reports. 
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
H. Any other violation which the POTW considers to be significant. 
SLUG — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause aviolation of the prohibited discharge standards in Article IV of this chapter. 
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by theExecutive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget (current edition). 
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — A sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludessewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANIC POLLUTANT (TTO) — The sum of the masses or concentrations of specific toxic organic compounds found in the industrial user's process discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. Eachcategorical standard lists the specific toxic organic compounds that areto be included in the summation to define TTO for the category. For all noncategorical users, the TTO shall be determined by the summation of allorganic compounds set forth in Appendix B of 40 CFR 403. 
TOWN OF GREENFIELD — That corporate entity in the County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, acting by and through its Mayor andTown Council. 
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EnvironmentalProtection Agency under the provision of CWA § 307(a) or other acts. 
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Town's POTW or storm drain system. 
WASTEWATER — See "sewage." 
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which arecontained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
1:175 

The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
§ 355-4. Abbreviations.53 

ASTM  American Society for Testing and Materials  
BOD  Biochemical oxygen demand  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
COD  Chemical oxygen demand  
EPA  Environmental Protection Agency  
l  Liter  
mg  Milligrams  
mg/l  Milligrams per liter  
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works  
SIC  Standard Industrial Classification  
SWDA  Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.  
TSS  Total suspended solids  
TTO  Total toxic organics  
WEF  Water Environment Federation  


53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:176 ARTICLE III 
Building Sewers and Connections 
§ 355-5. Permits required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or open into, use, alter, disturb, introduce a new discharge or substantially changethe volume or character of pollutants currently discharged to any publicsanitary sewer, storm sewer, or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. 
§ 355-6. Types of permits. 
A. 	Building sewer and connection permit. There shall be two classes of building sewer connection permits. Application fees for both shall bereviewed periodically by the Director and set forth in the Policy onWater and Sewer Service and User Fees. 
(1) 	
Residential service: living units that contribute only domesticwastes to the POTW. Permit and inspection fees shall be payableto the Town of Greenfield. A permit application shall be made to the Town 30 days prior to the date of the proposed connection. Theapplication form is attached as Appendix A.54 

(2) 	
Nonresidential service: permit for all commercial and industrial services. Permit and inspection fees shall be payable to the Town ofGreenfield. A permit application shall be made to the Town 90 daysprior to the date of the proposed connection. The application form is attached as Appendix B.55 


B. 	Industrial discharge permit. All industrial discharges to the POTWshall apply for an industrial discharge permit as outlined in Article V, § 355-33B. The application form used is the same as Subsection A(2)above, and attached as Appendix B.56 Sections I and II of the form must be completed. 
C. 	DEP permit for sewer system extension or connection. Any personidentified in 314 CMR 7.00, MGL c. 21, § 27(12) and § 43, is required toobtain a permit from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 7.03. Information on how to obtain a permit application is attached as Appendix C.57 A permit application shall be submitted to the Town for approval prior to the owner forwarding the application to DEP for finalapproval. The applicant should submit this permit application to theTown at least 120 days prior to the date on which the owner desires to make a sewer system extension or connection to be constructed. 
54.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Town offices. 55.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices. 56.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices. 57.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town offices. 
1:177 
D. 	Excavation/Trench permit. In addition to the building sewer permit, theowner must obtain an excavation/trench permit from the DPW where subsurface work is to be done on public property, private property orwithin the public way. A copy of the form is attached as Appendix D.58 
E. 	Priority development sites. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the development of a priority development site (PDS), as defined by§ 200-2.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, requires one or more permits inaccordance with this § 355-6, application(s) therefor shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required by theTown Code, including the Zoning Ordinance, relating to the use ordevelopment of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by MGL c. 43D, and decision(s) thereon shall be rendered nolater than 180 days from said date of submission. 
§ 355-7. Installation of building sewers. 
Building sewers may be installed by the DPW or by the owner at the optionof the Director. In either case, a building sewer permit will be required andthe pipe and fittings, inclusive of the connecting fitting at the sewer main, shall be furnished by the owner. The DPW shall make the connection at themain sewer. In all cases, the owner shall excavate, backfill, and restore the site. 
§ 355-8. Expenses to be borne by owner; indemnification of Town. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection and use of thebuilding sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasionedby the installation, connection, and use of the sewer system. The ownershall further indemnify the Town from any loss or damage from sewer backups, overflows, or blockages. 
§ 355-9. Separate building sewers required. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on aninterior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed tothe rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear buildingand the whole considered as one building sewer. 
§ 355-10. Existing building sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings onlywhen they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet allrequirements of these regulations. 

58.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices. 
1:178 
§ 355-11. Installation requirements. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements ofthe building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of theASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Following are the basic requirements for building sewers: 
A. 	All single-family dwellings shall have a minimum six-inch-diameter building sewer. All dwellings of more than one family shall have a building sewer of a size acceptable to the Director. 
B. 	Polyvinylchloride pipe for residential building sewers shall be ClassSDC 35, ASTM D3034-81 with rubber-gasketed joints and sleeves. Other types of pipe may be used for building sewers with the approvalof the Director, who shall specify the type of joint and the strength classto be used. Commercial and industrial building sewers shall be Class SDC 31, polyvinylchloride or such other material as shall be requiredby the Director to handle safely the type of wastes to be transmitted. 
C. 	The minimum slope of a six-inch building sewer shall be 0.005 foot per foot or approximately 1/16 inch per foot. In cases where physicallimitations necessitate a flatter slope, the Director shall be consulted. 
D. 	All cellar drains shall be fitted with an accessible backflow prevention (commonly referred to as "backwater" or "flapper") valve to precludesewage from backflowing from a plugged main or building sewer intothe dwelling. 
E. 	The building sewer shall, in general, be laid in a straight line frombuilding drain to the sewer main. Should any changes in any directionbe required, the method to be used shall be as approved by the Director. 
F. 	The building sewer shall not be laid in the same trench with the waterservice. Sewers shall be laid in separate trenches not less than 10 feetapart horizontally and shall be separated by undisturbed earth. Should it be necessary, as determined by the Director, to lay the building sewerand the water service nearer than 10 feet apart horizontally, then themanner of such laying together, with materials to be used and vertical separation, shall be as specified by the Director. 
G. 	If the length of a building sewer is to exceed 200 feet, the owner shallinstall a sewer cleanout as required by the Director. If the length of the building sewer is to exceed 400 feet, a manhole shall be installed every200 feet on the service. 
H. 	When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitablecontrol manhole, together with such necessary meters, and other 
1:179 

appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordancewith plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed bythe owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
I. 	The minimum depth of cover above all building and sewer connectionsand lines shall be three feet from top of pipe to finished grade. 
§ 355-12. Gravity flow. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building atan elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewagecarried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means anddischarged to the building sewer. 
§ 355-13. Surface water and groundwater connections. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundationdrains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface water runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly to a public sanitary sewer. 
§ 355-14. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinionof the Director, such are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastescontaining grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not berequired for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shallbe of a type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Allrestaurants and institutional kitchen facilities with seating capacity greaterthan 25 seats shall install and properly maintain outside buried grease interceptors (traps) on the kitchen flow stream. The tanks shall provide aminimum of twenty-four-hour kitchen flow detention time, but in no case besmaller than 1,000 gallons. 
§ 355-15. Connection to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer or privatesewer main as specified in § 355-5 shall conform to the requirements of the Massachusetts State Plumbing Code and applicable rules and regulationsof the DPW. The DPW shall make all such connections. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director before installation. 
1:180 

§ 355-16. Inspection. 
The applicant for a building sewer permit who has laid the building sewer shall notify the Director when the building sewer is ready for inspection. Nobackfilling shall take place until the sewer service has been inspected. 
§ 355-17. Safety precautions. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guardedwith barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town. 
1:181 

ARTICLE IV 
Use of Public Sewers 
§ 355-18. Unpolluted water excluded. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary sewer any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, unpolluted industrial processwaters, or unpolluted water from hydraulically operated equipment. 
§ 355-19. Storm sewers. 
A. 	No polluted waters shall be discharged into the storm sewer. 
B. 	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to anatural outlet approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water orunpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. A discharge to a naturaloutlet may require a NPDES permit. 
§ 355-20. Monitoring. 
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform, at no costto the Town, such monitoring of their discharges as the Director and/or other duly authorized employees of the Town may reasonably require, including installation, use, and maintenance of sampling, monitoring andflow equipment, keeping records, and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Director. Such records shall be made available upon request by the Director to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters. 
§ 355-21. General discharge prohibitions. 
No user shall contribute or cause to contribute, directly or indirectly, anypollutant or wastewater which can harm the sewers, pass through thePOTW, interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,public property, or constitute a nuisance. These general prohibitions applyto all such users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or localpretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute thefollowing substances to any POTW. 
A. 	Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantityare, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with othersubstances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosionhazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any pointin the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Waste streams with a closed­
1:183 

B. 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. (using the test methodsspecified in 40 CFR 261.21) are also prohibited. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides. 
Any waters or wastes containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving watersof the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categoricalpretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. 
Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 9.0or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flowin a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage withparticles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, hops andbeans, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glassgrinding or polishing wastes. 
Any wastewater having a temperature higher than 60° F. (71° C.), or containing heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in thePOTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantitiesthat the temperature at the treatment plant exceeds 40° C. (104° F.). 
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances whichmay solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. 
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installationand operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the reviewand approval of the Director. 
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
Any wastes exerting an excessive chlorine demand. 
Local limits for certain parameters are as follows: 
1:184 

K. 
L. 
M. 
Maximum for AnyOne Day  Monthly Average ShallNot Exceed  
Parameter  (mg/l)  (mg/l)  
Cyanide, T  1.20  0.65  
Copper, T  3.38  2.07  
Silver, T  0.43  0.24  
Lead, T  0.69  0.40  
Cadmium, T  0.69  0.11  
Chromium, T  2.75  1.71  
Nickel, T  3.98  2.38  
Zinc  2.61  1.48  
Aluminum  2.00  1.00  
Barium  15.0  10.0  
Iron  25.0  20.0  
TTO  2.13  1.00  
Any waters  or  wastes containing phenols  or  other taste- or  odor- 

producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of thecomposite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, orother public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of suchhalf life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
Materials which exert or cause: 
(1) 	
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or ofdissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium, chloride andsodium sulfate). TSS concentrations of discharge shall not exceed 250 lbs./day. 

(2) 	
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes andvegetable tanning solutions). 

(3) 	
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirementsin such quantities as to cause or result in inhibition, interference,or pass through at the POTW. BOD of discharge shall not exceed 250 lbs./day. 

(4) 	
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting"slugs" as defined herein, which a user knows or has reason to 


1:185 

know will cause or result in inhibition, interference, or passthrough at the POTW. 
N. 	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable totreatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,or which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES or the receiving water quality standards. 
O. 	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singlyor by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into thesewers for maintenance and repair. 
P. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use ordisposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
Q. 	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a publicnuisance. 
R. 	Any medical wastes such as, but not limited to, the following: hypodermic needles, examination gloves, viable cultures, tissue, swabs,used gauze, etc., that, in the opinion of the Director, are not suitable fordisposal into the POTW. 
§ 355-22. Acceptance of harmful or potentially harmful wastes. 
A. 	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 355-21 of this article,and which in the judgment of the Director may have a deleterious effectupon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance,the Director may: 
(1) 	
Reject the wastes; 

(2) 	
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge tothe public sewers; 

(3) 	
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 

(4) 	
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatingthe wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges underthe provisions of § 355-24 of this article. 

1:186 


B. 	
If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 


§ 355-23. Flow equalization. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided forany waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactoryand effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
§ 355-24. Special agreements. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing anyspecial agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character maybe accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor bythe industrial user. No such agreement or arrangement shall violate any applicable pretreatment standards which includes categorical standards,prohibitions, and local limits. For clarity, it is noted that the TSS and BODlimits cited in Article IV, § 355-21M(1) and (3) are not defined as local limits, but operational limits. 
§ 355-25. Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
The national categorical pretreatment standards, located in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporatedinto these regulations. Upon the promulgation of the federal categoricalpretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under these regulations for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede thelimitations imposed under these regulations. All categorical industrial users are subject to the reporting requirements outlined in 40 CFR 403.12. 
§ 355-26. State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations orthose in these regulations. 
§ 355-27. Right of revision. 
The Town reserves the right to establish by regulation more stringentlimitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposalsystem if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Article I of these regulations. 
§ 355-28. Excessive discharges. 
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for 
1:187 

adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations containedin the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Town or state. 
§ 355-29. Accidental discharges. 
A. 	Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by these regulations. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibitedmaterials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operatingprocedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Townfor review, and shall be approved by the Town before construction of the facility. No industrial user who commences contribution to thePOTW after the effective date of these regulations shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Town. Review and approval ofsuch plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrialuser from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. In the case of an accidentaldischarge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephoneand notify the Director of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, andcorrective actions. 
B. 	Within five days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the Director a detailed written report describing thecause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user toprevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may beincurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any otherdamage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposedunder Article IX or other applicable law. 
C. 	A notice shall be permanently posted on each industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call inthe event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that allemployees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
§ 355-30. Analysis of waters and wastes. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this regulation shall be determined inaccordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments,and shall be performed on processed water only unless directed otherwise by the Director. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily acceptedmethods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and todetermine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular 
1:188 

analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour compositeof all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspendedsolids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. 
§ 355-31. Trucked or hauled wastes. 
The discharge of hauled or trucked pollutants, except at points which thePOTW designates, is prohibited. No septic tank contents shall be discharged into the public sewer system, except at the manhole at the water pollutioncontrol treatment plant so designated by the Director for such purpose. Afee set annually by the Director will be charged to all septage haulers. The fee will be based on vehicle capacity, whether full or not. In addition, anyhauler disposing of septage at the plant must hold a valid "septic transportlicense" from the Board of Health. Only septic and grease interceptor tank contents from the Town of Greenfield shall be allowed. The Director reserves the right to reject, suspend, or place a limit on the volume ofmaterial accepted at the water pollution control plant. 
1:189 

ARTICLE V 
Industrial Pretreatment Regulations 
§ 355-32. Industrial dischargers. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a permit to any natural outlet within the Town of Greenfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction of saidTown, and/or to the POTW, any wastewater except as authorized by theDirector in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
§ 355-33. Industrial discharge permits. 
A. 	General. All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute tothe POTW shall obtain an industrial discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing industrial users connectedor contributing to the POTW shall obtain a permit within 180 days afterthe effective date of these regulations. 
B. 	Permit application. Users required to obtain an industrial dischargepermit shall complete and file with the Town an application in the formprescribed by the Town. Existing users shall apply for an industrial discharge permit within 90 days after the effective date of theseregulations, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days priorto connecting to or contributing to the POTW; provided, however, that where an industrial discharge permit is required in connection withthe development of a priority development site (PDS), as defined by§ 200-2.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, an application therefor shall be submitted in accordance with § 355-6E, above. The permit is entitled"industrial discharge permit." Both Sections I and II must be completed.A copy of the application is attached as Appendix E.59 
C. 	The Town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may requireadditional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the datafurnished, the Town may issue a wastewater contribution permit, subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
§ 355-34. Permit modifications. 
Within 90 days of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the industrial discharge permit of users subject to such standardsshall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for an industrial discharge permit as required by § 355-33A ofthis article, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categoricalpretreatment standard, including the information required by § 355-35Athrough J. 

59.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Town offices. 
1:191 
§ 355-35. Permit conditions. 
Industrial discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other applicable regulations, user charges andfees established by the Town. Permits may contain the following: 
A. 	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
B. 	Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
C. 	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
D. 	Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for testsand reporting schedule. 
E. 	Compliance schedules. 
F. 	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
G. 	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating towastewater discharge as specified by the Town for a minimum of three years and affording Town access thereto. 
H. 	Requirements for resampling; when sampling by an industrial userindicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user must also resample andsubmit results of this resampling to the POTW within 30 days ofbecoming aware of the violation. 
I. 	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
J. 	Requirements for notification of discharge of hazardous wastes. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(p), all industrial users must notify thePOTW, state, and EPA, in writing, of any discharge which would beconsidered a hazardous waste, if disposed of in a different manner. 
§ 355-36. Permit duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance aminimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Town during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements asidentified in Article IV are modified or other just cause exists. The user shallbe informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permitshall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
1:192 

§ 355-37. Permit transfer. 
Industrial discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned,transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a newor changed operation without the approval of the Town. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
§ 355-38. Reporting requirements. 
A. 	Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for finalcompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standardsand requirements shall submit to the Director a report indicating thenature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards andrequirements and the average and maximum daily flow for theseprocess units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on aconsistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified by a qualified professional. 
B. 	Periodic compliance reports. 
(1) 	
Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source,after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submitto the Director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by theDirector, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows. At thediscretion of the Director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., theDirector may agree to alter the months during which the abovereports are to be submitted. 

(2) 	
The Director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required bySubsection B(1) shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated bypretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, 


1:193 

including the flow and the nature and concentration, or productionand mass where requested by the Director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard.All analysis shall be performed in accordance with proceduresestablished by the Administrator of the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, and amendments thereto, or with any other tests procedures approvedby the Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the Administrator. 
§ 355-39. Monitoring facilities. 
A. 	The Town shall require monitoring facilities to be provided and operated at the user's own expense to allow inspection, sampling,and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainagesystems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Town may, when such a location would beimpractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to beconstructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
B. 	There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facilityto allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measurement equipment shall be maintained atall times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
C. 	Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling andmonitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Town'srequirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 daysfollowing written notification by the Town. 
§ 355-40. Inspection and sampling. 
The Town shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of these regulations are being met and all requirements arebeing complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allot the Town or its representatives readyaccess at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposesof inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The Town shall have the right to copy any of the user'srecords that pertain to waste generated, stored, disposed of or discharged,including the quantity and quality of said wastes. The Town, approval authority, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's propertysuch devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliancemonitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearancebefore entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangementswith its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, 
1:194 

personnel from the Town, approval authority, and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
§ 355-41. Pretreatment. 
Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with these regulations and shall achieve compliance with all federalcategorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specifiedby the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Town shall be provided, operated,and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Town for review, and shall be acceptable to the Town before constructionof the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will inno way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Town under theprovisions of these regulations. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Town prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
§ 355-42. Publication of noncompliant users. 
A. 	The Town shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper published in Town a list of the users which were in significantnoncompliance with pretreatment requirements or standards duringthe 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months. 
B. 	All records shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
§ 355-43. Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless theuser specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town that the release of such information would divulge information,processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secretsof the user. The request for confidentiality must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested by the personfurnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose tradesecrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for usesrelated to these regulations, the National Pollutant Discharge EliminationSystem (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit, and/or the pretreatment programs and in judicial review or enforcement proceedings 
1:195 

involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents andcharacteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
§ 355-44. Enforcement. 
A. 	Harmful contributions. 
(1) 	
The Town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an industrial discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, inthe opinion of the Town, in order to stop an actual or threateneddischarge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, tothe environment, causes or may cause interference to the POTW ora violation of any condition of the Town's NPDES permit. 

(2) 	
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatmentservice and/or the industrial discharge permit shall immediatelystop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Townshall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediateseverance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The Townshall reinstate the wastewater service upon proof of the eliminationof noncompliant discharges. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Town within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 


B. 	Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions ofthese regulations, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having its permit revoked in accordance with the procedures ofArticle V of these regulations. 
(1) 	
Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 

(2) 	
Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, orwastewater constituents and characteristics; 

(3) 	
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purposeof inspection or monitoring; or 

(4) 	
Violation of conditions of the permit. 


C. 	Notification of violation. Whenever the Town finds that any user hasviolated or is violating these regulations, industrial discharge permit,or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the Town may serve upon such person a written notice stating the natureof the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for thesatisfactory correction of the violation shall be submitted to the Town by the user. 
1:196 

§ 355-45. Legal action. 
If any person violates a pretreatment standard or requirement, and/or discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the Town's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of these regulations,federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any orders of the Town, the Town Counsel may commence an action for appropriate legal and/orequitable relief in the Superior Court of Franklin County. 
1:197 

ARTICLE VI 
Protection from Damage 
§ 355-46. Prohibited acts. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Anyperson violating this provision shall be subject to appropriate legal action. 
1:199 

ARTICLE VII 
Power and Authority of Inspectors 
§ 355-47. Entry to private property. 
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this regulation. The Director or its representatives shall have authority toinquire into any processes having a bearing on the kind and source ofdischarge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
§ 355-48. Liability of Town. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in§ 355-47 above, the Director or duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by thecompany, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to theTown employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability claimsand demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against thecompany and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintainsafe conditions as required in Article III, § 355-11F. 
1:201 

ARTICLE VIII 
Charges and Billing Procedures 
§ 355-49. Connection and maintenance fees and services. 
A. 	Annually, the Director shall review and establish fees for the following: 
(1) 	
New sewer service. 

(2) 	
Repair of sewer service. 

(3) 	
Replacement of sewer service. 

(4) 	
Sewer services without operable access points. 

(5) 	
Routine service cleanings. 

(6) 	
Freeing a blocked service. 

(7) 	
Freeing a blocked public main. 

(8) 	
Inspection for leaks. 

(9) 	
All overtime work. 


(10)Miscellaneous service calls. 
B. 	The fees for the above will be set forth in the Policy on Water and SewerService and User Fees. 
§ 355-50. Annual sewer use charges. 
In addition to the charges listed in § 355-49 of this article, an annual feeshall be charged to every user of the municipal sewage works. The fee so charged shall be established by the Mayor and shall be such as to producerevenues commensurate with the estimated annual cost of operating andmaintaining all wastewater collection and treatment works. Each user fee so charged shall be calculated so as to reflect the user's fair share of theoperating costs based on the volume of the wastewater flows as determinedby the Director. The fee shall be reviewed annually and set forth in the Policy on Water and Sewer Service and User Fees. 
§ 355-51. Surcharges. 
All dischargers of wastes of unusual character or strength may be subject to a surcharge in addition to any other sewer charges. The amount ofthe surcharge shall reflect the additional cost incurred by the Town inrepair, maintenance, and operation of the sewage works for the transport, treatment, and disposal of such wastes. 
§ 355-52. Septage. 
The Town will receive septage at the water pollution control plant as set forth in Article IV, § 355-31. The fee for disposal of this waste shall be 
1:203 

reviewed annually and set forth in the Policy on Water and Sewer Serviceand User Fees. 
§ 355-53. Billing periods. 
Annual sewer use fees shall be billed semiannually. Surcharges shall bebilled monthly unless otherwise determined by the Director. 
§ 355-54. Payment. 
All charges shall be payable at the office of the Town Treasurer. 
1:204 

ARTICLE IX 
Enforcement and Remedies 
§ 355-55. Written notice of violation. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this regulation shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation.The offender shall permanently cease all violations. 
§ 355-56. Civil penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this regulation shall be liable tothe Town for a maximum civil penalty of $5,000 for each violation. Eachday in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
§ 355-57. Liability for costs and expenses. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this regulation shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town byreason of such violation. 
§ 355-58. Criminal prosecution. 
A. 	Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under theseregulations shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per day, per violation, or by imprisonment for not morethan six months, or by both. 
B. 	Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this regulation, a wastewater permit, or order issued hereunder, or anyother pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, beguilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000 per violation, per day, or by imprisonment for not more than sixmonths, or both. 
1:205 

ARTICLE X 
Appendixes 
§ 355-59. Listing of appendixes.60 
The following appendixes are on file in the Town offices: 
A. 	Appendix A, Application to the Town of Greenfield for a ResidentialService Building Sewer and Connection Permit. 
B. 	Appendix B, Application to the Town of Greenfield for a Nonresidential Service Building and Sewer Connection Permit. 
NOTE: This form is also used as the application for an industrial discharge permit. 
C. 	Appendix C, Information on how to apply to the Commonwealth ofMassachusetts DEP permit for sewer system extension or connection. 
(1) 	
The application must be completed by a registered professional engineer. 

(2) 	
The application must be reviewed and approved by the Town ofGreenfield before being submitted to DEP. 

(3) 	
Approval of this permit by the Town does not ensure approval ofthe permit by DEP. 


D. 	Appendix D, Town of Greenfield Excavation/Trench Permit. 
E. 	Appendix E, Industrial Discharge Permit. 

60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:207 
§ 355-59  GREENFIELD CODE  § 359-3  
Chapter 359  
SIGNS  
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Public lands — See Ch. 346.  Streets, sidewalks Ch. 385.  and  public places — See  

§ 359-1. License required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, set up, or keep upon or in front of any building or place of business any sign, signboard or inscription ofany kind (either temporary or permanent), any part of which shall projector extend into, upon, or over the limits of any sidewalk, street or highway, without a license from the Board of License Commissioners. 
§ 359-2. Applicability to outdoor advertising. 
This chapter shall apply exclusively to outdoor advertising within public view of any sidewalk, street, highway, public park or reservation or anyother public land. 
§ 359-3. Excluded signs and devices. 
This chapter shall not apply to signs or other devices controlled under theprovisions of MGL c. 85, §§ 1, 2, and 8, or any other statute, or any otherordinance of the Town of Greenfield, including the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Greenfield, or to any other devices on the rolling stock, stations orstructures of or used by common carriers. Advertising devices on bridges,viaducts or abutments thereof are prohibited. This chapter shall not apply to signs or other devices which advertise or indicate either the person, firm, orcorporation occupying the premises in question or the business transactedthereon, or which advertise the property itself or any parts thereof as "for sale" or "to let," "to rent" or "to lease" and shall contain no other advertising matter. 
Chapter 364 


SMOKING 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322. 	Board of Health tobacco regulations — SeeCh. 507, Art. I, Art. II and Art. III. 
Public lands — See Ch. 346. 
1:208 

ARTICLE I 
Public Buildings and Lands
[Adopted 1-19-2011 by Order No. FY 11-053 (Ch. 151 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 364-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the heath and safety of the residentsof Greenfield from secondhand smoke, particularly minor children andadults within certain areas designated for their use by said minor children, and public events and gatherings of the Town's inhabitants. 
§ 364-2. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BARRIER DEVICE — A fence, mulched bed, landscape timber or any otherdevice used to delineate a playground from surrounding land. 
BEACH — The sand bank located on the south side of the Green River from the footbridge going to the west upriver located at the swimming pool. 
GREENFIELD SWIMMING POOL — The recreation area owned by the Town of Greenfield located on Nash's Mills Road. 
MINOR CHILD — Any person not having attained the age of majority (18). 
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for the purpose of housing any employee or office of the Town ofGreenfield. 
MUNICIPAL LANDS — Any land or open space owned, leased, rented or otherwise under the control of the Town of Greenfield. 
PAVILION — The post-and-beam pavilion located at the Greenfield swimming pool. 
PLAY STRUCTURE — Any structure made for use by a minor child. 
PLAYGROUND — The area on which is located any play structure or devicemade for the sole use of any minor child, out to, and including, any barrier device. 
SMOKING — The lighting of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or tobacco product,hookah, marijuana, or any other substance inhaled into the body, or having possession of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product,hookah, marijuana, or any other substance. 
SPORTS FIELD — Any field owned, leased, rented, or otherwise in use by the municipality, delineated for use for a particular sports game, out to, andincluding, any barrier device. 
§ 364-3. Prohibited conduct. 
No person or persons shall smoke in any of the following areas: 
1:209 

A. 	Within any municipal building. 
B. 	Within 25 feet of any entrance to a municipal building. 
C. 	On or within 100 feet of any playground located on any municipal lands. 
D. 	On or within 100 feet of any sports field while in use by any person or persons. 
E. 	On or within 25 feet of the beach located at the Greenfield swimmingpool. 
F. 	Under or within 25 feet of the Greenfield swimming pool pavilion. 
G. 	Within the confines of any municipal lands while such municipal landsare being used for either: 
(1) 	
Any public event; or 

(2) 	
Within 100 feet of any gathering of people within the confines ofany municipal land. 


H. 	Within the boundaries of the area known as "Shattuck Park." 
§ 364-4. Posting of signs. 
The Town of Greenfield, through its Parks Maintenance Department, willpost signs conspicuously at each entrance of each municipal building and municipal lands to alert any person or persons using said building or landof the smoking restrictions thereon. 
§ 364-5. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Any person who violates this article by smoking where smoking isprohibited shall be subject to a written warning for a first offense. Anyperson who violates this article in a second or subsequent offense shall be subject to a civil fine of $150. Each day during which a violation ofthis article occurs shall be considered a separate violation. 
B. 	Fines assessed pursuant to this section shall be payable to the Town of Greenfield. The Police Department and/or Board of Health, through itsinspectors, shall enforce this article through noncriminal disposition. 
1:210 

ARTICLE II 
Veterans Mall 
[Adopted as amended 8-17-2011 by Order No. FY 12-006 (Ch. 182 ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 364-6. Definition. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SMOKING — The lighting of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or tobacco product, hookah, marijuana, or any other substance inhaled into the body, or havingpossession of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product,hookah, marijuana, or any other substance. 
§ 364-7. Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall smoke in the space known as "Veterans Mall," located infront of the Town Hall Annex at 253 Main Street in Greenfield, including the sidewalks and alleyway immediately bordering this area. 
§ 364-8. Posting of signs. 
The Trustees of the Soldiers Memorial for the Town of Greenfield shall post conspicuously a notice at each entrance indicating that smoking isprohibited in this area. 
§ 364-9. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Any person who violates this article by smoking where smoking isprohibited shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $25 for a firstoffense. Any person who violates this article in a second or subsequent offense shall be subject to a civil fine of $100. Each day during which aviolation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate violation. 
B. 	Fines assessed pursuant to this section shall be payable to the Town of Greenfield. The Police Department and/or Board of Health, through itsinspectors, shall enforce this article through noncriminal disposition. 
§ 364-10. Disposition of fines. 
The Town of Greenfield will establish a fund for the disposition of revenuesreceived from fines levied in accordance with the provisions of this article.Said fund shall be expended under the authority of the Mayor for the purpose of public education on the hazards posed by secondhand smoke,also known as "environmental tobacco smoke," or for the maintenance of the Veterans Mall area. 
1:211 

Chapter 368 
SOIL REMOVAL 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Excavations — See Ch. 259. Wetlands protection — See Ch. 423. 
Stormwater management — See Ch. 381. Site plans — See Ch. 550, Art. I. 
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. 

Ch. 385. 

§ 368-1. License required; additional requirements.61 
No person, firm, or corporation shall strip, sever, remove or convey awayany soil, loam, sand, or gravel from any land in the Town not in public use, unless and until such stripping, severance, removal or conveyance away isfirst authorized by a license issued by the Board of License Commissionersof Greenfield, except in conjunction with construction of a building on the parcel, or except in conjunction with the development, improvement,or landscaping of said land, or except for the continued operation of anexisting sand and gravel pit, or except soil, loam, sand or gravel which is to be removed in compliance with the requirements of a subdivision planapproved by the Planning Board. As a condition to obtaining said license,the Board of License Commissioners may require the erection of a fence or barrier around such area and the finished grading of the same. 
§ 368-2. Application for license. 
No such license shall be issued unless and until an application therefor has been filed with the Board. 
§ 368-3. Public hearing; notice. 
Said Board shall then hold a public hearing on the application, and notice of the filing of the application and the date and the time of the holding ofthe public hearing thereon shall be advertised, forthwith, at the expense ofthe applicant, in a newspaper published in the county, seven days, at least, before the meeting. 
§ 368-4. Removal from public lands.62 
No person(s) other than the Director of Public Works (or his/her agents or employees) in the performance of his/her duties shall remove any soil, loam,sand, or gravel from any public way or other Town property. 
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:212 
§ 368-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction in equity to compel compliance with this chapter. The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be asfollows: for the first offense, $50; for the second offense, $100; for each subsequent offense, $200. 
Chapter 372 
SOLID WASTE 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Littering — See Ch. 293. Hazardous materials — See Ch. 507, Art. V. 
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
1:213 

ARTICLE I 
Curbside Trash Collection 
§ 372-1. Curbside collection provided. 
The Greenfield Department of Public Works provides curbside collection of household trash from houses containing four or fewer housing units. Alltrash placed for curbside collection must be from the housing units it isplaced curbside in front of. 
§ 372-2. Containers and rates; placement. 
All trash placed curbside for collection must be in plastic bags no largerthan 33 gallons and tied so no spillage occurs. No bag shall weigh more than 30 pounds. Bags must be either Town-printed, purchased trash bagsor have the proper size trash sticker placed around the neck of the bag.Rates for bags and stickers are annually set by the Mayor. Curbside trash for collection shall be placed on the grass belt next to the roadway edge by
7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, in front of the property where the trash isgenerated, and should not block any ordinary pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
§ 372-3. Time of placement for collection. 
Bags must be placed curbside for collection between 7:00 p.m. on the daybefore collection and 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
§ 372-4. Use of rubbish barrels.63 
Rubbish barrels may be used; however, all contained trash should be inplastic bags no larger than 33 gallons and which must be easily removable from the barrels. Trash stickers must be on the bags within the barrels, noton the barrel itself. Trash barrels and/or other containers must not be outcurbside except from 7:00 p.m. on the day before collection to 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
§ 372-5. Order of pickup. 
Materials must be curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. The Town may vary the order in which routes are collected for efficiency and staffing reasons. 
§ 372-6. Residential collection only. 
No collection will be made from industrial or commercial establishments. 

63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:215 
§ 372-7. Containerizing wastes and ashes. 
Food scraps, feces, pet litter box wastes, and cold ashes should be contained in tied plastic bags which are then placed in plastic bags no larger than 33gallons and no heavier than 30 pounds. 
§ 372-8. Prohibited wastes. 
The following special wastes are not acceptable for inclusion in the plasticbags of this collection: 
A. 	Recyclable paper, cardboard, aluminum cans, steel/tin cans, glass containers, plastic containers, and waxed cardboard beveragecontainers. 
B. 	Items that cannot fit in a thirty-three-gallon bag.64 
C. 	Leaves and grass. 
D. 	Brush. 
E. 	Medical wastes. 
F. 	Paint, oil, and antifreeze. 
G. 	Furniture and appliances. 
H. 	Building demolition wastes: earth, brick, mortar, stone, concrete, plaster, sheet rock, wood, boards, doors, windows, plumbing fixtures,and other building components. 
I. 	Car parts. 
J. 	Chemical powders or liquids. 
K. 	Hazardous materials. (However, empty hazardous material containersmay be included in disposal bags.) 
L. 	Any explosives or gun cartridges. 
M. 	Pressure tanks. 
N. 	Metal items. 
O. 	Large sheets of glass. 
P. 	Monitors and televisions. 
§ 372-9. Disposal of broken glass sheets. 
Broken glass sheets can be included in bags for collection if they are completely contained and tied or taped in cardboard to prevent injury tocollection personnel. 

64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:216 
§ 372-10. Violations and penalties. 
Violations of these regulations may result in withdrawal of curbside collection of trash at any and all of the locations where the violator livesor which the violator owns, at the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works. 
§ 372-11. Regular collection schedule. 
The refuse collection schedule by areas is set forth on a map available fromthe Department of Public Works. The DPW reserves the right to change days of collection in order to improve efficiency and conserve fuel. 
§ 372-12. Holiday collection schedule. 
During the weeks in which there is a holiday, there will be the following schedule: 
A. 	Monday: Monday picked up on Tuesday, Tuesday picked up on Wednesday, Wednesday picked up on Thursday, and Thursday and Friday picked up on Friday. 
B. 	Tuesday: Monday picked up on Monday, Tuesday picked up on Wednesday, Wednesday picked up on Thursday, and Thursday and Friday picked up on Friday. 
C. 	Wednesday: Monday and Tuesday picked on their respective days.Wednesday picked up on Thursday, and Thursday and Friday picked up on Friday. 
D. 	Thursday: Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday picked up on their respective days, and Thursday and Friday picked up on Friday. 
E. 	Friday: Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday picked up on their respectivedays, Thursday and Friday picked up on Thursday. 
1:217 

ARTICLE II 
Leaf and Yard Waste 
§ 372-13. Disposal requirements. 
Yard waste shall not be set out with regular trash for collection. When funding allows, the DPW offers curbside collection of leaves and grassclippings from October 15 through November 30 in compostable paperbags. Another alternative is to bring yard waste to the transfer station at the designated delivery area. Yard waste must be in compostable paper bags ormust be emptied from containers and/or plastic bags by the person makingthe deliveries to the transfer station. 
§ 372-14. Plastic bagging prohibited. 
No plastic bags specified for yard waste are accepted at the curbside orthe transfer station. This includes any plastic bag even if it states that it is compostable. 
§ 372-15. Waste accepted at transfer station. 
Leaves, grass clippings, and brush are accepted at the transfer station from residential locations within the limits of Greenfield. 
§ 372-16. Yard waste to be organic. 
Yard waste delivered to the designated location of the transfer station will be free of all nonorganic materials or contaminants, such as litter, refuse,and debris. 
§ 372-17. Brush, hedge trimmings and sticks. 
Brush, hedge trimmings, and sticks must be delivered to the designateddelivery area. 
§ 372-18. Stumps and logs. 
Stumps and logs greater than eight inches in diameter will not be accepted. 
§ 372-19. Annual limit. 
Each residential location can bring up to 12 cubic yards of brush per calendar year. 
§ 372-20. Covering of loads. 
All loads of leaves, grass clippings, or brush shall be covered and secured. 
§ 372-21. Violations and penalties. 
Failure of any individual to meet the requirements of these regulations willresult in loss of the privilege of use of the transfer station. 
1:219 

§ 372-22. Inspection authorized. 
Attendants at the transfer station shall have the authority to inspect any incoming materials for the purpose of ensuring that such materials arefree of unacceptable or nonbiodegradable items, and to reject any loadscontaining such materials. 
1:220 

ARTICLE III 
Recyclables Collection 
§ 372-23. Separation of recyclables required; disposal methods. 
All household owners receiving municipal refuse collection shall separate all recyclables from their other refuse. Recyclables must either be transported by the household owner to the Town transfer station or beplaced for collection in accordance with this article. 
§ 372-24. Preparation for collection; fee for recycling bin. 
A. 	All glass, tin/aluminum, plastics and aerosol cans must be placed in astandard fourteen-gallon recycling bin, which can be purchased from the Town for $4. Bins cannot contain loose plastic bags. Items in thebin do not need to be separated. Containers need to be rinsed but notwashed, and labels need not be removed. 
B. 	All paper products, including cardboard, must be placed in a paperbag or tied and left on the side of the bin or preferably in a separatefourteen-gallon recycling bin. Do not place paper in bin with glass, tin and plastic. 
§ 372-25. Container limits. 
Containers shall not exceed 30 gallons in capacity nor 30 pounds in weight when full. No round trash barrels may be used for recyclables. 
§ 372-26. Placement of containers. 
Containers shall be placed on the grass belt next to the roadway edge before 7:00 a.m. on the day of recyclables collection. 
§ 372-27. List of materials; collection schedule. 
Recyclables materials and collection schedules shall be periodically defined by the Mayor. Recyclable materials may include the following: 
A. 	Newspapers, junk mail, magazines, paperbacks, boxboard, clean pizzaboxes, wrapping paper and shredded paper sealed in a paper bag; cardboard and corrugated cardboard that is flattened. 
B. 	Glass bottles and jars rinsed of residuals. Labels need not be removed. No window glass, mirrors, light bulbs, Pyrex® or ceramics. 
C. 	Tin cans and aluminum cans, lids, foil and dishes. Containers should be rinsed and free of residuals. Labels need not be removed. No paintcans, pressured cans or cans with residual materials remaining. 
1:221 

§ 372-28. Applicability of refuse collection regulations. 
All applicable Town regulations for refuse collection shall apply to recyclables collection. 
§ 372-29. Violations and penalties. 
Any household owner who fails to separate all recyclable materials designated by the Mayor or otherwise violates any of the provisions of theserecyclables collection regulations may be punished by a fine of $50 for eachday that the offense occurs and may be excluded from any future collections of refuse from that same household. 
§ 372-30. Ownership of recyclables. 
All recyclables placed in the Town transfer station or on the curbside shall be the property of the Town. Any other party collecting recyclables placedunder the provisions of this regulation shall be in violation of this regulationand may be punished by a fine of $50 for each location and for each incident that the offense occurs. 
1:222 

ARTICLE IV 
Transfer Station 
§ 372-31. Hours of operation. 
Hours of operation of the transfer station will be set by the Mayor and available from the DPW or Town website. The Town reserves the right tochange hours to increase efficiency and decrease the cost of operation. Thestation is closed on Sundays, Mondays and all legal holidays. 
§ 372-32. Authority of attendants. 
The Department of Public Works attendants are in control of the transferstation operation and are authorized to report all violators of these regulations and all persons who fail to obey their instructions. 
§ 372-33. Loss of privilege.65 
Those persons failing to follow regulations and instructions of the attendants shall forfeit their privilege to use the transfer station for up toone year after the occurrence of the violation. 
§ 372-34. Deliveries. 
Deliveries to the transfer station are to be in compliance with the materialsand pricing guide set forth by the DPW and approved by the Mayor. Copiesare available from the DPW and are on the Town website. 
§ 372-35. List of disposal items and prices. 
The Mayor shall maintain and periodically update a list of acceptable disposal items, with corresponding prices. 
§ 372-36. Covering of materials. 
All materials delivered must be completely covered and secured. 
§ 372-37. Salvaging restricted. 
No salvaging of materials is allowed except for specified items placed indesignated area and by written permission from the Director. 
§ 372-38. Limited admittance to building. 
No persons other than employees are allowed into the transfer stationbuilding unless special approval is granted. 

65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:223 
§ 372-39. Smoking and flames prohibited. 
No smoking, open fires, or burning is permitted within the transfer station site. 
§ 372-40. Firearms prohibited. 
No use of firearms is permitted. 
§ 372-41. Disposal outside of site prohibited. 
Disposal of any waste material outside of the fence or on the roadways isstrictly prohibited. 
§ 372-42. Enforcement. 
Violators of any of these regulations will be prosecuted. 
1:224 

Chapter 377 
STORAGE TANKS, UNDERGROUND 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Excavations — See Ch. 259. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
§ 377-1. Authority. 
The Town of Greenfield adopts the following measures under its home rule powers, its police powers to protect the public health and welfare, and itsauthority under MGL c. 40, § 21, Powers and Duties of Cities and Towns,Town Ordinances. 
§ 377-2. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the public health and safety of theresidents of Greenfield and to protect their surface water and groundwater supplies by ensuring that discharges of petroleum products which maycontaminate the environment and present health risks do not occur, andthat, if they do, timely notice of such discharge is achieved and remedial action pursued. 
§ 377-3. Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this chapter: 
ABANDONED — Being out of service for a period in excess of 12 months forheating oil tanks and six months for gasoline tanks. 
CONSUMPTIVE USE — Fuel oil used exclusively for area heating and/or theheating of domestic water on the premises where stored. 
DISCHARGE — The disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of any petroleum product or any constituent thereof onto or on any land or water so that such material may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
LEAK — Any uncontrolled movement, measurable by a testing methodaccurate to 0% gallons per hour or less, of any petroleum product out of a tank or its components, or any uncontrolled movement of water into a tankor its components. 
TANK — Any structure, either underground or above ground, used or designed to be used for the storage of any petroleum product. 
UNDERGROUND STORAGE — Where 10% or more of the tank volume and piping is buried below the ground surface, but not including storage in a 
1:225 

freestanding container within a building. Septic systems are not consideredto be underground storage under this chapter. 
§ 377-4. Registration and testing; fee. 
A. 	By January 1, 1994, all owners or users of underground storage tanksused exclusively for consumptive use found within the Water Supply Protection District, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, must registerthose tanks with the Fire Department. Even tanks no longer in use,but previously used for heating purposes, must be registered. The Fire Department will provide a form for the purposes of registration whichwill request the following information: 
(1) 	
Name and address of the tank owner. 

(2) 	
Address of the tank location. 

(3) 	
Size of tank. 

(4) 	
Type of tank construction. 

(5) 	
Age of tank and proof of date of installation. 

(6) 	
Location of tank on property. 

(7) 	
Location of any private well on property. 

(8) 	
Any tank permits. 

(9) 	
Tank testing history. 


(10)Name of present oil delivery company. 
(11)Other pertinent information as the Fire Department may request. 
B. 	There shall be a fee of $10 for registration. This registration shallbe in addition to any permits previously applied for. As of the date of passage of this chapter, any permit application for a consumptiveuse underground storage tank filed with the Fire Department shallserve as the registration form required in this section. The Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire SafetyCode, requires that the Fire Department be notified before the installation of any new underground storage tank and that no new or replacement tank or piping shall be buried or concealed until it hasbeen inspected and approved by the Fire Department. 
C. 	Upon registration, the Fire Department will provide the registrant with a "flag" with which to identify the tank as duly registered. This flag mustbe prominently displayed on the vent pipe. 
D. 	Owners of tanks for which evidence of the installation date is not available shall, at the order of the Fire Department, have such underground tank tested as per the following Subsection E. If the tankis not product tight, it shall be removed and disposed of under the 
1:226 

direction of the Fire Department. The provisions of this section shall bein addition to the provisions of the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations and the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code. 
E. 	All underground storage tanks and associated piping for consumptive use within the Water Supply Protection District, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, shall be subject to mandatory testing 15 years afterthe date of installation and annually thereafter according to the standards determined by the Greenfield Fire Department. All test results must be provided to the Fire Department within 14 days of thetest being administered. If evidence of the date of installation is notavailable, the Fire Department may order the testing of the tank. 
F. 	Nothing in this section shall be construed to replace or supersede thetesting requirements of the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations andthe Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code. 
G. 	If any owner fails or refuses to complete a required test within sixmonths, the Fire Department shall require the immediate removal ofthe tank. 
§ 377-5. Abandonment; removal of tanks and piping. 
A. 	All tanks not regulated by the Massachusetts Comprehensive FireSafety Code shall be regulated as follows: 
(1) 	
To abandon a tank which is located under a building and cannotbe removed from the ground without first removing the building,the owner shall promptly notify the Fire Department, and, subject to the directions of the Fire Department, shall have all materialsremoved from the tank, the tank purged, and the tank filled with cement, as prescribed by the authority, within 90 days of abandonment. If the tank is located adjacent to a building, thetank owner may obtain a certified, stamped report by a structuralengineer. If that report confirms that to remove the tank would impair the structure, the Fire Department may grant permission forthe tank to be rendered inert in place. In this case, the tank mustbe emptied, purged, and filled with cement, as prescribed by the Fire Department. 

(2) 	
Except as provided in Subsection A(1) above, no tank may beabandoned in place. Underground storage tanks used for heating oil which are out of service for a period in excess of 12 monthsshall be considered abandoned, and the tank shall be emptied,purged, and removed under the direction of the Fire Department. The tank must be emptied, purged, and removed within 90 days ofabandonment. The product and the tank shall be disposed of at theowner's expense as directed by the Fire Department. 


1:227 

B. 	Before any tank or its piping is removed from underground, the FireDepartment must issue a permit, and a representative of the Fire Department must be on site during the removal. 
C. 	All tanks and piping which are removed must be properly disposed of ina facility approved by the Fire Department. 
§ 377-6. Defects. 
All leaking tanks or associated pipes must be emptied and purged within12 hours of detection of the leak and removed within 90 days. The tank and its pipes must be removed as per § 377-5 above and the Board of FirePrevention Regulations, Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code. Apermit for the tank and pipe removal must first be obtained from the Fire Department, and a representative of the Fire Department must be on sitewhen the tank and piping are removed. There may be a fee for this permit. 
§ 377-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	All persons having knowledge of any discharge of petroleum productfrom an underground storage tank or its piping shall report thedischarge to the Fire Department within two hours of the discovery of the discharge. The Fire Department shall alert the Board of Health ofthe discharge. 
B. 	The Fire Department, or its agents, may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing its duties under this chapter. 
C. 	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishedby a fine of up to $300. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. If more than one,each condition shall constitute a separate offense. Upon the requestof the Fire Department, the Mayor or his/her designee shall take such legal action as is necessary to enforce this chapter.66 
§ 377-8. Responsibility for costs. 
In every case, the owner of the tank and piping shall assume responsibility for costs incurred necessary to comply with this chapter. The owner shall beresponsible for all costs of recovering and properly disposing of any productthat has leaked and for all costs of restoring the environment, including groundwater and surface water, to an acceptable condition. 

66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:228 
Chapter 381 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Drainage — See Ch. 248. 	Conservation Commission regulations — See Ch. 515. 
Sewer use — See Ch. 355. Site plans — See Ch. 550, Art. I. 
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 423. Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. 
1:229 

ARTICLE I 
Purpose and Policy 
§ 381-1. Compliance required. 
Under authority of the General Laws, Acts of the State Legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the following rules and regulations shallbe part of the contract with every person using the stormwater systemof the Town of Greenfield, and every person applying for a stormwater connection permit. 
§ 381-2. Purpose. 
The purpose of the Town's stormwater regulations is to ensure high water quality standards and address any potential water quantity problems associated with development and to: 
A. 	Preserve hydrologic conditions that closely resemble pre-development conditions. 
B. 	Prevent flooding by managing the peak discharge and volume of runoff. 
C. 	Reduce the amount of suspended solids and other pollutants in order to maintain water quality. 
§ 381-3. Interpretation. 
The Director, or his/her duly appointed designee, shall make the final interpretation of these regulations whenever unforeseen situations arisewhich are not clearly covered, or when further interpretation of the intentof the regulations is required. 
1:231 

ARTICLE II 
Terminology 
§ 381-4. Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this regulation, shall have the meanings hereinafterdesignated: 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — For the purposes of stormwater management, structural, nonstructural, and managerialtechniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical meansto prevent or reduce non-point source pollutants from entering receiving waters. 
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Greenfield Conservation Commission appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield and charged with the administration of the Wetlands Protection Act. 
DPW (DENOTING THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS) — That department established by vote of the Town on March 4, 1963, which has jurisdiction over the municipal stormwater system. 
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Impermeable surfaces, such as pavement or rooftop,which prevent the infiltration of water into the soil. 
INFILTRATION — The entry of water (from precipitation, irrigation, orrunoff) into the soil. 
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
OWNER — The person legally and lawfully possessing the land across which a particular stormwater management system will lay. 
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum instantaneous rate of flow during astorm, usually in reference to a specific design storm event. 
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmentalentity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shallinclude the plural where indicated by the context. 
PLANNING BOARD — The Greenfield Planning Board, fully appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield and with the administration of Chapter550, Article V, of the Town Code, Subdivision Regulations. 
RECHARGE — Water that infiltrates to an aquifer, usually from above. 
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT — Development, rehabilitation, expansion onpreviously developed sites, provided that redevelopment results in no netincrease in impervious area and no net increase in the peak discharge for a ten-year twenty-four-hour storm. 
1:233 

SITE PLAN APPROVAL — Required under the Greenfield Zoning Ordinancefor the creation, expansion, substantial alteration, or change of use of the following uses: all uses requiring a special permit; any businesscommercial, industrial, or institutional use (except home occupations notrequiring a special permit); any residential use of two or more units, including subdivision; any site containing more than one principal use.67 
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — A sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS — Management standards toprotect water bodies from the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — A conveyance system for the capture, treatment and discharge of stormwater. 
SUPERINTENDENT — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Greenfield or authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
TEN-YEAR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR EVENT — Precipitation from a storm thathas a predicted statistical frequency of occurring once every 10 years over atwenty-four-hour period. This storm has a ten-percent chance of happening in any one given year. 
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — Matter suspended in water or stormwater; when water is filtered for laboratory analysis, TSS are retained by the filter, dissolved solids pass through. 
TOWN — The town known as the "Town of Greenfield"; that corporate entityin the County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, acting by and through its Mayor and Town Council, who are also the Board of PublicWorks. 
TWO-YEAR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR EVENT — Precipitation from a storm that has a predicted statistical frequency of occurring once every two yearsover a twenty-four-hour period. This storm has a fifty-percent chance ofhappening in any one given year. 
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
WETLANDS — Tidal and nontidal areas characterized by saturated or nearly saturated soils most of the year that are located between terrestrialand aquatic environments; includes freshwater marshes around ponds,rivers and streams, brackish and salt marshes; common names include "marshes," "swamps" and "bogs." 
WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT — The Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. Under the provisions of the Act, no person may remove, fill, dredge, or alter certain resource areas without first filing a 

67.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 550, Art. I, Site Plans. 
1:234 
notice of intent and obtaining an order of conditions. The Act requiresthat the order contain conditions to preserve and promote the protection of public and private water supply and groundwater supply, flood control,storm damage protection, the prevention of pollution and the protection offisheries, land containing shellfish, and wildlife habitat. 
1:235 

ARTICLE III 
Connections 
§ 381-5. Permit required. 
A. 	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter, disturb, introduce a new discharge or increasethe volume currently discharged to any public way, stormwater sewer,or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written stormwater connection permit from the DPW. 
B. 	Any connections to the stormwater system owned or maintained by theMassachusetts Department of Transportation (MDOT) will require its approval. 
§ 381-6. Application for permit. 
Each applicant for a stormwater connection permit must be made at the office of the Department of Public Works on forms provided for that purpose. 
§ 381-7. Classes of permit applications; fees; additional approvalsrequired. 
A. 	There shall be two classes of stormwater connection permitapplications: 
(1) 	
Residential. This includes all single-and two-family individualdwelling units, not including subdivisions. The permit and application fee shall be $25, payable to the Town of Greenfield. 

(2) 	
Nonresidential. This includes all multifamily dwellings,subdivisions, commercial, industrial and institutional uses. The permit and application fee shall be $100, payable to the Town of Greenfield. 


B. 	The application form shall be signed by the owner of the property orby his authorized representative. Fees are nonrefundable. Applications may be transferred to a new owner with permission of the DPW. 
C. 	In addition to the stormwater connection permit, the owner must obtainan excavation permit (street opening permit) from the DPW where subsurface work is to be done on public property or within the public way. 
D. 	Contact DIG SAFE 1-888-344-7233 for utility notification. 
§ 381-8. Time frame for application submittal. 
A. 	Applications for residential stormwater connection permits must besubmitted to the Department of Public Works at least 10 working days prior to the proposed connection date. 
1:237 

B. 	Applications for nonresidential stormwater connection permits requirethe submittal of a stormwater management plan. Applications shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works at the same time as thesubmittal of the site plan application, if site plan approval is required,or 30 working days prior to the proposed connection date if site plan approval is not required. 
§ 381-9. Stormwater management plans. 
Two copies of a stormwater management plan shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works for all nonresidential stormwater connectionpermits. The applicant may request and the Superintendent may grant awaiver from any information requirements the Superintendent judges to be unnecessary to review of a particular plan. 
A. 	Computations. Pre-and post-development drainage calculations shallbe completed for a two-year and a ten-year twenty-four-hour storm event. The one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm event must beevaluated for downstream impacts (flooding). Peak discharge ratesmust be calculated using the point of discharge or the downgradient property boundary. Separate drainage calculations shall be submittedfor each point of discharge of flow from the site. Based on the particulars of each site, the DPW Engineering Superintendent will determine the appropriate methodology for developing drainage calculations. 
B. 	Existing site characteristics: 
(1) 	
Location of all property boundaries. 

(2) 	
Topographic survey showing the existing contours, including thearea necessary to determine downstream analysis for the proposed stormwater management system. 

(3) 	
Soils investigation, including borings and test pits, for areas whereconstruction of small ponds and infiltration practices will occur. 

(4) 	
Description of all watercourses, impoundments, and wetlands on oradjacent to the site or locations into which stormwater flows. 

(5) 	
Delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain and all wetlands, if applicable. 

(6) 	
Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwaterelevation (November to April) in areas to be used for stormwater retention, detention and infiltration structures. 


C. 	Proposed site alterations: 
(1) 	
Location of all existing and proposed buildings, other structures and impervious surfaces. 

(2) 	
Any proposed changes to the existing contours. 


1:238 

(3) 	
Location of all existing and proposed roads and utilities. 

(4) 	
Location of all existing and proposed stormwater management systems. 

(5) 	
Structural details of all components of the proposed stormwatermanagement system. Notes on the plan specifying materials to be used, construction specifications, and typicals. 

(6) 	
Location of erosion and sediment controls and details of types used. 

(7) 	
Timing schedule and sequence of development, including: land clearing, grubbing, and stripping, rough grading, construction,final grading and vegetative stabilization. 

(8) 	
Written inspection and maintenance plan of the stormwater management system to ensure that it functions as designed. Amaintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of all stormwater management systems and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shallperform the maintenance. 

(9) 	
Breakdown of the estimated construction costs of the stormwater management system. 


§ 381-10. Coordination with wetlands protection requirements.68 
The stormwater management plan shall be coordinated with any order of conditions from the Conservation Commission and requirements under theWetlands Protection Act. The provisions of this regulation do not supersedeany requirements from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the Conservation Commission. 
§ 381-11. Stormwater management standards. 
When one or more of these management standards cannot be met, theapplicant must demonstrate that an equivalent level of stormwater protection will be provided. 
A. 	The stormwater management system shall be designed so that the post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed the pre-developmentdischarge rates for a ten-year twenty-four-hour storm. 
B. 	Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized throughthe use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent practicable. Theannual recharge from the post-development site should approximate the annual recharge from the pre-development or existing site conditions based on soil types. 
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 423, Wetlands Protection; and Ch. 515, Art. I, ConservationCommission Rules and Regulations. 
1:239 
C. 	New development shall be designed to remove 80% of the averageannual load (post-development conditions) of total suspended solids (TSS). It is presumed that this is met when: 
(1) 	
Suitable nonstructural practices for source control and pollutionprevention are implemented. 

(2) 	
Stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) areused to capture the prescribed runoff volume. For details on BMPs,see the Massachusetts DEP's Stormwater Management, Vol. 1 & 2, March 1997. 

(3) 	
Stormwater management BMPs are maintained as designed. 


D. 	Redevelopment projects must meet these management standards to the maximum extent practicable. If it is not practicable to meet allthe minimum standards, the stormwater management systems shall bedesigned to improve existing conditions. 
E. 	Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent impactsduring construction or land disturbance activities. 
§ 381-12. Design criteria. 
A. 	Stormwater management systems are encouraged to be designed toincorporate the use of natural topography and land cover. The use ofsuch features as natural swales and depressions as they exist prior to development, to the degree that they can accommodate the additionalflow of water, are recommended. 
B. 	All stormwater management systems shall be designed to provide an emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures to provide anonerosive velocity of flow along its length and at any outfall. 
C. 	The applicant shall consider public safety in the design of a stormwater management system. The banks of detention, retention, and infiltrationbasins shall be sloped at a gentle grade into the water as a safeguardto personal safety, to encourage the growth of vegetation and to allow the alternative flooding and exposure of areas along the shore. Basinsshall be fenced or shall have a slope of 4:1 to a depth two feet belowthe control elevation. Side slopes must be stabilized and planted with vegetation to prevent erosion and provide pollution removal. The banksof detention and retention areas shall be designed with sinuous ratherthan straight shorelines, so that the length of the shoreline is maximized and offering more space for the growth of vegetation. 
§ 381-13. Expenses to be borne by owner; indemnification of Town. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection, use, and maintenance of the stormwater system shall be borne by the owner. Theowner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection, use, and 
1:240 

maintenance of the stormwater system. The owner shall further indemnifythe Town from any loss or damage from stormwater backups, overflows, or blockages. 
§ 381-14. Installation requirements. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a stormwater management system, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing ofthe pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to therequirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works. 
§ 381-15. Site inspections and approval. 
The DPW shall perform the following inspections and shall, in writing, either approve it or notify the applicant in what respects there has been a failureto comply with the requirements of the approved stormwater managementplan. The applicant shall promptly correct any portion of the work that does not comply with the approved plan. 
A. 	Initial site inspection: prior to approval of any stormwater managementplan. 
B. 	Erosion control inspection: after commencement of construction; toensure erosion control practices are in compliance with the approvedplan. 
C. 	Construction inspection: prior to backfilling any underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures. 
D. 	Final inspection: when all work, including construction of the stormwater management system, has been completed and the applicanthas submitted as-built plans. The Superintendent will providecertification of completion. 
§ 381-16. Maintenance agreements; recording of agreement andplan. 
A. 	Prior to issuance of any stormwater permit for which a stormwater management plan is required, the applicant will be required to executean inspection and maintenance agreement with the Town binding onall subsequent owners of land served by the private stormwater management system. Such agreement shall provide for access to the stormwater management system at reasonable times for regularinspections by the Superintendent to ensure that the system is maintained and is in proper working condition to meet the performancestandards and any provision established. 
B. 	The inspection and maintenance agreement and the stormwater management plan shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner inthe land records of the Franklin County Registry of Deeds prior to theissuance of a stormwater permit. 
1:241 

§ 381-17. Maintenance responsibility. 
The owner(s) of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this regulation for a private stormwater management system, or any otherperson or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good conditionand promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams, structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and otherprotective devices. Repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be done inaccordance with an approved stormwater management plan. 
§ 381-18. Performance bonds. 
The Director may require from the developer a surety or cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the Town as reviewed by its attorney, prior to the issuance of a stormwaterpermit. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimatedconstruction cost of the stormwater management system. The bond so required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture forfailure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater managementplan, compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shall not befully released without a final inspection of the completed work by theDPW representative, submission of "as-built" plans, and certification of completion by the DPW of the stormwater management system as being incompliance with the approved plan. 
1:242 

ARTICLE IV 
Protection from Damage 
§ 381-19. Prohibited acts. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, tamper, deface, or connect with any structure,appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the stormwater system. Anyperson violating this provision shall be subject to appropriate legal action. 
1:243 

ARTICLE V 
Power and Authority of Inspectors 
§ 381-20. Right of entry. 
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter allproperties for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this regulation. The Superintendent or its representatives shall haveauthority to inquire into any processes having a bearing on the kind andsource of discharge to the stormwater management system. 
§ 381-21. Liability of Town. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in§ 381-20 above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises establishedby the owner, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death tothe Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability claimsand demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against theowner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safeconditions. 
1:245 

ARTICLE VI 
Enforcement and Remedies 
§ 381-22. Notice of violation. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this regulation shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation.The offender shall permanently cease all violations. 
§ 381-23. Civil penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this regulation, including lackof compliance with a maintenance plan on file at the Registry of Deeds,shall be liable to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of $5,000 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall bedeemed a separate offense. 
§ 381-24. Liability for costs and expenses. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this regulation shall becomeliable to the Town for any expenses incurred by the Town, including coststo make repairs to the privately owned stormwater system, administrative costs, and any loss or damage occasioned the Town by reason of suchviolation. 
1:247 

Chapter 385 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Excavations — See Ch. 259. Signs — See Ch. 359. Public lands — See Ch. 346. 
1:248 

ARTICLE I 

Awnings
[Adopted as amended 1-18-2012 by Order No. FY 12-065 (Ch. 25 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-1. License required; term. 
No person, firm, or corporation owning, leasing, or controlling real propertyshall allow awnings to be placed on said real property which project overthe public streets, highways or sidewalks of the Town unless licensed to do so by the Board of License Commissioners. All such licenses shall expire onDecember 31 of each year. 
§ 385-2. Application for license. 
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Board of LicenseCommissioners on forms provided and shall set forth the name and place ofbusiness of the applicant and such other information as the Board of License Commissioners and the State Building Code shall require. 
§ 385-3. Location; manner of attaching; additional attachmentsprohibited. 
Every such awning shall be safely and securely attached to the building andso located and constructed as to not interfere with pedestrians, the lowestpart of said awning to be at least seven feet above the sidewalk, and no part thereof to extend beyond the outer line of the sidewalk. No additionalsignage or banners may be attached to any awning. 
§ 385-4. Conformity with sign requirements; approval required. 
All awnings shall conform to signage requirements of the Town of Greenfield ordinances,69 Greenfield Zoning Ordinance, and approval of the Building Inspector. 
§ 385-5. Indemnification of Town; liability insurance. 
A. 	Licensees issued a license or licenses for awnings shall, as part ofthe condition for the issuance or renewal of such license(s), agree to indemnify and save harmless the Town against any and all damages,costs, expenses, or compensation which it may sustain or be requiredto pay, by reason of damages or injuries caused by said awnings. 
B. 	Licensees issued a license or licenses for awnings shall, as part of thecondition for the issuance or renewal of said license(s), provide liabilityinsurance covering bodily injury and property damage in an amount to be determined by the Board of License Commissioners. In all cases, theTown of Greenfield must be listed as an additional insured. 

69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 359, Signs. 
1:249 
ARTICLE II 
Handbill Distribution 
[Adopted 3-4-1889 and 4-1-1889 (Ch. 76 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-6. Placement on vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall put or place, or cause to be put or placed, any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, advertisements or other papers or articles of any kindin or upon any vehicle parked in any public place in the Town. 
1:251 

ARTICLE III 
Visual Obstructions at Intersections 
[Adopted as amended 5-16-2012 by Order No. FY 12-141 (Ch. 80 ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 385-7. Sight obstructions prohibited. 
No person owning, possessing, or having under his/her control any realestate abutting any intersection of streets in any section of the Town shallerect, place, plant or permit or suffer the erection, placing, or planting or maintenance of anything in such a manner that it shall materially impedethe vision of operators of motor vehicles between a height of 2 1/2 feet and10 feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of said real estate and a line joining points 30feet along said street lines from the point of intersection of said street line. 
1:253 

ARTICLE IV 
Disturbing Protective Equipment
[Adopted as amended 8-17-2011 by Order No. FY 12-003 (Ch. 138,
Art. I, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-8. Prohibited acts. 
No person shall, except as authorized or required by law, remove, alterthe position of, deface or disturb in any manner any barrier, sign, manholecover, or grating placed or installed in or on any street, sidewalk, or public place within the Town in the interest of safety or necessity. 
§ 385-9. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates this article may be arrested without a warrant in the place where the offense is committed pursuant to MGL c. 272, § 59. Thepenalty for such a violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed $200,which may be recovered upon complaint before the District Court and shall inure to the Town, all in accord with MGL c. 40, § 21. 
1:255 

ARTICLE V 
Street Names 
[Adopted 3-4-1889 and 4-1-1889 (Ch. 159, Art. I, of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 385-10. Continuation of current names; authority of Town. 
The several streets and highways in the Town of Greenfield shall continueto be called and known by the names by which they are now called andknown, until the same shall be altered by the Board of Selectmen; and the Selectmen may change or alter the name of any street, highway or publicplace, and they shall establish the names of all streets, highways and publicplaces hereafter laid out and accepted by the Town or any other authority. 
§ 385-11. Record of names; signage. 
The names of all streets in the Town shall be recorded in the records of the Town; and the Selectmen shall cause suitable signs containing the names of the streets to be erected at all intersections where they deem it necessary. 
1:257 

ARTICLE VI 
Street Numbering
[Adopted 3-6-191170 (Ch. 159, Art. II, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-12. Authority to number or renumber; records. 
The Building Inspector may order a street to be numbered or renumbered whenever he/she deems it necessary and shall keep a suitable record of allnumbering and renumbering. 
§ 385-13. Placement of number on building. 
The owner and occupant of every tenement and building shall cause to beplaced and maintained, on or near the outside doors fronting the street oron the front corners of every tenement or building having its entrance on the sides thereof, such number or numbers as may be assigned thereto bythe Building Inspector, said numbers or figures not to be less than threeinches in height, and so placed as to be easily observed from the street in front of the premises. 
70.Editor's Note: Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, GeneralProvisions, Art. I). 
1:259 
ARTICLE VII 
Obstruction of Sidewalks 
[Adopted 3-21-1984 (Ch. 159, Art. III, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-14. Loitering prohibited. 
No person shall stand or remain on any sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of persons thereon after a request to move on bya police officer. 
§ 385-15. Immediate arrest authorized. 
Any person who violates § 385-14 of this article may be arrested without awarrant in the place where the offense is committed pursuant to MGL c.272, § 59. 
§ 385-16. Violations and penalties. 
The penalty for violation of § 385-14 of this article shall be a fine not toexceed $100 for each offense, which may be recovered upon complaint before the District Court and inure to the Town, all in accordance with MGL 
c. 40, § 20. 
1:261 

ARTICLE VIII 
Placing Obstructions in Streets
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985; amended
6-17-2003 (Ch. 159, Art. V, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-17. Permit required. 
No person, unless he is the holder of a permit issued by the Board ofSelectmen and except in accordance with the terms and conditions of suchpermit, shall place an obstruction in any street on any sidewalk within the Town and allow it to remain there, or allow shrubbery to overhangsidewalks so as to impede the free passage of pedestrians and snow removalequipment. 
§ 385-18. Prohibited placement of items. 
The Selectmen shall not allow any items, except for trash bags andrecyclables for municipal curbside collection meeting the provisions of Chapter 372, Solid Waste, of the Code of the Town of Greenfield, to beplaced within the property limits of any way owned, controlled or maintained by the Town, including in or on any sidewalk or tree belt. 
§ 385-19. Duty of owner to remove. 
The owner of any real estate abutting any way owned, controlled or maintained by the Town shall remove any items, except for trash bags and recyclables for municipal curbside collection meeting the provisions ofChapter 372, Solid Waste, of the Code of the Town of Greenfield, which areplaced within the property limits of said way, including in or on any sidewalk or tree belt, within 24 hours of the placement of said items. 
§ 385-20. Violations and penalties. 
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50 for each violation, with each day being considered aseparate violation. 
1:263 

ARTICLE IX 
Private Maintenance of Structures 
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985 (Ch. 159, Art. VI, ofthe 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 385-21. Duty of owner; nonliability of Town. 
Every owner of real estate hereinafter maintaining any cellar, vault, coalhole, or other excavation under the part of the street or sidewalk which isadjacent to the part of his real estate, and every person maintaining a post, pole, or other structure in a street or sidewalk, or a wire, pipe, conduit, orother structure under a street or sidewalk, shall do so on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the Town to keep the same and the covers thereof in good repair and condition at alltimes during his ownership and to indemnify and save harmless the Townagainst any and all damages, costs, expenses, or compensation which it may sustain or be required to pay, by reason of such excavation or constructionsbeing under or in the street or sidewalk, or being out of repair during hisownership, or by reason of any cover of the same being out or repair or unfastened during his ownership. 
1:265 

ARTICLE X 
Use of Sidewalks 
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985 (Ch. 159, Art. VII,of the 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 385-22. Bicycles, skates and other vehicles in commercialdistrict.71 
No person shall drive, draw or ride any bicycle, roller skates, street skates,skateboards, or other vehicles (except children's hand carriages, two-wheeled shopping carts, battery-operated two-wheeled wheelchairs, andinvalid tricycles) over or upon any sidewalks adjoining and located in theCentral Commercial District as defined in the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance, § 200-4.7. 
§ 385-23. Bicycles on sidewalks. 
A person operating a bicycle on the sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and give an audible signal before overtaking and passing anypedestrian. 

71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:267 
ARTICLE XI 
Damage to Streets
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985 (Ch. 159, Art. VIII,
of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-24. Vehicular damage prohibited.72 
No person traveling on a street within the Town shall break or injure thesurface thereof by the use of brakes, chains, or other mechanism so appliedto the wheels of any vehicle under his control as to cause said wheels not to slide, slip, or coast on said way. 

72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:269 
ARTICLE XII 

Damage to Borders
[Adopted 7-17-1985, approved by AG 9-19-1985 (Ch. 159, Art. IX, of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-25. Damage by animals and vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously or negligently injure, or permit or suffer anyanimal or vehicle of any kind under his care to injure any grass borders orother ornamental borders upon the streets, parks or other public places in the Town. 
1:271 

ARTICLE XIII 
Snow and Ice Removal; Prohibited Discharges and Activities[Adopted as amended 5-15-1996, approved by AG 8-6-1996 (Ch.159, Art. X, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 385-26. Responsibility for removal from sidewalks abutting Town property. 
The Selectmen shall cause snow and ice to be removed from the sidewalks abutting all Town property. 
§ 385-27. Responsibilities of owners of property abutting sidewalks.[Amended 7-15-2015 by Order No. FY 16-015] 
The owner of any real estate abutting any Town way where there is a sidewalk shall, within 24 hours after the ceasing to fall or form or theaccumulation from any other cause of any snow, ice or sleet upon saidsidewalk, cause the same to be removed therefrom, for four feet up to the full width of the sidewalk and including abutting curb cuts/ramps; and ifthe same cannot be wholly removed shall sprinkle thereon sand or othersubstance so that such sidewalks shall be safe for travel. 
§ 385-28. Violations and penalties. 
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine notexceeding $10 for the first offense, $25 for the second offense and for the third and subsequent offenses, $100 for each separate offense in any onecalendar year. 
§ 385-29. Discharge of water prohibited. 
No person shall permit water from eaves or leader pipes of any buildingowned or cared for by him to be discharged upon the sidewalk; and noperson, between the hours of 8:00 in the morning and 10:00 in the evening, shall wash or allow to be washed any windows, walls, steps or floors of abuilding owned or cared for by him in such a manner as to unnecessarilyincommode travel. 
§ 385-30. Wash water causing icy conditions prohibited. 
No person shall at any time wash or allow to be washed any windows, walls,steps, or floors of a building owned or cared for by him, if such washing is likely to cause ice upon the sidewalks. 
§ 385-31. Removal of vehicles impeding cleanup efforts; costs ofstorage to be borne by owner.73 
The Director of Public Works may, for the purpose of removing or plowingsnow, or removing ice from any way, remove or cause to be removed to some 

73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:273 
convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle which interfereswith such work. In the event of the removal of any vehicle in accordance with the terms hereof, the actual cost of removing said vehicle and anystorage or garage charges that may be incurred as a result thereof may beenforced by the Town in any manner provided by law for the collection of a debt based upon contract. 
§ 385-32. Throwing of snow onto public ways prohibited. 
No person shall throw or put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or ice from any privately owned property into any street, land or alley in the Town. 
§ 385-33. Throwing of snow against fire hydrants and catch basinsprohibited. 
No person shall throw or put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or iceor any other substance upon or against any fire hydrant or catch basin inany street, lane, alley or park in the Town. 
§ 385-34. Throwing snowballs prohibited. 
No person shall throw snowballs or other missiles at moving vehicles in thepublic ways of the Town. 
§ 385-35. Approval required for sledding or coasting on public ways. 
No person shall course, coast or slide upon any sled, board, or other contrivance upon any sidewalk, footwalk, street or highway in the Townwithout the approval of the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 385-36. Removal of snow and ice around fire hydrants. 
The owner or persons occupying any real estate abutting upon any Townor public way where there is a fire hydrant shall, within 24 hours after theceasing to fall or form, or the accumulation from any other cause, of any snow or ice surrounding said fire hydrant, cause the same to be removed toa width of two feet around said fire hydrant, except that there shall be keptclear a direct path at least two feet wide to the open Town or public way for access by the Fire Department. 
1:274 

ARTICLE XIV 

Sidewalk Outdoor Seating
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-1-2003 (Ch. 370 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 385-37. License required; term. 
Any eating establishment that would like to provide outdoor seating on thepublic sidewalks in downtown Greenfield shall obtain a sidewalk outdoorseating license from the Licensing Authority. The license for sidewalk outdoor seating shall be good only for a time period beginning April 1 untilOctober 31 of the year of issue and is nontransferable. 
§ 385-38. Submittal requirements. 
A. 	Completed and signed application. 
B. 	Application fee. 
C. 	A site plan drawn to scale providing the following information: 
(1) 	
Location of all proposed outdoor seating areas and the relationshipof the seating to the business, the building entrance, and adjacentbusinesses. 

(2) 	
Location of all trees, tree grates, planters, public benches, trashreceptacles, fire hydrants, utility and/or light poles, parking meters, bicycle racks, basement entrances, handicap ramps, driveways, mailboxes, and newspaper boxes. 

(3) 	
Details on sidewalks and indicating any bricked sidewalk sectionsand bump outs where applicable. 


D. 	Details indicating day and evening hours the street furniture will belocated on the sidewalk. 
E. 	Specifications on the design of all proposed outdoor furniture, including size, color, number, style or type. Color photos and/or manufacturerspec sheets are recommended. 
§ 385-39. Use restrictions. 
A. 	No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on sidewalk outdoor seating. 
B. 	Outdoor seating must be located on a sidewalk that maintains a continuous and clear six-foot-wide pedestrian travel area of the sidewalk at all times. 
C. 	Outdoor seating must be located directly in front of the permit holder's business space. 
1:275 

D. 	Seating must not obstruct visibility of the public way to pedestrians orto motor vehicles. 
E. 	No seating shall be placed within the area of any handicap ramps,driveways or doorways. 
F. 	Umbrellas associated with outdoor tables must provide a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet above the sidewalk and must maintain a continuous and clear six-foot-wide pedestrian travel area of the sidewalk at all times. 
G. 	Outdoor seating must be attractive and made of safe, sturdy anddurable materials that will handle outdoor conditions. 
H. 	Outdoor seating must be secured so as not to be moved by the wind. However, tables, seats shall not be bolted into the ground or secured tothe streetlights, trees or other street furniture. 
I. 	No advertising shall be displayed or printed on any outdoor furniture or umbrellas. 
J. 	Outdoor seating must be removed from the sidewalk and put awayafter business hours, unless otherwise agreed upon by the Licensing Authority. 
K. 	The permit holder is responsible for picking up all litter associated withthe outdoor seating and shall maintain the area in a clean condition at all times. 
L. 	Applicants requiring a vendor cart license must receive that licensefrom the Licensing Authority prior to receiving a sidewalk outdoor seating license. 
§ 385-40. Liability; insurance requirements. 
The permit holder shall indemnify, defend and hold the Town of Greenfield, its agents, officers, attorneys, employees and officials harmless from anyand all claims, causes of action, injuries or damages arising out of anynegligent acts on the part of the permit holder, its agents, officers, employees or anyone rendering services on their behalf. This indemnityshall include all reasonable costs and attorney's fees incurred in defendingany action covered by this provision. 
A. 	The permit holder, during the continuance of this permit and at nocost to the Town, shall maintain a comprehensive liability policy inthe amount of $1,000,000 and, if applicable, a workers' compensation policy each with a minimum coverage of $100,000. 
B. 	Said policy shall include the Town of Greenfield as additional insuredand shall apply as primary insurance and shall stipulate that no other insurance effected by the Town of Greenfield will be called on to contribute to a loss. 
1:276 

C. 	Prior to issuance of a permit, the permit holder shall furnish to theTown a certificate of insurance, duly authenticated, evidencing maintenance of the insurance required under this permit. 
D. 	If the insurance policy is canceled, terminated, suspended or materiallychanged, the outdoor seating license shall be suspended until such time as compliance with the requirements of this section has been fullysatisfied.74 

74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:277 
ARTICLE XV 

Street Openings
[Adopted as amended 5-16-2012 by Order No. FY 12-146 (Ch. 662 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 385-41. License required; conditions. 
No person, except the Director of Public Works in the performance of usualduties, or, in cases of emergency, shall break or dig up or cause to bebroken or dug up the pavement or ground in any public street, or any sidewalk or common in the Town, or erect or cause to be erected anybuilding or any staging for building, or other structure thereof, or place orcause to be placed any materials, rubbish, goods, wares, or merchandise or other articles or substance thereon, without first obtaining from theDepartment of Public Works or Licensing Commission a written permitor license delineating the space in the street or other public place that may be occupied and the time allowed for such occupancy, and such otherprovisions as it may deem best, and filing with the Director of Public Worksor Licensing Commission a written agreement to comply strictly with the terms of the permit or license and these regulations and to indemnifythe Town from all loss, cost or expense that it may suffer by reason ofsuch occupancy. Excavation/Trench permits, as well as ladder and staging permits, are reviewed and approved by the Department of Public Works.A license to occupy space in the street or other public space is reviewedand approved by the Licensing Commission. Where a written license, as aforesaid, is required in connection with the development of a prioritydevelopment site (PDS), as defined by § 200-2.1 of the Zoning Ordinance,an application therefor shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required by this Code, including the ZoningOrdinance, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by MGL c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered no later than 180 days from said date of submission. 
§ 385-42. Annual statement of proposed openings. 
All department heads, persons or corporations owning structures, poles,wires, conduits, pipes, etc., within the limits of the public way within theTown shall, on or before the 15th day of March of each year, file a statement with the Director of Public Works showing the work proposed to be done bythem requiring the opening of streets during the ensuing year. 
§ 385-43. Safety fences. 
Whenever any street, lane, alley or sidewalk or other public place in theTown shall, under any license granted, be dug up, obstructed, encumbered,or otherwise thereby be rendered unsafe or otherwise inconvenient for travel, the person licensed shall put up, and at all times keep up, a suitableand sufficient railing or fence around the section of the street, lane, alleyor other public place so obstructed, so long as the same shall be or remain 
1:279 

unsafe or inconvenient as aforesaid, and, if required by the Director, shallfit the safety fence with one or more portable lights/lanterns and have them lit every night from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise so longas such railing or fence shall be kept standing or the obstruction remains. 
§ 385-44. Repairs after licensed work. 
The contractor shall also, within such time as the Department of PublicWorks or Licensing Commission shall direct, repair such street, lane oralley, sidewalk or public place, to the acceptance of the Director of Public Works. 
§ 385-45. Notice to public utilities.75 
MGL c. 82, § 40A states that contractors making excavations in public way are required to give notice thereof to public utility companies. 
§ 385-46. Curb cuts. 
A. 	Anyone requiring a curb cut in an existing berm shall be required to obtain an access permit from the Department of Public Works.Application will be made at the Engineering Office of the DPW forprocessing. Where an access permit is required in connection with the development of a priority development site (PDS), as defined by§ 200-2.1 of the Zoning Ordinance, an application therefor shall besubmitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required by this Code, including the Zoning Ordinance, relating to the use ordevelopment of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by MGL c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered no later than 180 days from said date of submission. 
B. 	No curb cuts shall be allowed within 20 feet of an intersecting way, said20 feet being from the street line layout to the beginning of the curb cut, and all curb cuts shall be constructed with a minimum radius of five feet. The cost of the work shall be borne by the applicant and anyrelated work done by DPW shall be billed to the applicant, if applicable. If work is done by a contractor, all work shall be inspected by theDPW before completion. Notification to the DPW for inspection is theresponsibility of the contractor/owner. 
§ 385-47. Notice required prior to excavation. 
No person, other than a direct employee of a public utility company, asdefined in MGL c. 25, § 3, shall, except in an emergency, make an excavation in a public way unless at least 72 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays,and legal holidays, before the proposed excavation is to be made, he/shehas filed an excavation/trench permit with the Department of Public Works and has given notice in writing of the proposed excavation to such publicutility companies as supply gas, electricity, water or telephone service in the 

75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:280 
Town or city in which such way is located. Such notice shall set forth thename of the street, or route number of the way, and a reasonably accurate description of the location in which the excavation is to be made. 
A. 	Notice requirements for emergency excavations. If such notice be givenas aforesaid because of an emergency, it shall be given as soon as may be practicable. 
B. 	Filing of notices. Copies of such notices, together with a statementcertifying that they have been mailed or delivered to such public utility companies as provided by the preceding provisions of this article, shallbe filed with the officer or board having charge of any such public waybefore a permit to excavate may be approved or issued, except in case of an emergency. 
C. 	Excavations as part of government contracts. Where an excavation isto be made by a contractor as part of the work required by a contract with the commonwealth or with any political subdivision thereof orother public agency, for the construction, reconstruction, relocation orimprovement of a public way or for the installation of a railway track, conduit, sewer or water main, such contractor shall be deemed to have complied with the requirements of this article by giving one such noticesetting forth the location and the approximate time required to perform the work involved to the Department of Public Works and to each of saidcompanies. 
§ 385-48. Responsibilities of utilities. 
Proper return notice shall be made by said companies designating thelocation, if any, of pipes or conduits in that portion of the public way inwhich the excavation is to be made. 
§ 385-49. Prevention of damage to pipes and conduits. 
Any such excavation shall be performed in such manner, and such reasonable precautions shall be taken, as to avoid damage to the pipes or conduits in use under the surface of said way. 
§ 385-50. Effect on other provisions. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to affect or impair local ordinances requiring permits to be obtained before excavating in apublic way, except that, notwithstanding any contrary provision of localordinances, no permit to excavate in a public way shall be approved or issued by the officer or board having charge of any such way, except in anemergency, until such time as copies of notices to public utility companiesare filed by the applicant for a permit as required by this article. 
1:281 

§ 385-51. Violations and penalties. 
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200 for the first offense and not more than $500 for anysubsequent offense. 
§ 385-52. Excavation beyond center line of street. 
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the centerline of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the streettemporarily restored. 
§ 385-53. Limit on size of opening. 
No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in anystreet at any one time. 
§ 385-54. Exposure of utility facilities. 
All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently ahead of trench excavationwork to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation if necessary. 
§ 385-55. Disturbance of reference markers. 
A. 	Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or propertysubdivision, or a precise survey reference point or a permanent surveybenchmark shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission is first obtained from the Director of Public Works. 
B. 	Permission shall be granted only upon condition that the permittee shallpay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by a professional land surveyor. 
§ 385-56. Removal of excavated material from street. 
A. 	When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll, flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to beremoved from the street within eight hours after deposit. 
B. 	In the event the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the Director of Public Works shall cause such removal, and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee. 
§ 385-57. Access to private driveways. 
Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working hourswhen construction operations prohibit such access. 
1:282 

§ 385-58. Access to fire hydrants. 
Free access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants. 
§ 385-59. Permitted hours of operation.76 
Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the permittee obtains permission from the Director of Public Works to do the work at an earlier orlater time. Such permission shall be granted only in case of emergency. 
§ 385-60. Conditions of permit. 
A. 	In granting any permit, the Director of Public Works may attach suchother conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damageto public or private property to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a mannerlikely to create a nuisance. 
B. 	Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1) 	
Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may beperformed. 

(2) 	
Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment. 

(3) 	
Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported. 

(4) 	
The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials. 

(5) 	
Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of the streets, the prevention of noise, and other results offensive or injurious tothe neighborhood, the general public, or any portion thereof. 

(6) 	
Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work. 


§ 385-61. Furnishing of equipment. 
The contractor shall furnish all equipment necessary for opening,excavating, and backfilling. 
§ 385-62. Furnishing of labor. 
All labor and any material, exclusive of road patch, required shall befurnished by the contractor. 
§ 385-63. Initial cut.77 
The initial cutting of pavement shall be done in such a way that a straight,even cut is made. 
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:283 
§ 385-64. Cutting by DPW; responsibility for costs. 
If the Department of Public Works cuts the pavement, the contractor or owner will be billed for this work. 
§ 385-65. Tearing or ripping of pavement prohibited. 
Tearing or ripping of pavement will not be permitted. 
§ 385-66. Shoring required. 
Open excavations shall be shored or benched as required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor for protection of workers. 
§ 385-67. Use of original material for fill. 
After an excavation is made in any roadway, the trenches or opening may be filled with the original material to within 24 inches of the road surfaceunless otherwise ordered by the Director of Public Works. 
§ 385-68. Frozen material prohibited for backfill. 
If the work is done in cold weather, no frozen material shall be used for backfilling. 
§ 385-69. Use of graveled material. 
Graveled material conforming to MDOT Specification Section M1.03.0 TypeB shall be used to fill within one inch of the road surface. 
§ 385-70. Compacting of backfill. 
All backfill shall be thoroughly compacted in six-inch lifts by tamping,flooding, or vibratory means to reduce settling. 
§ 385-71. Temporary patch. 
A. 	After completion of all utility work, all edges shall be saw cut, andthe backfill shall be placed and mechanically compacted in six-inchlayers to within four inches of finished road surface. All backfill material shall be acceptable to the DPW representative. If unsuitable material isencountered, it shall be replaced with a gravel meeting the approval ofthe DPW. 
B. 	Four inches of Class 1 dense binder per MDOT M3.11.03 shall belaid and compacted in layers not to exceed two inches in depth; thecompaction equipment shall be of sufficient weight to obtain a density equal to the surrounding pavement. 
C. 	This shall be considered as a temporary patch. 
1:284 

D. 	In case of cold weather or when hot bituminous surface mix is not available, a three-inch layer of cold patch may be applied and rolled. 
E. 	All openings with temporary patch shall be checked weekly, with additional temporary patch being added if settling should occur. 
§ 385-72. Permanent patch. 
A. 	Permanent patch. The permanent patch shall not be applied until onewinter season has passed since the completion of the temporary patch,and shall be then patched as follows: 
(1) 	
The area to be repaired shall be swept clean to remove all looseand foreign material. 

(2) 	
A binder course of 2 1/2 inches compacted depth shall be placed in accordance with MDOT M3.11.03. 

(3) 	
A top course of 1 1/2 inches compacted depth shall be placedand rolled to grade to match the surrounding surface and provide proper drainage of the roadway. 

(4) 	
The edges of rolled areas shall be sealed with suitable asphaltemulsion, and sand shall be spread over the entire newly patched area. 

(5) 	
The work area shall then be swept of all old and excess materialand left in a neat condition. 


B. 	It is recognized that asphalt manufacturing plants are not operatingduring winter months. Therefore, during this period conventionalmethods of temporary patching shall be used at the direction of the Director of Public Works. 
§ 385-73. Concrete subsurface or stone base. 
In cases where either brick or concrete subsurface or a stone base is encountered and removed, it shall be replaced in kind or with an equalamount of cement concrete topped with four inches of bituminous concretewhich shall be rolled. 
§ 385-74. Reinforcing rods. 
Reinforcing rods may be required in certain instances as determined by theDirector of Public Works. 
§ 385-75. Openings when concrete is required. 
When concrete is required, the edges of the opening shall be neatly cut backa minimum of six inches over undisturbed material. 
§ 385-76. Information from DPW records; nonliability of Town. 
1:285 

A. 	All information derived from Department of Public Works recordsrelating to the subsurface and other conditions, natural phenomena, existing pipes, and other structures is from the best sources as presently available. 
B. 	All such information is furnished only for the information and convenience of contractors and is not guaranteed. 
C. 	It is agreed and understood that the Town of Greenfield does not warrant or guarantee that the subsurface or other conditions, natural phenomena, existing pipes or other structures encountered duringconstruction will be indicated in the Department of Public Worksrecords. 
D. 	It is agreed further and understood that a contractor shall not use orbe entitled to use any of the information made available to him/her orobtained in any examination by him/her in any manner as a basis of or grounds for any claim or demand against the Town of Greenfieldarising from or by reason of any variance which may exist between theinformation made available and the existing pipes or other structures actually encountered during the construction work. 
§ 385-77. Prosecution of violators. 
Violators of any of these regulations will be prosecuted. 
1:286 

§ 385-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS 	§ 389-4 
Chapter 389 
SURVEILLANCE AND TRESPASSING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Curfew — See Ch. 235. 	Noise — See Ch. 311. 
§ 389-1. Peeping prohibited. 
It is unlawful for a person to be a "peeping person" on or about the premises of another or to go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a peeping person. The term "peeping person," as used in thissection, is defined as a person who peeps through windows, doors, or otherlike places, on or about the premises of another, for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of the persons spied upon, and any otherconduct of a similar nature that tends to invade the privacy of others. Theterm "peeping person" also includes any person who employs the use of video or audio equipment for the purposes set forth in this section. 
§ 389-2. Voyeurism prohibited.78 
Voyeurism is prohibited in the Town. A person commits the crime of voyeurism if, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desireof any person, he or she knowingly views, photographs, audio records,video records, or films another person, without that person's knowledge and consent, while the person is in a place where he or she would have areasonable expectation of privacy. 
§ 389-3. Trespassing prohibited.79 
Trespassing is prohibited in the Town. A person commits the crime oftrespassing: 
A. 	If he or she enters someone's property without permission or lawful excuse by any means, regardless of the intentions or whether damageis done to the property. 
B. 	If he or she is on someone's property when permission to be there was granted and later revoked by the owner or occupier of the property. 
C. 	If he or she obtains permission to enter someone's property for onepurpose and does something else. 
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:287 
§ 389-4. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
PLACE WHERE A PERSON WOULD HAVE A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY — 
A. 	A place where a reasonable person would believe that he or she coulddisrobe in privacy, without being concerned that his or her undressingwas being photographed, filmed, or videotaped by another; or 
B. 	A place where one would reasonably expect to be safe from hostileintrusion or surveillance. 
SURVEILLANCE — Secret observation of the activities of another person for the purpose of spying upon and invading the privacy of the person. 
VIEW — The intentional looking upon of another person for more than abrief period of time, in other than a casual or cursory manner, with the unaided eye or with a device designed or intended to improve visual acuity. 
§ 389-5. Exceptions.80 
The following activities shall not be subject to the prohibitions set forth in this chapter: 
A. 	Viewing, photographing, videotaping, or filming by personnel of theDepartment of Corrections or of a county, municipal, or local jail or detention center or correctional facility for security purposes or duringinvestigation of alleged misconduct by a person in the custody of theDepartment of Corrections or a county, municipal, or local jail or detention center or correctional facility. 
B. 	Security surveillance for the purposes of decreasing or prosecutingtheft, shoplifting, or other security surveillance measures. 
C. 	Any official law enforcement activities. 
D. 	Private detectives and investigators conducting surveillance in theordinary course of business. 
E. 	Any bona fide news gathering activities. 
§ 389-6. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	For a first offense a person shall be fined $500. 
B. 	For a second or subsequent offense a person shall be fined $1,000. 
C. 	For the purpose of this chapter, each violation of § 389-1, 389-2 or 389-3shall be considered a separate violation. 

80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:288 
Chapter 394 
TAG SALES 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 282. Signs — See Ch. 359. Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 328. 
§ 394-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
DAYLIGHT HOURS — From sunrise to sunset. 
PERSONAL PROPERTY — That property which is owned by members of a household. 
TAG SALES — All general sales open to the public conducted on residentialpremises for the purposes of disposing of personal property, and shall include but not be limited to all sales known as "tag," "garage," "lawn,""yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market" or "rummage." 
§ 394-2. Sales of certain property prohibited. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale, at any tag sale, any property other thanpersonal property. 
§ 394-3. Permit required. 
No person shall conduct a tag sale until a permit for the same has beenissued by the Board of License Commissioners or its designee. The Board of License Commissioners or its designee shall cause a permit log to be kept,listing the permit, the address where the tag sale is to be conducted, thedates and times of the tag sale and the name and telephone number of the permittee. Each permittee shall apply for a permit not less than one daybefore the tag sale date. The permit application may be made in person orby phone during regular Town Hall hours. 
§ 394-4. Limitations. 
No person shall conduct a tag sale on more than four days in any calendaryear or on more than two consecutive days, and no premises shall be the site of a tag sale for more than four days in any calendar year. Tag salesshall be conducted during daylight hours only. 
1:289 

§ 394-5. Display of property. 
Personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shall be displayed only on private property. No personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shallbe displayed in any public right-of-way, on highways, streets or sidewalks. 
§ 394-6. Signs. 
Signs promoting tag sales shall not be erected more than two days prior toany tag sale. No sign promoting any tag sale shall exceed two square feet.All signs shall be removed immediately after the permit expires. No sign shall be attached to traffic signs, utility poles, street lamps, street signs, orshade trees. 
§ 394-7. Right of entry; enforcement. 
The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department or the Inspector ofBuildings, or persons authorized by them, shall have the right to enter ontoprivate property showing evidence of a tag sale for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, and may close any tag sale for a violation of this chapter. 
§ 394-8. Parking. 
Where a tag sale is being conducted, the Chief of Police, or persons authorized by him, may enforce temporary parking restrictions necessary tothe safe and orderly flow of traffic and the passage of emergency vehicles. 
Chapter 400 
TREES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Public lands — See Ch. 346. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
1:290 

ARTICLE I 
Purpose and Definitions 
§ 400-1. Purpose. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for the protection, preservation, resilience and improvement of Greenfield's urbanforest; provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the residents byallowing appropriate shade and ornamental trees to be planted within the public right-of-way; and to provide guidance to the Town and its residentsin planting, caring for, and removing trees. 
§ 400-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD or ANSI A300 STANDARDS — ANSI A300 standards are the generally accepted industry standards for treecare practices. They are voluntary industry consensus standards developedby TCIA and written by a committee called the "Accredited Standards Committee (ASC) A300," whose mission is to develop consensus performance standards based on current research and sound practice forwriting specifications to manage trees, shrubs, and other woody plants. 
CALIPER — Diameter of a tree trunk (in inches). For trees up to andincluding four inches in diameter, the caliper is measured six inches abovethe existing grade at the base of the tree. For trees larger than four inches in diameter, the caliper is measured 12 inches above the existing grade atthe base of the tree. 

CERTIFIED ARBORIST — A professional arborist possessing current certification issued by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) and/ or the Massachusetts Arborist Association (MAA). 
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The average diameter of thetrunk of a tree measured 4'h feet above mean ground level at the base of the trunk. If the tree splits into multiple trunks above ground, but below 4'hfeet, the DBH is the average diameter of the narrowest point beneath thesplit. If the tree has excessive swelling at 4'h feet, the DBH is the average diameter of the narrowest point beneath the swelling. 
HAZARDOUS TREE — A tree with a structural defect or disease, or which impedes safe sight distance or traffic flow, or otherwise currently poses a threat to life or property. 
1:291 

PLANNED SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM — A solar collection system inwhich a permitting process has been initiated or notice has been given to the Building Inspector that the permitting process will be initiated within aspecified time line. 
PUBLIC SHADE TREE — As defined in MGL c. 87, § 1, a public shade tree is a tree within or on the boundaries of a public way other than a statehighway, such as a road, street, bike path, or walkway. 
TOWN — The Town of Greenfield. 
TREE — Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of 1.5 inches or greater measured at a point 12 inches above theground level and which normally obtains a height of at least 10 feet at maturity. 
TREE BELT — The portion of the public way available for tree planting. It istypically the area between the sidewalk and the edge of pavement. 
TREE PIT — The cut out in pavement on municipal walkways in which treesare planted. 
TREE PLANTING PERMIT — A permit issued to a resident by the Director of the Department of Public Works or Tree Warden that authorizes the plantingof trees on Town property. 
TREE REMOVAL — Cutting down and taking away a tree. 
TREE REPLACEMENT COSTS — The costs of tree replacement include thecost of a 2.5-inch to three-inch caliper tree, planting, and soil as needed, setby the DPW. 
TREE WARDEN — The agent of the Town having primary enforcementresponsibilities under this chapter and MGL c. 87, and charged with theresponsibility for approvals required pursuant to this chapter. 
1:292 

ARTICLE II 
General Provisions 
§ 400-3. Applicability. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to any activity on Town property and any activity that requires the issuance of a tree plantingpermit. No tree planting permit shall be issued by the Town without it beingdetermined that the proposed activity is in conformance with the provisions of these regulations and approved by the Tree Warden. 
§ 400-4. Powers of Tree Warden. 
This chapter shall not abridge the powers of the Tree Warden as provided by MGL c. 87. The Tree Warden shall have the care and control of all publicshade trees, shrubs and growths in the Town, except those within a statehighway, and shall enforce all the provisions of law for the preservation of such trees, shrubs and growths. The Tree Warden shall expend all moneyappropriated for the setting out and maintenance of such trees, shrubsand growths, and no tree shall be planted within a public way without the approval of the Tree Warden. The Tree Warden may make regulations forthe care and preservation of public shade trees; which, when posted in oneor more public places, shall have the effect of Town ordinances. 
§ 400-5. Determination of location on Town or private property. 
The Town, through the DPW Director or designee, will determine if a tree ison Town or private property. 
§ 400-6. Damage to trees prohibited. 
No person shall in any manner cut, girdle, mutilate, break off limbs, ordeface any tree on Town land, including posting notices, except as permitted herein. 
§ 400-7. Attachment of wires, ropes, and fixtures. 
A. 	No electric wires, decorative lights, cables, guys, ropes, poles, cross arms, brackets, insulators, or other wires or electrical fixtures shall be attached to or come into contact with any tree on public propertywithout the written consent of the Tree Warden. Upon consent, the Tree Warden will provide guidelines for proper installation of decorativelights that will allow for tree growth. 
B. 	Installations will be inspected regularly for the safety of people and trees. 
§ 400-8. Interference with light and solar systems. 
The Tree Warden and DPW Director shall not allow a tree to be planted on Town property, or on private property where the Town is paying for 
1:293 

the tree, that will negatively impact an active or planned solar collectionsystem, public lighting, street lamps or privately illuminated freestanding commercial signage without the consent of the sign owner. 
§ 400-9. Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Tree Warden to enforce this chapter. The Tree Warden or the Director of Public Works shall have the authority to revoke,suspend or void the tree planting permit and shall have the authority tosuspend all work on a site or any portion thereof and levy fines as provided by § 400-10. 
§ 400-10. Violation and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the costof repair or replacement and a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 forthe second offense and $300 for the third or subsequent offenses. Any fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to replace or maintain Town trees. 
1:294 

ARTICLE III 
Tree Planting and Maintenance 
§ 400-11. Tree planting guide. 
All trees on public property will be planted as specified in the ANSI A300 Standard. Trees planted on private property, paid for by the Town, shall alsobe planted per the ANSI A300 Standard. Tree species will be chosen fromAppendix C.81 
§ 400-12. Planting and protection of trees in tree belt. 
A. 	Planting of trees within the tree belt may be conducted by Greenfield'sDepartment of Public Works where the tree will not interfere with buried or above-ground utilities; will not obstruct visibility for carsmaking turns; will not cause major damage to streets and sidewalks;and will not become a nuisance, e.g. trees that shed branches or are short-lived. 
B. 	Businesses that are hired by the Town of Greenfield to plant treesmust sign a contract that clearly states that they are responsible for replacement of the tree if it dies within 12 months. Any work will beperformed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with§ 400-11. 
C. 	Planting of trees by citizens is allowed in the tree belt after securinga tree planting permit. Following are guidelines to a successful treeplanting permit application. 
(1) 	
If the person seeking the permit is not the property owner immediately behind the proposed tree planting location, he/shemust provide written permission from the property owner to plant the tree. 

(2) 	
Citizens shall select a native species, as identified in AppendixC,82 appropriately sized and suited for the location that will not interfere with buried or above-ground utilities; will minimize rootdamage to streets and sidewalks; and will not become a nuisance,e.g., trees that shed branches or are short-lived. 

(3) 	
All costs incurred shall be the responsibility of the citizen plantingthe tree, and work will be performed in a good and workmanlikemanner and in accordance with § 400-11. 


D. 	Notice of planting of a tree. The immediately abutting owners' rightto object shall be given to the immediately abutting property ownerseither in person or by first class mail to the address registered with the Treasurer/Collector's office no less than 14 days in advance of the 
81.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter. 82.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:295 planting. If the abutting owner objects in person or in writing three ormore days prior to the planting, the tree shall not be planted. 
§ 400-13. Town planting of trees on private property. 
If a resident's property cannot accommodate tree plantings in the tree belt,and if the property owner wishes to plant a tree in his/her front yard, he/she can apply to the DPW front yard tree-planting program. As funds allow, theDPW may work with the property owner to select an appropriate location(a distance not exceeding 20 feet from the layout of such public way) and tree, order Dig-Safe; and install the tree at no cost to the resident. The Townshall have no responsibility for maintenance of the tree after planting iscomplete. 
§ 400-14. Protection and maintenance. 
A. 	Businesses that are hired by the Town of Greenfield to mow aroundtrees must sign a contract that clearly states that they are responsible for protecting the trees. If trees are damaged and subsequently diedue to poor maintenance practices such as scarring trees with mowersand weed whips, the business shall pay the replacement cost of the tree, including dead tree removal, purchase, planting and watering forthree years as specified in the ANSI A300 Standard. (See the TreeReplacement Table § 400-16C.) 
B. 	Businesses or residents who hire someone to mow around trees in the tree belt shall be responsible for the tree replacement cost (seedefinition) of trees that die due to poor maintenance practices such as scarring trees with mowers and weed whips. 
1:296 

ARTICLE IV 
Tree Removal 
§ 400-15. Town rights; emergency removal. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Town, or a public utility, from removing a tree on Town property without prior notice if the tree representsan immediate threat to the public way or public safety (e.g., tree seriouslydamaged by storm, uprooted). In such cases, the Town shall remove the portion of the tree that poses an immediate threat (e.g., a hanging limb). 
§ 400-16. Removal of hazardous trees within tree belt and on otherpublicly owned land. 
A. 	Nothing in this chapter shall abridge the powers of the Tree Warden toact in the interest of public safety regarding the removal of hazardoustrees. The Tree Warden may remove a tree, which, because of its condition and location, is deemed to endanger the health and/or safetyof the general public, as outlined in the ISA Tree Assessment Form(Appendix A83). 
B. 	Requests or petitions for removal of hazardous trees shall be made tothe Department of Public Works. The discretion and sound judgmentof the Tree Warden alone determines whether a tree shall be removed after such request for removal has been made. 
C. 	With the goal of improving Greenfield's tree canopy, each tree removedwhich is replaced will be replaced as outlined in following Tree Replacement Requirements Table: 
Tree Replacement Requirements Table 
Size of Tree Removed  ReplacementRequired  ReplacementSchedule  
Less than 12 inches' DBH  1 tree with a minimum 3-inch caliper if in a tree pit;1.5 trees with a  During the same calendar year'sgrowing season or, ifremoved in winter, the  
minimum 2-inch caliper in all otherlocations  following spring or fall  

Greater than 12 2 trees with a During the sameinches' DBH minimum 3-inch calendar year's caliper if in a tree pit;growing season or, if
1.5 trees with a removed in winter, the minimum 2-inch following spring or fall caliper in all otherlocations 

83.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:297 
§ 400-17. Removal of nonhazardous trees within tree belt or treepit. 
A. 	Trees on public property belong to all residents of Greenfield andprovide many benefits. It is a priority of the Town to preserve andprotect all trees on Town property. If on the rare occasion the Tree Warden determines that a nonhazardous tree must be removed, as funds allow it will be replaced by planting as required in the TreeReplacement Table § 400-16C. 
B. 	Following is the procedure for requesting the removal of a nonhazardous tree: 
(1) 	
Requests for the removal of a tree shall be filed with the Tree Warden and acted upon by the Tree Warden and the PlanningBoard in a public hearing as provided by MGL c. 87. 

(2) 	
Replacement trees that die within the first year will be replaced, subject to appropriation. 

(3) 	
The Tree Warden will select the appropriate trees and locationsthat will not interfere with buried or above-ground utilities; will minimize root damage to streets and sidewalks; and will not become a nuisance. A replacement tree is not required to belocated on the section of public right-of-way from which it was removed. It may be planted on an approved location as follows: a)on public property, b) on their own property next to a public right­of-way, or c) on other private property that is next to a public right­of-way with permission of the property owner. The petitioner shallprovide the Planning Board and the Tree Warden with a suitableguarantee that the replacement trees will be provided prior to the removal of the live tree in question. 

(4) 	
All costs incurred, including related work, regardless of contractor,shall be the responsibility of the citizen making the nonhazardous tree removal request, unless otherwise stated in a written agreement with the Town. 

(5) 	
All work related to tree removal must be done by the DPW or a contractor hired or approved by the Town. 

(6) 	
All work in a public right-of-way shall be conducted to the specifications of the Director of the Department of Public Works and the Tree Warden. 


§ 400-18. Tree Warden responsibility for trees on private property. 
If the Tree Warden assesses that a tree on private property may pose a hazard to the public right-of-way in the near future, he/she will contact theowner of the tree about the condition of the tree with a request that theowner remedy the situation by pruning or removing the tree. 
1:298 

§ 400-19. Appeals process. 
If a tree is deemed unhealthy, but does not fit the definition of a tree in need of emergency removal as defined in § 400-15, below is the tree removaldecision process. If, during the process, the tree poses an immediate threatto the public way or public safety, the DPW may exercise its emergency removal responsibilities. If a tree has been posted for removal, anyone mayfile an appeal of the Tree Warden's decision with the DPW Director, within20 days after the notice has been posted. If an objection to removing a tree is made in writing at or before a public hearing, the Tree Warden shallnot cut down or grant a permit for cutting down a public shade tree. Suchobjection, however, may be overruled by the Mayor. 
1:299 

Chapter 408 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322. Traffic regulations — See Ch. 555, Art. I. 
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
1:300 

ARTICLE I 

Parking Restrictions
[Adopted as amended 3-21-2012 by Order No. FY 12-114 (Ch. 180 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 408-1. Parking and standing. 
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his/hername to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway underthe control of the Town of Greenfield in violation of the Traffic Regulations adopted by the Board of License Commissioners, and in particular in any ofthe following places as described in § 408-3, except when necessary to avoidconflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or signal. 
§ 408-2. Removal of vehicles in violation. 
Vehicles found violating any of the provisions of this article may be moved by or under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the owner to aplace where parking is allowed. 
§ 408-3. Prohibited stopping, standing and parking. 
Any registered vehicle shall not be allowed or permitted to be stopped,standing or parked as follows: 
A. 	Within an intersection, except in those areas where the installation of parking meters has been specifically approved by the MassachusettsDepartment of Transportation. 
B. 	Upon any sidewalks. 
C. 	Upon any crosswalk. 
D. 	Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district. 
E. 	Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge ofthe roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as one-way streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels withinsix inches of the curb. This shall not apply to street or parts of streetswhere angle parking is required by these regulations. 
F. 	Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clearand unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic. 
G. 	Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant. 
H. 	Upon or in front of any private road or driveway without the consent ofthe owner of said private road or driveway. 
1:301 

I. 	Upon any street within 20 feet of an intersecting way, said 20 feet beingfrom the street layout line, except at intersections where official signs indicate a greater distance and except at alleys. 
J. 	On a bridge and the approach thereto where official traffic signs areerected. 
K. 	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when suchstopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
L. 	Within 25 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing when there are no gates at such crossing; otherwise, within five feet from the gatewhere official traffic signs are erected. 
M. 	Upon any tree belt or common or other Town-owned land not designated for parking. 
N. 	Upon any street or highway on the south side and east side betweenDecember 1 and April 1 with the following exceptions: Federal Street, Bank Row, Main Street or any metered area unless signs are posted. 
O. 	Upon or in front of any fire lane, which is defined as any part of astreet, public parking lot, parking lots of shopping malls to which the public has a right of access or private roads or parts thereof which aredesigned to provide access for fire trucks to any building or locationsand which are conspicuously designated as such. 
P. Within parking spaces designated as reserved for vehicles owned andoperated by disabled veterans and/or handicapped persons in a street,public or private parking lots or a right of access; except for those disabled veterans and handicapped persons whose vehicles bear thedistinguishing license plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2 or other state-issued disabled veteran/handicapped person designation.84 

84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:302 
ARTICLE II 

Metered and Permit Parking
[Adopted as amended 5-16-2012 by Order No. FY 12-144 (Ch. 643 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 408-4. Metered spaces. 
A. 	The maximum parking time in all metered spaces is two hours. "Feeding" the meter past two hours is not allowed. 
B. 	Meters accept nickels, dimes and quarters. Rates are annually set by the Mayor and kept on file in the Mayor's office. 
C. 	Only United States currency may be used in parking meters; othercurrency will not register. 
D. 	Parking regulations are enforced Monday through Saturday from 8:00 
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sundays and legal holidays (holidays on which municipal offices are closed) are excluded. 
A. 	Locations. Kiosks are used in Town parking lots. Maximum parkinglimits are as follows. Rates for each lot are annually set by the Mayor. 
§ 408-5. Parking lots. 

Maximum Time  
Lot  (hours)  
Ames Street Lot  4  
Chapman and Davis (C and D) Lot  10  
Fire Station Lot  4  
Fiske Avenue  2  
Hope Street Lot  10  
Legion Lot  4  
Miles Street Lot  4  
Olive Street Lot  4  
Pleasant Street Lot  10  
Town Hall (rear) Lot  4  

B. 	The kiosks will accept nickels, dimes, quarters, debit cards and majorcredit cards. Only United States currency can be used; other currency will not register. 
§ 408-6. Parking permits. 
A. 	Parking permits may be purchased as set forth below for use in all Town-owned parking lots, except the Fiske Avenue lot. 
1:303 

B. 	Long-term parking permits are available on a quarterly and annualbasis for companies located in the Greenfield downtown area as well as individuals who work in the downtown area. 
C. 	Permit parking is not allowed in the Fiske Avenue lot or in any meteredspaces. Permitted parking is available in all other lots regardless of the hourly parking limits in those lots. A list of the lots is as follows: 
Ames Street Lot 
Chapman and Davis (C and D) Lot 
Fire Station Lot 
Hope Street Lot 
Legion Lot 
Miles Street Lot 
Olive Street Lot 
Pleasant Street Lot 
Town Hall (rear) Lot 

D. 	Parking regulations are enforced Monday through Saturday from 8:00 
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sundays and legal holidays (holidays on which municipal offices are closed) are excluded. 
E. 	Permits can be purchased at the Greenfield Collector's Office at Town Hall, 14 Court Square, Greenfield, Monday through Friday from 8:30
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Applicants should bring their vehicle registration ora copy of the registration into the Collector's Office when applying for the permit. The annual rates are set annually by the Mayor. 
F. 	Payment must be made with cash or check. Debit and credit cards arenot accepted. If permits are being purchased in bulk, the purchaser must provide the name and plate number(s) of individuals for whomthey are purchasing permits. The bulk purchaser shall provide theCollector with one check for the purchase and the name and contact information of the person representing the bulk purchaser. 
G. 	Permits may be purchased individually for a minimum of three monthsat a rate per month. The rate is set annually by the Mayor. 
H. 	Annual permits will run from January through December. 
I. 	Refunds will be issued for full months only and only upon surrenderingof the permit. 
J. 	The permit holder is responsible for the permit. Lost permits will bereplaced at a cost of $5. 
K. 	Permits are not transferable. If individuals typically drive different vehicles to work, they need to provide all vehicle plate numbers to theCollector's office at the time of application. 
1:304 

L. 	Permits must be hung from the rear-view mirror. The hang-tag mustbe removed prior to driving the vehicle. If the tag is not removed, the driver may be ticketed for having an obstructed windshield. 
M. 	Year -round overnight parking is only allowed in designated spaces inthe C and D Lot and Hope Street Lot. 
N. 	Violation of these guidelines will result in the standard parking ticketfor the first offense. Revocation of the permit may also be a consequence. 
1:305 

Chapter 415 WATER 
GENERAL REFERENCES Sewer use — See Ch. 355. Wells — See Ch. 419. 
1:306 

Part 1 
[Adopted As Amended 3-21-2012 By Order No. FY 12-115 (Ch. 187
Tampering With Water System
Of The 2002 Bylaws)] 
ARTICLE I 
Hydrants, Pipes and Reservoirs 
§ 415-1. Tampering prohibited. 
Except in the case of fire or where authorized in writing by the Mayor orhis/her designee, no person shall open any Town water hydrant, nor lift orremove the cover thereof, nor make any opening in or connection with any Town pipe or reservoir, nor turn on or off the water from any Town firehydrant, pipe, reservoir, or fountain. 
§ 415-2. Violations. 
For the purposes of this Part 1, each successive day on which any violationis committed or continued shall be deemed a separate offense. 
1:307 

Part 2 
[Adopted As Amended 5-16-2012 By Order No. FY 12-147 (Ch. 689
Water Use
Of The 2002 Bylaws)] 
ARTICLE II 
Purpose and Policy 
§ 415-3. Compliance required. 
Under authority of the General Laws, Acts of State Legislature of theCommonwealth of Massachusetts, the following rules and regulations,together with the water rates, shall be part of the contract with every person using water supplied by the Town of Greenfield, and every persontaking or applying for water agrees to them and to be bound thereby. 
§ 415-4. Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations is to: 
A. 	Provide adequate water pressure and volume to users. 
B. 	Provide high-quality, unpolluted, and aesthetically pleasing water to users that meets or exceeds all Safe Drinking Water Act standards. 
C. 	Provide a uniform schedule of charges and rates and a uniform policyfor administration of rates and charges. 
D. 	Promote water conservation. 
E. 	Establish minimum standards of materials, workmanship, and specifications for materials and appurtenances, which would ultimately become part of the Town of Greenfield's distribution system. 
F. 	Set up procedures which all new users must follow to enter into thedistribution system. 
§ 415-5. Interpretation. 
The Mayor, or his/her duly appointed designee, shall make the finalinterpretation of these regulations whenever unforeseen situations arise which are not clearly covered, or when further interpretation of the intentof the regulations is required. 
1:309 

ARTICLE III 
Terminology 
§ 415-6. Definitions. 
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
APPURTENANCES — Auxiliary equipment, such as valves and hydrants,attached to the distribution system to enable it to function properly. 
BACKFLOW — A hydraulic condition caused by a difference in pressures, inwhich nonpotable water or other fluids flow into a potable water system. 
BACKPRESSURE — A condition in which a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means results in a pressure greater than the supply pressure. 
BACKSIPHONAGE — A condition in which the pressure in the distributionsystem is less than atmospheric pressure. 
BOARD OF HEALTH — That duly elected board of the Town of Greenfieldcharged with enforcing state and local health and sanitary regulations andthe Massachusetts State Plumbing Code. It shall also include the authorized agent or representative of said Board.85 
BUILDING INSPECTOR — That agent of the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield who is responsible for enforcing the local and/or State Building Code and Zoning Ordinance. 
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiologicalsubstance or matter in water. 
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the Town Council. 
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between adistribution pipe of potable water from a public water system and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or other unapproved source. Withoutlimiting the generality of the foregoing, the term "cross-connection" shallalso include any bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removal section, swivel or changeover connection, and other temporary or permanent connection through which backflow can or may occur. 
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Greenfield or his/ her authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
DPW (DENOTING THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS) — That department established by vote of the Town on March 4, 1963, which has jurisdiction over water treatment, supply, and distribution. 
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Town of Greenfield Town Council and the Town police, special police, and any other locally designated body having police powers. 
LATERAL — A smaller-diameter pipe that conveys water from the mains topoints of use. 

85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:311 
OWNER — The person legally and lawfully possessing the land across whicha particular water service lies or will lie. 
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmentalentity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shallinclude the plural where indicated by the context. 
PLAN AND PROFILE DRAWINGS — Engineering drawings showing depth of pipe, pipe location (both horizontal and vertical displacements) and thedistance from a reference point. 
PLANNING BOARD — That Board fully appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield charged with the planning for the Town of Greenfield and withthe administration of the Subdivision Regulations.86 
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
POTABLE — The characteristic that describes water that does not contain objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or infective agents and is considered satisfactory for domestic consumption. 
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION — Any arrangement of pipes, fittings,or devices that indirectly connects a potable water supply to a nonpotable source. This connection may not be present at all times, but it is alwaysthere potentially. Also known as an "indirect cross-connection." 
SERVICE CONNECTION — That portion of the service line from the utility's water main to the curb stop at or adjacent to the street line or the customer's property line. It includes the curb stop and any other valves,fittings, etc., that the utility may require at or between the main and the curb stop, but does not include the curb box. 
SERVICE LINE — The pipe (and all appurtenances) that runs between theutility's water main and the customer's place of use, including fire lines. 
SERVICE VALVE — A valve, such as a corporation stop or curb stop, that isused to shut off water to individual customers. 
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
TAPPING — The process of connecting lateral and service lines to mainsand/or other laterals. 
TOWN OF GREENFIELD — That corporate entity in the County of Franklin,Commonwealth of Massachusetts, acting by and through its Mayor andTown Council. 

86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Art. V, Subdivision Regulations. 
1:312 
ARTICLE IV 
Building Connections and Services 
§ 415-7. Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water main or appurtenancethereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. 
§ 415-8. Application for water service. 
Each application for water service connection must be made at the office ofthe Department of Public Works on forms provided for that purpose. 
§ 415-9. Time frame for application. 
Applications for new water service connections must be obtained from theDepartment of Public Works at least five working days prior to the proposedconnection date. 
§ 415-10. Classes of permit applications; fees. 
A. 	There shall be two classes of water permit applications: 
(1) 	
Residential: living units that use water for domestic purposes. The permit and application fee shall be $100, payable to the Town ofGreenfield by check. 

(2) 	
Nonresidential and water main construction and/or extension. The fee shall be $250, payable to the Town of Greenfield by check. 


B. 	The application form shall be signed by the owner of the real estaterequesting service or by his/her authorized representative. Fees are nonrefundable. Applications may be transferred to a new owner withpermission of the Director. 
C. 	The applications shall state fully, and truly, the extent of water service required, and the purpose for which the water is to be used. The permitapplication shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or otherinformation considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. 
D. 	Priority development sites. Where the development of a prioritydevelopment site (PDS), as defined by § 200-2.1 of the ZoningOrdinance, requires a permit hereunder, an application therefor shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s)required by this Code, including the Zoning Ordinance, relating to theuse or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by MGL c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered nolater than 180 days from said date of submission. 
§ 415-11. Limitations on scheduling connections. 

1:313 

A. 	No new service shall be connected between December 1 and April 1,except in the case of a project located on a priority development site (PDS), and no new water service applications will be accepted by theDepartment after November 15. 
B. 	In general, new water service connections will not be scheduled on Monday, Friday, and days immediately preceding or following holidays;July 4, November 11, or the day following when said holidays occur onSundays or the day preceding if said holidays occur on a Saturday; also the third Monday in April, the last Monday in May, the first Monday inSeptember, and the second Monday in October. 
§ 415-12. Town may reject application. 
The Director may reject any application for a new service connection if, inthe opinion of the Director, the service connection is likely to reduce thedistribution system's pressure, reduce fire flows to less than recommended standards or in any way negatively impact the quantity and quality of waterwithin the distribution system. 
§ 415-13. Pressure considerations. 
No water connections shall be permitted in areas where available pressurein any portion of the building is less than 20 psi, unless the owner, athis/her expense, adds internal holding and boosting capability. If pressure exceeds 80 psi, the owner must install and maintain a pressure-reducingvalve at his/her cost. The valve is to be installed after the water meter, andin accordance with the Massachusetts Plumbing Code. 
§ 415-14. Owner's responsibility for new service. 
The owner is responsible for the installation of a new water service line fromthe main to the owner's place of use. This work shall include tapping of the main, installation of the service and associated valves, etc., installation of the water meter, and site restoration. 
§ 415-15. Conformity with Town requirements. 
All water services from the main through the meter shall conform to therequirements of the Department in regard to materials used, and manner ofinstallation, and manner of water use. 
§ 415-16. Compliance with Massachusetts Plumbing Code. 
All provisions of the Massachusetts Plumbing Code shall be observed by theowner and shall be enforced by the Plumbing Inspector. 
§ 415-17. Separate and independent services. 
A separate and independent building water service shall be laid for everyprimary building. There shall be only one service per building (even if 
1:314 

multiple dwelling units exist within the building), and no independentservices from the water main shall be provided to accessory buildings (barns, garages, etc.). If an owner desires water service to a barn, garage,etc., the owner may, at his/her own expense, extend service from theprimary building to the accessory building. Where appropriate, in the opinion of the Director, units within condominiums may be considered separate and independent and thus be connected with their own independent water service. No services shall be provided to empty lots. 
§ 415-18. Reuse of building services. 
Old building water services may be used in connection with new buildingsonly when they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all requirements of this regulation, and judged to be of adequate size. Theapplicant is responsible for necessary work to prove that the service is ingood condition. 
§ 415-19. Minimum fill cover. 
The minimum fill cover of water pipe shall be five feet below final gradebetween the water main and outer foundation wall. 
§ 415-20. Service pipe trenches. 
Service pipes shall not be placed within 10 feet horizontally of a sanitarysewer service, or within five feet horizontally of other utilities except under special conditions and with the approval of the Director. 
§ 415-21. Subsurface information from Town. 
All information derived from the Department of Public Works records relating to subsurface and other conditions, natural phenomena, existingpipes, and other structures is from the best sources at present available.All such information is furnished only for the information and convenience of contractors and is not guaranteed. It is agreed and understood that theTown of Greenfield does not warrant or guarantee that the subsurface orother conditions, natural phenomena, existing pipes, or other structures encountered during construction will be as indicated in the Department ofPublic Works records. 
§ 415-22. No warranty of subsurface conditions. 
It is agreed further and understood that contractors shall not use or beentitled to use any of the information made available to them or obtainedin any examination made by them in any matter as a basis of or grounds for any claim or demand against the Town of Greenfield arising from orby reason of any variance which may exist between the information madeavailable, and the actual subsurface or other conditions, natural phenomena, existing pipes or other structures actually encountered duringthe construction work. 
1:315 

§ 415-23. Notice of abandonment of water services; charge. 
The owner of a building that is to be demolished or abandoned shall give the Department of Public Works seven days' notice of the date on whichthe owner wishes to have the water service to the building permanentlydisconnected at the main. The Town will do this disconnection at no charge to the owner. 
1:316 

ARTICLE V 
New Water Services 
§ 415-24. Connections. 
All connections off of the main pipes will be treated as "service connections," regardless of size. Service connections shall conform to requirements of the Town in regard to pipe sizes, materials, layout andmanner of installation as a minimum. 
§ 415-25. Work done by owner; meter provided by Town. 
A. 	The owner is responsible for hiring a qualified contractor(s) for theinstallation of a new water service line from the main to the owner's place of use. 
B. 	This work shall include tapping of the water main, installation of allnecessary pipe, valves, curbs and backflow prevention devices. The owner shall provide holes, openings, or conduit necessary for installation of cables for outside meter readers. Work shall include all site restoration, including the roadway, paving, and sidewalk. 
C. 	All materials such as pipe, fittings, curb box, meter, valves, backflowprevention devices, etc., shall be supplied by the owner and meet Townspecifications. 
D. 	The Town will provide and install the water meter. When new servicesare installed requiring water meters 1.5 inches or larger, the metermust be supplied and installed by the owner. The meter shall meet Town specifications and must be inspected and sealed by the Town ofGreenfield. 
§ 415-26. Service to be in straight line. 
The water service shall be laid in a straight line from the main to the front(or first) wall, with the meter placed immediately inside the wall. 
§ 415-27. Curb box location. 
The curb box shall be located seven feet off of the street line within the public way, unless otherwise directed by the Director. 
§ 415-28. Contractor to carry insurance. 
The contractor shall furnish a certificate of insurance as required by theDepartment of Public Works and which the Department of Public Works willretain. 
1:317 

§ 415-29. Contractor to obtain excavation/trench permit. 
The contractor shall obtain an excavation/trench permit when it is necessary to excavate in any public way or easement or on private property.87 
§ 415-30. Location. 
The water service shall be installed as shown on the utility plan or plot planof the "license to erect building" unless written permission to change thelocation is obtained from the Department of Public Works. 
§ 415-31. Permit to be on job site. 
The permit must be available at the job site. 
§ 415-32. Contractor to finish work. 
The contractor shall remain on the site until the job is complete. 
§ 415-33. Proper building construction required prior toconnection. 
The Water Division shall not permit the flow of Town water to any newbuilding or structure or any new addition to an existing building or structure unless it is satisfied that the outer walls and roofs are covered with a noncombustible material or that a license as provided herein hasbeen granted by the Mayor. This shall be interpreted to mean that the waterservice from the main to within the proposed building shall not be installed unless the outer foundation wall and footing is in place; and furthermore,that the meter shall not be installed until it can be protected from theft andfrost damage. 
§ 415-34. Inspection. 
The Town must inspect all new service pipes before covering the trench. Allpipe, trench, and site restoration work shall meet the approval of the Town. 
§ 415-35. Service activation. 
No water will be turned on to any new premises until all work is completedto the satisfaction of the Town, and has been formally inspected by the Town. The work shall include trench restoration, paving work, including thedriveway apron, raising of the curb box to proper grade, and any other workdeemed necessary by the Director at the particular site. 

87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 259, Excavations; and Ch. 385, Art. XV, Street Openings. 
1:318 
ARTICLE VI 
Service Replacements and Repairs 
§ 415-36. Repair or replacement of service lines. 
All service lines between the water main and the water meter are the property of the owner. However, the Town of Greenfield will make repairs orreplacement of water services from the water main to the water meter at nocost to the owner. The Town does not work on private water mains or water services after the water meter in water boxes. 
§ 415-37. Leaking services. 
Upon the detection of a leak in the water service line, the Town will repair or replace the service at no cost to the owner. 
§ 415-38. Temporary services. 
With the permission of the Director, temporary service may be permitted where appropriate while repairs are being made. 
§ 415-39. Galvanized lines. 
If a galvanized line is leaking, the entire stretch (house to curb or curb to main) must be replaced, not repaired. This work will be done by the Townat no cost to the owner. 
§ 415-40. Replacements due to change in use. 
Any replacement of an existing water service, which is required due to achange in or increase of building usage, will be treated as a new service forthe purpose of these policies. 
§ 415-41. Thawing of frozen service lines. 
The Town will thaw a service frozen between the main and the house to the discharge side of the meter. The Town may hire a contractor to perform this work. There is no charge for the first thawing. If the service freezes asecond time, the Town will charge for labor and equipment. 
§ 415-42. Repairs to damaged hydrants. 
The driver or insurance company is responsible for the costs of hydrantrepairs necessitated by vehicle accidents. The Town will charge for labor,materials and equipment. 
§ 415-43. Town not responsible for damage due to leaks. 
The Town is not responsible for any damage caused by a service leak of anywater due to any and all causes. The owner's insurance policy should be checked for coverage in these cases. 
1:319 

§ 415-44. Right to discontinue service. 
The Town reserves the right to discontinue providing water to any owner who refuses to have repairs made on a damaged or leaking water serviceor ignores written notification of violation of Article VII, § 415-59 (water userestrictions). This discontinuance would be done by shutting off the water service valve 72 hours after notice is placed at the building. 
1:320 

ARTICLE VII 
Use of Town Water 
§ 415-45. Scope. 
This article details regulations regarding the use of Town water and the Town's rights and responsibilities regarding the furnishing of water. 
§ 415-46. Water to be metered. 
All water supplied by the Town for any purpose, except for specifically designated standby fire services, shall be drawn from a metered service. 
§ 415-47. Furnishing water to others. 
A consumer of water through a metered service may use it for his/her own purposes, but will not be permitted to supply the premises of anotherperson, except in special emergencies and then only with the approval ofthe Town. 
§ 415-48. Operation of fire hydrants and gates. 
Other than authorized employees of the Town, no person whatsoever,without express written consent, shall open, operate, or close any water gate, valve, or corporation attached to water mains, or service pipes. Noperson, except authorized employees of the Department of Public Works orfiremen at a fire, shall open, close, or operate any fire hydrants within the Town. Violations of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250for each incident as set forth in Article XII, Penalties. 
§ 415-49. Temporary water use. 
No contractor or any other person shall be allowed to use Town waterfor building, construction, or private purposes without first obtainingpermission from the Town. The connection must be fitted with a suitable backflow prevention device. Any such temporary water service will besubject to the usual charges for installation and operation of the temporarywater service. Water usage will be metered and will be charged for at the prevailing water rates. 
§ 415-50. Water bill abatements. 
All water passing through a meter must be paid for, whether used or wasted. Owners must properly maintain their water pipes and plumbing fixtures. Noabatements to water bills will be granted for leaked or wasted water. 
§ 415-51. Expansion tanks. 
The owner is hereby cautioned of the need to provide for expansion ofheated waters within the interior plumbing system. The owner shall install 
1:321 

and maintain an expansion tank or suitable toilet ballcock to provide forexpansion as required. 
§ 415-52. Cross-connection control required. 
No cross-connection, either temporary or permanent, between a pipingsystem containing Town of Greenfield water and any other piping system will be permitted unless fitted with a suitable backflow prevention device(s)that has been approved by the Town. 
§ 415-53. Backflow protection required. 
All new water service connections, including residential, shall be fitted withproper backflow prevention protection before water is supplied. Protectionshall be provided to the last flowing tap on the premises. 
A. 	Backflow prevention devices. In all cases, the installation, testing, andmaintenance of backflow prevention devices shall be in accordance tothe Town's Cross-Connection Control Program and the Drinking Water Regulations of Massachusetts, 310 CMR 22.22. 
B. 	Specification and testing of backflow prevention devices. The Directoror his/her designee shall evaluate the need for and type of backflow prevention device(s) required through survey of the water user's premises. Devices shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense. Testable devices shall be tested by the Town two times per year at the owner's expense. The Mayor shall annually set the fee fortesting services. 
C. 	Access to backflow prevention devices. Authorized employees of the Town shall have access to backflow prevention devices for inspectionand testing. The property owner shall maintain the area around thedevice so that it is free from rubbish or other materials which may obstruct access by Town employees. 
§ 415-54. Termination of unprotected services. 
Where, in the opinion of the Director, a cross-connection represents a serious and imminent danger to the public health, the Town reserves theright to immediately terminate and physically sever the water service inquestion from the Town system. In other cases, after serving a seventy-two­hour notice, the Town reserves the right to terminate a water service to anypremises if, in the opinion of the Director, a cross-connection into the Town'spotable system exists, and the owner fails to install, maintain, test a device, or compensate the Town for testing fees. 
§ 415-55. Fire systems. 
The Town will furnish water for standby fire protection service at no cost. All lines and associated equipment from the discharge side of the gate valveused for this purpose shall be installed, maintained, and repaired entirely at 
1:322 

the owner's expense. Repair or replacement of fire lines from the gate valveto the building is also the responsibility of the owner and shall be performed by the owner at the owner's expense. Installations must be inspected andapproved by the Department of Public Works and Fire Department. Fireservice lines shall not be used for supplying of water for any other purposes and must be so arranged that easy inspection can be made by the Town. 
A. 	No taps on fire lines. No taps shall be made to or drawn from unmetered fire lines except for the purposes of testing the fire system or fighting fire. Use of unmetered water from fire services for purposesother than above shall result in a minimum fine of $1,000, as set forth in Article XII. 
B. 	Backflow protection on fire lines. All new fire service lines shall be fittedwith testable backflow prevention devices approved by the Town. TheTown may require such devices on existing fire service lines where, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary to protect the Town'spotable water system. The owner shall be responsible for all costs ofinstallation, maintenance, repair, and testing of the devices. 
C. 	Notification of work on fire lines. No person shall shut off fire lineservices supplying automatic sprinkler systems without notifying theFire Department and the Department of Public Works. No work may be done on any fire line without permission of the Department of PublicWorks. 
D. 	Notification of fire line testing. No water shall be drawn from fire line services for tests or repairs without notifying the Department of PublicWorks. 
§ 415-56. In-ground irrigation systems. 
In-ground irrigation systems are allowed on the public water system;however, no separate services or metering is allowed for these systems. 
A. 	Moisture-sensing devices required. All automatic lawn watering systems must be equipped with some type of moisture-sensing devicethat will prevent the system from starting automatically when notneeded. 
B. 	Backflow prevention device required. All automatic lawn wateringsystems must be installed with a Town-approved backflow preventiondevice. Said device will be inspected initially by the Plumbing Inspector and may be inspected periodically thereafter by the Town. 
C. 	Notification of installation. Any person who now has installed, or whointends to install, an automatic lawn watering system in the future must notify the Department of Public Works of the existence of saidsystem or of his/her intention to install a new system prior to the actualinstallation. All systems, those currently in existence as well as any installed in the future, must comply with all regulations adopted on thisdate. 
1:323 

D. 	Nonconformance. Any in-ground irrigation system not in conformancewith the above criteria may be disconnected from the public water supply system. 
§ 415-57. Right to refuse water service. 
The Town reserves the right to refuse water service to any real estate or location, where, in the opinion of the Director, proper and adequate servicecannot be provided under conditions then existing, or where the extensionof such water service would be detrimental to the existing water system. 
§ 415-58. Right of entry. 
Designated employees of the Town may enter the premises of any waterconsumer to examine all plumbing, pipes, meters, and fixtures; the quantity of water used, the manner of its use; collection of water samples; andto determine compliance with § 415-59. Where the right to so examine isdenied, the water may be shut off from said premises, and not turned on again until such examination is allowed. 
§ 415-59. Water supply emergencies. 
A. 	Right to restrict water use. The Town, through its Mayor, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation upon a determination that ashortage of water exists and conservation measures are appropriateto ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public notice of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given underSubsection C of this section before it may be enforced. 
B. 	Restricted water uses. A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following restrictions,conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary toprotect the water supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions, or requirements shall be included in the public notice required underSubsection C. 
(1) 	
Odd/Even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with odd-numbered addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days.Outdoor watering by water users with even-numbered addresses isrestricted to even-numbered days. 

(2) 	
Outdoor water ban A. Only outdoor watering with a hand-held hoseor sprinkling pail is allowed. 

(3) 	
Outdoor water ban B. All outdoor watering and water usage is prohibited. 

(4) 	
Car washing ban. All car washing except in commercial car washesis prohibited. 

(5) 	
Filling swimming pools. Filling or "topping off" pools is prohibited. 

1:324 

(6) 	Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems isprohibited. 

C. 	
Public notification of State of Water Supply Conservation. Notificationof any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by theTown as part of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by suchother means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users ofwater. Any restriction imposed under Subsection B shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification of the State of WaterSupply Conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 

D. 	
Termination of State of Water Supply Conservation. A State of WaterSupply Conservation may be terminated by the Mayor upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of the state shall be given in the samemanner required by Subsection C. 

E. 	
Violations and penalties. Any person violating Subsection B of this section shall be liable to the Town in the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent violation, which shall inureto the Town for such uses as the Mayor may direct. Fines shall be recovered by indictment or on compliant before the District Court or bynoncriminal disposition in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each dayof violation shall constitute a separate violation. 


§ 415-60. Right to terminate water services. 
Except in cases of emergencies and serious and imminent public healthconcerns, a seventy-two-hour notice and posting of the Town's intention to terminate water service will be served. No one shall be entitled to damagesnor to have any portion of any payment refunded due to the termination ofwater service. Water service may be terminated for the following reasons: 
A. 	To allow for repairs to any main, service, or associated appendages. 
B. 	If an owner refuses to make repairs to water service or interior plumbing after being served notice to do so by the Town. 
C. 	Denying entry to Town officials as set forth in § 415-58 of this article. 
D. 	Violation of cross-connection control regulations as set forth in §§ 415-52 and 415-53 of this article. 
E. 	Wasting of water as determined by the Director. 
F. 	Nonpayment of water used or service and repair bills unpaid 90 daysafter they become due. 
G. 	Violation of any provision of these regulations. 
1:325 

H. 	Any reason that, in the opinion of the Director, jeopardizes or potentially jeopardizes the quality or quantity of the Town of Greenfield's water supply. 
§ 415-61. Limitations on Town liability. 
No user shall be entitled to damages, or to have payment refunded, for any interruption of supply occasioned either by accident to any portion of theworks, or by shutting off for the purpose of additions or repairs to the works,or by the stoppage or shortage of supply due to causes beyond the control of the Town, such as excessive drought, excessive use of and waste of waterby other users, or by leaks or defects in the pipes or appliances owned byhim/her, or other users. 
A. 	Town not liable for damage due to leaks. The Town shall not be liablefor any damage caused by a water leak due to any and all causes.88 
B. 	Town will not guarantee constant pressure. The Town does not guarantee constant pressure nor uninterrupted service, nor does itassure the consumer either a full volume of water or the requiredpressure per square inch necessary to effectively operate hydraulic elevators, sprinkler systems, appliances, or any other usage, the samebeing subject to all the variable conditions that may take place in theuse of water from the Town mains.89 
C. 	Town not liable for dirty water. The Town will not be responsible fordamages caused by rusty and/or dirty water resulting from the openingor closing of any gate for repairs, the use of any hydrant, the breaking of any pipe, or any circumstances beyond the Town's control. 
D. 	Town not liable for problems after work performed. The Town assumesno liability for conditions which exist in a consumer's pipes and cause trouble coincident to or following the repairs of any main pipe, servicepipe, or meter. 
§ 415-62. Right to shut off water. 
As set forth in § 415-61 of this article, the Town reserves the right at anytime, without notice, to shut off the water in the mains for purposes ofmaking repairs, extensions, or for other necessary purposes. Persons having boilers or other devices on their premises depending on the pressure inthe pipes to keep them supplied with water are hereby cautioned againstdanger from these sources, and are required to provide, at their own expense, suitable safety devices to protect themselves against such danger.In any event, it is expressly stipulated that the Town will not be liable for anydamage resulting from water having been cut off, either through accident or necessity. 
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:326 
§ 415-63. Notice not required for shutoff. 
When it becomes necessary to shut off the water from any section of the Town because of an accident or for the purpose of making changes orrepairs, the Division will endeavor to give timely notice to as many of theconsumers affected thereby as time and the character of the repairs or the accident will permit, and will, so far as practicable, use its best efforts toprevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such cause, but failureto give such notice will not render the Town responsible or liable for any damages that may result from the shutting off of the water or any coincidentconditions. 
§ 415-64. Town not responsible for work by others. 
The Town accepts no responsibility for work done by others on mains,services, plumbing, or associated appurtenances. 
1:327 

ARTICLE VIII 
Meters 
§ 415-65. All water to be metered. 
The entire supply of the Town water furnished through each separate service tap and pipe for any and all premises must be furnished through oneprimary meter. All water passing through such meters will be charged tothe owner of the property supplied, whether the water is used or wasted. Specifically designated fire services do not require meters except in specificcircumstances determined by the Director. 
§ 415-66. Specifications set by Town.90 
The proper size, type, brand of water meter, and associated plumbinghardware required for any given service shall be specified by the Town. TheTown shall standardize brands of meters and associated equipment to be installed. 
§ 415-67. Purchase, installation and ownership. 
The meter and associated materials shall be supplied and installed by the Town and remain property of the Town. If the service is 1.5 inches or larger,the owner shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of themeter and the meter shall become property of the Town at the time the water service is turned on. The owner shall provide a shutoff valve at themeter inlet. This shall be the first fitting inside the service building. On thedischarge side of the meter the owner will place the appropriate backflow prevention device and then a stop valve in order to facilitate the removalof the meter. There shall be one meter per service and one service perbuilding. Condominium owners, see § 415-78. 
§ 415-68. Backflow protection required on all services. 
All new service connections shall be equipped with a backflow preventiondevice on the property side of the meter. The Town shall approve the device used. The device shall be purchased and installed by the owner. The deviceshall remain the property of the owner, who is responsible for the cost of itsmaintenance, repair, replacement, and testing if required. 
§ 415-69. Repair and replacement. 
The Town shall have the right to remove, calibrate, repair, or replace anymeter at any time. The cost of ordinary care and repair of all primary meters is borne by the Town; the cost of unusual repairs (necessitated byfreezing, hot water, etc.) due or attributable to any carelessness or neglecton the part of the consumer shall be borne by the owner. No person except authorized employees of the DPW or persons expressly authorized by theTown shall install, remove, bypass, or repair any primary meter. 

90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:329 
§ 415-70. Bypasses required for industrial and commercialinstallations. 
Where necessary in the opinion of the Director, industrial and commercialmeter installations shall be equipped with a bypass line. The cost of thebypass line shall be borne by the owner. The bypass is to be sealed and operated only by employees of the DPW. The Town may require theinstallation of a meter and/or a backflow prevention device on the bypassline. 
§ 415-71. Care of meters. 
The property owner must execute responsible care to prevent damage tothe water metering equipment. All repairs to meters from freezing, hot water, or external causes shall be charged to the owner of the building. 
§ 415-72. Access to meters. 
Authorized employees of the Town shall have access to primary meters for reading, testing, repairing, and calibrating. The property owner shallmaintain the water meter and entrance valve free from rubbish or other materials which may obstruct access by Town employees. 
§ 415-73. Auxiliary meters. 
Where a single meter covers the supply of water through a service, theDepartment will read and maintain this meter. If additional or auxiliary meters are desired for showing subdivisions of such supply, they may befurnished and installed by the owner, at the expense of the owner, who mustassume all responsibility for reading and maintaining the same. 
§ 415-74. Testing meters by request. 
The accuracy of the meter on any premises will be tested by the Town uponwritten request of the owner, who shall pay in advance a fee to cover the cost of the test. If on such test the meter is found to register over 2% morewater than actually passes through it, the meter will be repaired and the feewill be refunded and the water bill for the current period will be adjusted in accordance with the result of the test. If, however, it appears that theperson was charged or has paid for less water than he/she should have beencharged with or should have paid for, he/she shall from this time forward be charged with the proper additional amount and shall pay the same, togetherwith the expense of the examination and test to the Town. 
§ 415-75. Town's right to change meters. 
If, in the opinion of the Director, a meter does not fit the conditions of theservice installation, the Town has the right to change such meter. Such changes shall be made in accordance with current regulations and shall be paid for by the owner. 
1:330 

§ 415-76. Tampering. 
No person shall open or in any manner tamper with a water meter or associated devices for the purpose of falsifying the meter reading. Penaltiesfor such action are defined in Article XII. 
§ 415-77. Readings upon property transfer. 
When the ownership of a property is to be transferred, the owner mustgive the Town 24 hours' notice for the final meter reading. No sale or othertransfer of title of property in the Town of Greenfield shall operate to bar the Town from collecting any balance due for meter repairs. 
§ 415-78. Condominium meters. 
A. 	Condominium associations may choose to accept an exemption from § 415-65, which calls for the entire supply of the Town water furnishedthrough each separate service tap and pipe for any and all premises tobe furnished through one primary meter. 
B. 	If a condominium association chooses to have individual meters for each condominium unit, then it must apply to the Director of PublicWorks for an exemption from § 415-65. 
C. 	Any condominium association which has been granted said exemptionmust meet the following requirements: 
(1) 	
The owners of each condominium unit for metered water use shall be responsible for the payment of all charges. 

(2) 	
The condominium association shall have the full responsibility forall charges to purchase, install, repair, and replace meters, valves, piping, and all related appurtenances from the water main up toand including the meter. 

(3) 	
Each unit must have a meter installed completely within the unit it services equipped with an outside reader and separate valving. 

(4) 	
Valving must be installed to allow independent operation of allservices and must be contained completely within the unit it services. 

(5) 	
All meters and valves shall conform to the Town of Greenfield requirements in regards to materials used and manner of installation. 

(6) 	
All other provisions of these Water Use Regulations must be met. 


1:331 

ARTICLE IX 
Construction and Extension of Water Mains and Branches § 415-79. Submission of plans for approval. 
A. 	Before the construction of any water mains, branch lines, nonresidential service connections, and for appurtenances which areto be connected to the public water supply system, plans and materialspecifications shall be submitted for approval by the Department of Public Works. The plans shall show the size and location of proposedpipelines, hydrants, valves, and types of pipe to be used, togetherwith all property subdivision and lot lines. No mains shall be laid nor appurtenances installed until written approval from the Department ofPublic Works has been obtained. Where a construction and/or extensionpermit is required in connection with the development of a priority development site (PDS), as defined by § 200-2.1 of the ZoningOrdinance, an application therefor, together with system plans andmaterial specifications, shall be submitted and a decision thereon shall be rendered in accordance with § 415-10D, above. 
B. 	Plans shall include an overall plot plan of the immediate area of thedevelopment at a suitable scale, as well as detailed plans at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet and showing contours, house locations,property lines, and street profiles. The overall plot plan shall showthe position of the development and its streets, in relation to existing streets and property owners in the area. 
§ 415-80. Application fee. 
An application fee as set forth in Article IV, § 415-10, shall apply. 
§ 415-81. Number of plans to be submitted. 
The developer shall submit to the Department of Public Works three sets ofplans showing the water main installation as proposed. These plans shall be in addition to plans required by other Town boards and departments, andshall include a profile of all streets. The profile shall be based on U.S. Coastand Geodetic datum, and each drawing shall refer to a local benchmark. 
§ 415-82. Specifications for material and work. 
All construction, materials, testing, and disinfection shall be done inaccordance with the Department of Public Works Specifications for the Construction of Water Mains. A copy of these specifications is available atthe Department of Public Works office. 
§ 415-83. Town right to reject. 
The Town reserves the right to reject all proposed water main additions if itjudges this addition will be detrimental to the existing distribution system,or if adequate quantities of water and pressure cannot be provided. 
1:333 

ARTICLE X 
Rates and Charges 
§ 415-84. Schedule of rates. 
The Mayor shall annually set the current water usage rates. The rate shall be based on 100 cubic feet of water usage and be uniform for all accounts. 
§ 415-85. Schedule of charges for labor and materials. 
Charges for material and labor shall be set forth in the Department of Public Works Policy on Water and Sewer Customer Services. These charges shallbe annually set by the Mayor. 
§ 415-86. Invoicing. 
The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the payment of allcharges for water and service furnished to the property. (By state law,all charges for water or service become a lien against the charge.) When ownership changes, the name and address of the new owner must be given to the Department of Public Works at once so bills may be promptlyrendered. No sale or other transfers of title of property in the Town of Greenfield shall operate to bar the Town in collection of water servicecharges. 
§ 415-87. Billing for water usage to be on biannual basis. 
A. 	The Town will undertake to deliver to property owners the originalbills for water and other charges against them, as committed by theDepartment of Public Works, and the sending of such original bills may be deemed to constitute a sufficient notification of same and a demand for their prompt payment. 
B. 	The failure of the property owner to receive his/her bill does not relieve him/her from obligation of its payment nor from the consequences of itsnonpayment as required. 
§ 415-88. Delinquent payments. 
A. 	When charges for water supplied or for service rendered remain unpaidfor more than 30 days, a demand notice will be mailed. 
B. 	When charges remain unpaid for more than one year, a lien shall be placed against the property. 
C. 	Water service may be discontinued if charges for water supplied orfor service rendered remain unpaid 90 days after they become due. When water service has been discontinued for nonpayment of charges,services will not be restored until all bills are paid in full; includingcharges related to turning the water off, and charges related to turning the water on. 
1:335 

§ 415-89. No business with delinquent accounts. 
No person who owes an overdue bill for water charges shall be entitled to the further use of water at the same or any other premises until such watercharges are paid in full, together with any other costs. 
§ 415-90. No abatements for wasted water; minimum charge. 
All water passing through a meter must be paid for, whether used or wasted.A minimum charge will be assessed for water service from the date thewater is turned on. 
§ 415-91. Defective meters. 
If a meter gets out of order or fails to register, the consumer will be chargedat the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order, for the corresponding period of two years proceeding. 
1:336 

ARTICLE XI 
Protection from Damage 
§ 415-92. Prohibited acts. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, pollute or tamper with any water source, water supplystructure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the waterworks.Additionally, no person shall make threats or claims of tampering with or polluting the public water system and thereby compromise public order andsafety. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to appropriatelegal action. 
1:337 

ARTICLE XII 
Penalties 
§ 415-93. Written notice of violation. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this regulation except Article XI, Protection from Damage, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonabletime limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
§ 415-94. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in § 415-93 shall be subject to legal action as set forth in MGL c. 40,§ 39G. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemeda separate offense. 
§ 415-95. Liability for costs and expenses. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this regulation shall becomeliable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such violation. 
§ 415-96. Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filedor required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations, or who falsifies,tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any metering device or method required under these regulations, shall be subject to legal action asset forth in MGL c. 165, § 11. 
1:339 

§ 415-96  GREENFIELD CODE  § 423-1  
Chapter 419  
WELLS  
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Water — See Ch. 415.  

§ 419-1. Covering required. 
Every person owning or possessing land or having it under his/her controlwhereon is located an abandoned well or a well in use shall provide a covering for such well capable of sustaining a weight of 300 pounds or shallfill same to the level of the ground. 
§ 419-2. Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be punished by a fine of notless than $250. 
Chapter 423 
WETLANDS PROTECTION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 

Underground storage tanks — See Ch. 377. 
Drainage — See Ch. 248.  Stormwater management — See Ch. 381.  
Excavations — See Ch. 259.  Conservation  Commission  rules  and  
regulations — See Ch. 515.  

Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. 
§ 423-1. Purpose. 
A. 	This chapter is intended to: 
(1) 	
Provide guidelines on the protection of wetlands, water resources,lands subject to flooding, and adjoining upland areas. 

(2) 	
Utilize the home rule authority of the Town of Greenfield for theprotection of wetland resource areas by prior public review. 

(3) 	
Control activities likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon jurisdictional areas as outlined in the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131 § 40, and 310 CMR 10.00. 


B. This chapter also provides additional local enforcement measures in conjunction with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act. It is also 
1:340 

the intention of this chapter, unless otherwise stated, that the jurisdiction, authority, exceptions, exemption, time periods, application procedures, definitions and enforcement standards of the WetlandsProtection Act shall apply. 
§ 423-2. Jurisdiction. 
A. 	Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission (hereafterreferred to as "the Commission"), no person shall commence to remove,fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into, or otherwise alter the following resource areas: any freshwater wetlands, marshes, wetmeadows, bogs, swamps, vernal pools, springs, banks, reservoirs, lakes,ponds, beaches, and lands under water bodies; lands adjoining these resource areas out to a distance of 100 feet, known as the "buffer zone"; rivers, streams, brooks and creeks, whether perennial or intermittent;lands adjoining these resource areas out to a distance of 200 feet, known as the "riverfront area"; or lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water (collectively the "resource areas protected by this chapter"). Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not they border surface waters. 
B. 	Jurisdiction under this chapter shall be the same as in the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, except as outlined below. 
C. 	In accordance with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and based upon local historical experience, the Commission has determined that the following provisions are necessary to address and clarify issuesparticular to Greenfield and to protect the interests contained in theMassachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. Each provision is followed by a brief explanation in italics of the intendedpurpose, which is not binding. 
(1) 	For activities within the jurisdiction, a minimum of a twenty-five­foot "No Disturb Zone" shall be maintained or provided betweenresource areas and all altered areas. The Commission shall create a wider "No Disturb Zone" when deemed necessary to protect the resource area because of the environmental quality or the hydrology of the resource area. The following are not subject to a"No Disturb Zone": 
(a) 	
Utility rights-of-way; 

(b) 	
Emergency activities; 

(c) 	
Any work with limited project status; and 

(d) 	
Activities currently exempted from the requirements for theriverfront area under 310 CMR 10.58(6). 


1:341 

(2) 
(3) 

(4) 


This provision serves to ensure protection from negativeimpacts during activities within a resource area and the long­term viability of a resource area. 
The following activities are prohibited within the one-hundred-yearfloodplain if implemented after August 7, 1996: 
(a) 	
The outdoor storage of autos, auto parts and associated materials, and lawn equipment, including but not limited tolawn mowers, weed whackers, snow blowers, etc. 

(b) 	
Solid waste landfills, junkyards, salvage yards, dumps. 

(c) 	
The manufacture, storage, or disposal of hazardous, toxic, orradioactive wastes. 

(d) 	
The temporary or permanent storage or disposal of materialsused in snow and ice control, including sand, salt or otherdeicing chemicals. 

(e) 	
The outdoor storage or placement of storage tanks, aboveor below ground, for petroleum products or other hazardousmaterial. 

(f) 	
The storage, dumping, filling, or disposal of earth, yard waste,or other materials. 


These restrictions serve to protect areas within the floodplain from potential sources of contamination from pollutants.Vehicles and their accessories (road salt, sand, oil, gas) storedin the floodplain will pollute surface water during flooding events, as well as themselves becoming dangerous debris. 
One-hundred-percent compensatory storage shall be provided forall flood storage volume that will be lost as the result of a proposed project within the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
This provision clarifies that the Commission considers all incremental reductions in flood storage capacity to be significant over time, and therefore requires replacement at a 1:1 ratio. 
Wetlands crossings to provide access to otherwise unreachableupland areas may be allowed only if: 
(a) 	
The only buildable uplands available on the lot have no reasonable alternative means of access from any road, whetherpublicly or privately owned. 

(b) 	
The crossing is designed to minimize to the greatest extentpossible any disruption of the wetland. 

(c) 	
The driveway length and design are the minimum length and width necessary to provide access to the proposed use. 


1:342 

This provision clarifies the criteria for determining the appropriateness of proposed wetlands crossing. The Commission may request the applicant to utilize access overan adjacent parcel of land currently or formerly owned bythe applicant, or in which the applicant has, or can obtain, an ownership interest; may impose conditions to protect thewetlands; or the Commission may deny a permit for a wetlandcrossing if the above criteria have not been satisfactorily met. 
(5) 	To prevent resource area loss, the Commission shall requireapplicants to avoid or minimize alteration wherever feasible; and,where alteration is unavoidable and has been minimized, to provide full mitigation. The Commission may require replication of wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans,professional design, proper safeguards, adequate security, and professional monitoring and reporting that assures success. Replication shall only be allowed when a preponderance of theevidence demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission that the hydrological and ecological value of the replicated wetlandwould be greater than that of the wetland to be replaced.Estimation of wetland value and guidelines for replication shall be based upon the guidelines for wetland replication as describedin the 2002 Massachusetts Inland Wetland Replication Guidelines;Commonwealth of Massachusetts Guidance No. BRP/DWM/ WetG02-2. 
The purpose of this provision is to provide clarification that thedestruction of wetlands shall only be considered as a last resort. Because replication does not in fact substitute for many wetlandsvalues, proposed wetlands replications are at the discretion of theCommission based upon solid scientific reasoning and shall not be permitted simply based upon a proposed 1:1 replication ratio orthe "highest and best use" of a property based upon developmentpotential. 
§ 423-3. Exemptions and exceptions. 
A. 	The applications and permits required by this chapter shall not berequired for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural and aquacultural use as defined by the WetlandsProtection Act regulations at 310 CMR 10.04. 
B. 	The permit and applications required by this chapter shall apply to the harvesting of forestry products under the provisions of MGL c.132, §§ 40 through 46 when an approved forest cutting plan has beenproperly filed with the Commission. 
C. 	The applications and permits required by this chapter shall not berequired for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantiallychanging or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, 
1:343 

wastewater, stormwater, telecommunication services, or publictransportation (roads, bridges), provided that written notice has been given to the Commission prior to commencement of work, and providedthat the work conforms to any performance standards and designspecifications in regulations adopted by the Commission. 
D. 	Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or regulations of theCommission, the definitions of terms, exemptions, limited projects,performance standards, time frames, and requirements shall be as set forth in the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and in 310 CMR
10.00 ("the state regulations"), as may be amended from time to time. 
E. 	The applications and permits required by this chapter shall not be required for emergency projects necessary for the protection of thehealth and safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; provided thatadvance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission priorto commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement; provided that the Commission or its agent certifies the work as anemergency project; provided that the work is performed only for thetime and place certified by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and provided that within 21 days ofcommencement of an emergency project a permit application shall befiled with the Commission for review as provided by this chapter. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the Commission, theCommission may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modifyan emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation measures. No work on any emergency project shall be conducted afterthe expiration of 30 days from the initial certification of the project asan emergency project. 
§ 423-4. Application and fees; consultants. 
A. 	Written application shall be filed with the Commission to performactivities affecting resource areas protected by this chapter. The permit application shall include such information and plans as are deemednecessary by the Commission to describe proposed activities and theireffects on the resource areas protected by this chapter. No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with a permit issuedpursuant to this chapter. 
B. 	The Commission may accept as the application and plans under this chapter any application and plans filed under the Wetlands ProtectionAct (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00), but theCommission is not obliged to do so. 
C. 	Any person desiring to know whether a proposed activity or an area issubject to this chapter may in writing request a determination from theCommission. Such a request for determination of applicability (RDA) or Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area delineation (ANRAD) filed under 
1:344 

the Act shall include information and plans as are deemed necessary bythe Commission. 
D. 	Procedures under this chapter are the same as the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, in terms of procedures andforms, with the following exception: 
(1) 	The applicant shall submit seven copies of each application. Theapplicant must submit a complete application and all supplementalmaterials by 12:00 noon at least seven business days prior to the Commission meeting date. Please note, Town-observed holidaysmight change this timeframe. 
E. 	Upon receipt of a request for determination of applicability (RDA), notice of intent (NOI), abbreviated notice of intent (ANOI), or abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD) application, or at any time during the hearing process, the Commission is authorized to require an applicant to pay a fee for the costs and expenses borne by the Commission for securing specific outside consultants, including engineers, wetlands scientists, land surveyors, wildlife biologists or other experts deemed necessary by the Commission to come to a final decision on the application. This feeis called the "consultant fee." The specific consultant services may include, but are not limited to, performing or verifying the accuracy ofa resource survey and delineation; analyzing resource area functionsand values, including wildlife habitat evaluations, hydrogeologic and drainage analysis; and researching environmental or land use law. 
F. 	Such funds shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer, who shall create an account specifically for this purpose. Additional consultant fees shall be requested where the requisite review is more expensivethan originally calculated or where new information requires additionalconsultant services. Only costs relating to consultant work done in connection with a project for which a consultant fee has been collectedshall be paid from this account, and expenditures may be made at thesole discretion of the Commission. 
G. 	Any consultant hired under this provision shall be selected by, andreport exclusively to, the Commission. The Commission shall provideapplicants with written notice of the selection of a consultant, identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged tothe applicant, and a request for payment of that fee. Notice shall bedeemed to be given on the date it is mailed or delivered. The applicant may withdraw the application or request within five business days ofthe date notice is given without incurring any costs or expenses. Theentire fee must be received before the initiation of consulting services. Failure by the applicant to pay the requested consultant fee within10 business days of the request for payment shall be cause for theCommission to declare the application administratively incomplete and deny the permit without prejudice, except in the case of an appeal.The Commission shall inform the applicant and Department of 
1:345 

Environmental Protection (DEP) of such a decision in writing. Anapplicant aggrieved by the imposition of, or size of, the consultant fee, or any act related thereto, may appeal according to the provisions ofthe Massachusetts General Laws. 
§ 423-5. Notice and hearings. 
A. 	An application for any wetland permit (NOI, RDA, ANOI, or ANRAD)shall be filed with the Commission, Greenfield Department of Planningand Development by mail, electronic, or hand delivery. The applicant shall give written notice to the property owner if other than the applicant. 
B. 	When submitting any wetland permit, other than a request for determination of applicability, the applicant shall notify by certified mailall abutters and owners of property within 300 feet of the propertylines, as determined by the most recent Assessor's maps, of the nature and intent of the proposed project and dates of applicable publichearings, if known. The notice to abutters shall also state where copiesmay be examined and obtained by abutters. An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy of the notice to abutters, shall befiled with the Commission. 
C. 	The Commission shall conduct a public meeting on any RDA application. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on anyother wetland permit application (NOI, ANOI, or ANRAD). Notice ofsaid hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least five working days prior to said hearing at theexpense of the applicant. The published notice, which shall be preparedby the Commission, shall contain the following information: the date, time, and place of hearing; the location of the property affected; thename of the applicant; and the action requested from the Commission.The Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing, with the applicant's approval, to a specific date announced at the hearing,for reasons stated at the hearing, which may include the need foradditional information from the applicant or others as deemed necessary by the Commission. 
D. 	The Commission shall issue its wetland permit, other order or determination in writing within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an extension is authorized in writing by theapplicant. The Commission shall send the wetland permit, other orderor determination to the property owner as well as the applicant, if different. In an appropriate case, the Commission may combine itshearing under this chapter with the hearing conducted under theWetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00). Applicants may contact the Conservation Agent or refer to theGreenfield Conservation Commission Rules and Regulations for moreinformation on meeting structure.91 

91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 515, Art. I, Conservation Commission Rules and Regulations. 
1:346 
§ 423-6. Coordination with other boards. 
An applicant must provide, at his/her own expense, seven copies of the application and associated materials to the Commission. One copy isdistributed to each Commissioner; two copies are on file at the Departmentof Planning and Development for review by other boards/departments (Zoning Board of Appeals, Agricultural Commission, Building Department,Health Department, Planning Board, and the Assessor's office). Oncefinalized materials are received, the Conservation Agent shall notify relevant boards/departments that materials are available for review. Comments from other boards and departments should be submitted to theConservation Agent prior to the scheduled public meeting. 
§ 423-7. Issuance or denial of permit; conditions; waivers;alteration and replication; performance of work; wetlandsdelineation. 
A. 	Permits. If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that theactivities which are subject to the permit application, or the land andwater uses which will result therefrom, are likely to have a significant individual or cumulative effect on the resource area values protectedby this chapter, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of thehearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. The Commission shall take into account the extent to which the applicanthas avoided, minimized and mitigated any such effect. The Commissionalso shall take into account any loss, degradation, isolation, and replacement or replication of such protected resource areas elsewherein the community and the watershed, resulting from past activities,whether permitted, unpermitted or exempt, and foreseeable future activities. 
B. 	Conditions. If it issues a permit, the Commission shall imposeconditions which the Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect said resource area values, and all activities shall be conductedin accordance with those conditions. 
C. 	Denials. 
(1) 	
Where no conditions are adequate to protect resource areas, theCommission may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. It may also deny a permit for: 

(a) 	
Failure to submit necessary information and plans requestedby the Commission. 

(b) 	
Failure to comply with the procedures, design specifications, performance standards, and other requirements of the Commission. 

(c) 	
Failure to avoid, minimize, or mitigate unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the resource area values protectedby this chapter. 


1:347 


(d) 	
Failure to correct any outstanding violations within the Town ofGreenfield under this chapter or the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. 


(2) 	Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardshipon the applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing. 
D. 	Waiver. The Commission may waive specifically identified and requested procedures, design specifications, performance standards, or other requirements set forth in its regulations, provided that: theCommission finds in writing after said public hearing that there areno reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow the proposed activity to proceed in compliance with said regulations; and thatavoidance, minimization and mitigation have been employed to themaximum extent feasible; and to avoid a decision that so restricts the use of the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking withoutcompensation. 
E. 	Buffer zone. In reviewing activities within the buffer zone, the Commission shall presume the buffer zone is important to the protection of other resource areas because activities undertaken inclose proximity have a high likelihood of adverse impact, either immediately, as a consequence of construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation or existence of the activities. Theseadverse impacts from construction and use can include, without limitation, erosion, siltation, loss of groundwater recharge, poor waterquality, and loss of wildlife habitat. The Commission may establish,in its regulations, design specifications, performance standards, and other measures and safeguards, including setbacks, no-disturb areas,no-build areas, and other work limits for protection of such lands,including without limitation strips of continuous, undisturbed vegetative cover, unless the applicant convinces the Commission thatthe area or part of it may be disturbed without harm to the valuesprotected by the chapter. 
F. 	Riverfront area. 
(1) 	
In reviewing activities within the riverfront area, the Commissionshall presume the riverfront area is important to all the resource area values unless demonstrated otherwise. No permit issuedhereunder shall permit any activities within the riverfront unlessthe applicant, in addition to meeting the otherwise applicable requirements of this chapter, has proved by a preponderance of theevidence that: 

(a) 	
There is no practicable alternative to the proposed project with fewer adverse effects; and 

(b) 	
Such activities, including proposed mitigation measures, willhave no significant adverse impact on the areas or values protected by this chapter. 


1:348 

G. 

H. 

I. 


(2) 	The Commission shall regard an alternative as practicable thatwhich is reasonably available and capable of being done after taking into consideration the proposed property use, overall projectpurpose (e.g., residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial),logistics, existing technology, costs of the alternatives, and overall project costs. 
Alteration and replication. To prevent resource area loss, the Commission shall require applicants to avoid alteration wherever feasible; to minimize alteration; and, where alteration is unavoidable and has been minimized, to provide full mitigation. The Commissionmay authorize or require replication of wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans, professional design, proper safeguards,adequate security, and professional monitoring and reporting that assures success. Replication shall only be allowed when a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates to the satisfaction of theCommission that the hydrological and ecological value of the replicatedwetland would be greater than that of the wetland to be replaced. Estimation of wetland value and guidelines for replication shall bebased upon the guidelines for wetland replication as described in the2002 Massachusetts Inland Wetland Replication Guidelines; Commonwealth of Massachusetts Guidance No. BRP/DWM/WetG02-2. 
Special studies. The Commission may require a special study (i.e.,wildlife habitat, geomorphic, hydrologic, stormwater studies) of the project area, to be paid for by the applicant, whenever it deemsappropriate, regardless the type of resource area or the amount ortype of alteration proposed. The decision shall be based upon the Commission's estimation of the importance of the area considering(but not limited to) such factors as proximity to other areas suitablefor wildlife, importance of wildlife "corridors" in the area, actual or possible presence of rare plant or animal species in the area, physicalproperties of the site, or proximity of the site to nearby resource areasof particular importance. Special studies shall be performed by an individual who at least meets the qualifications set out in the WetlandsProtection Act regulations (310 CMR 10.60). 
Special resource areas. The Commission may assign special resource area status to sites that perform unique resource functions and condition protections for those special resource areas. These areas mayinclude (but are not limited to) rare species habitat, wildlife migration corridors, areas sensitive to runoff, flooding, erosion, desiccation, andvernal pools. The Commission shall presume that all areas meeting thedefinition of "vernal pools" under § 423-9, Definitions, of this chapter, including the adjacent area, perform essential habitat functions, and warrant protection. Assignment of special resource areas may besupported or refuted only by credible evidence which, in the judgment of the Commission, demonstrates that the area does or does not provideessential or special resource functions. Any formal special resource 
1:349 

area evaluation should be performed by an individual who at leastmeets the qualifications under the Wetlands Protection Act regulations. 
J. 	Term of applicability, renewals, revocations, and amendments. 
(1) 	
A permit, determination of applicability (DOA), or order of resourcearea delineation (ORAD) shall expire three years from the date of issuance. Notwithstanding the above, the Commission in itsdiscretion may issue a permit expiring five years from the date ofissuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time and location of work is given to theCommission. Any permit may be renewed once for an additionalone-year period, provided that a request for a renewal is received in writing by the Commission prior to expiration. Notwithstandingthe above, a permit may identify requirements which shall beenforceable for a stated number of years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place, and shall apply to all present andfuture owners of the land. 

(2) 	
For good cause, the Commission may revoke any permit, DOA, or ORAD or any other order, determination or other decision issuedunder this chapter after notice to the holder, the public, abutters,and Town boards, pursuant to §§ 423-5 and 423-6, and after a public hearing. 

(3) 	
Amendments to permits shall be handled in the manner set out inthe Wetlands Protection Act regulations and policies thereunder. 

(4) 	
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine the decisionissued under this chapter with the permit, DOA, ORAD, or certificate of compliance (COC) issued under the Wetlands Protection Act and regulations. 


K. 	Initiation of work. No work proposed in any application shall beundertaken until the permit or ORAD issued by the Commission with respect to such work has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds or,if the land affected is registered land, in the Registry Section of theLand Court for the district wherein the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the Commission that the documenthas been recorded. If the applicant fails to perform such recording, theCommission may record the documents itself and require the applicant to furnish the recording fee therefor, either at the time of recording oras a condition precedent to the issuance of a COC. 
L. 	Wetland delineations. All delineations of wetland boundaries that come before the Commission for approval shall include the submission of theMassDEP Bordering Vegetated Wetland (310 CMR 10.55) DelineationField Data Form used to determine these boundaries. 
1:350 

§ 423-8. Regulations. 
Rules and regulations, and any changes or modifications, shall be adopted and take effect only following public notice and public hearing, a vote bythe Commission, approval by Town Council, and the filing with the TownClerk. Rules and regulations are established to carry out the purpose of this chapter, to explain the conduct and procedures of the Commission, andto provide guidance to applicants seeking to conduct a regulated activity.Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspendor invalidate the effect of this chapter. At a minimum, these regulationsshall reiterate the terms defined in this chapter, define additional terms not consistent with the chapter, and impose filing and consultant fees. 
§ 423-9. Definitions. 
A. 	Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in associated regulations of the Conservation Commission, the definitions of termsand the procedures in this chapter shall be as set forth in the WetlandsProtection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00). 
B. 	The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this chapter: 
AGRICULTURE — Refers to the definition as provided by 310 CMR 
10.04 (Agriculture). 
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities whenundertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this chapter: 
(1) 	
Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregatematerials of any kind. 

(2) 	
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushingcharacteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flowpatterns, or flood retention characteristics. 

(3) 	
Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table. 

(4) 	
Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material which may degrade water quality. 

(5) 	
Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation. 

(6) 	
Driving of piles, erection, expansion or repair of buildings, or structures of any kind. 

(7) 	
Placing of obstructions or objects in water. 

(8) 	
Destruction of plant life, including cutting or trimming of trees andshrubs. 


1:351 

(9) 	Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters. 
(10)Any activities, changes, or work which may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater. 
(11)Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative adverse impact on the resource areas protected by this chapter. 
BANK — Includes the land area which normally abuts and confines awater body; the lower boundary being the mean annual low flow level and the upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope orthe mean annual flood level, whichever is higher. 
CUMULATIVE EFFECT — Includes any impact on the resource area environment which results from the incremental impact of the actionwhen added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable futureactions. 
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to Town ordinances, administrative agency, public or quasi-publiccorporation or body, this municipality, and any other legal entity, itslegal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
POND — Shall follow the definition of 310 CMR 10.04. 
RARE SPECIES — Includes, without limitation, all vertebrate and invertebrate animals and all plant species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the Massachusetts Division ofFisheries and Wildlife, regardless of whether the site in which theyoccur has been previously identified by the Division. 
VERNAL POOL — Includes, in addition to scientific definitions found in the regulations under the Wetlands Protection Act, any confined basindepression which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring and/or summer, and whichis free of adult fish populations, as well as the area within 100 feet ofthe mean annual boundary of such a depression, and provides essential breeding and rearing habitat functions for amphibian, reptile or othervernal pool community species, regardless of whether the site has beencertified by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of the resource area for vernal pools shall be the mean annualhigh-water line defining the depression. 
§ 423-10. Security. 
As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any securityrequired by any other municipal or state board or official, the Commission may require that the performance and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by one or more of themethods described below: 
1:352 

A. 	Surety: by bond, deposit of money, or other undertaking of financialresponsibility sufficient, in the opinion of the Commission, payable to the Town of Greenfield, to be released in whole or in part upon theissuance of a certificate of compliance for work performed pursuant tothe permit; or 
B. 	Restriction: by conservation restriction, easement, or other covenantenforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the ownerof record, running with the land to the benefit of the municipality whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed beforeany lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage. This method shall beused only with the consent of the applicant. 
§ 423-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	Activities which remove, fill, dredge, build upon or otherwise alterresource areas protected by this chapter, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to restoreillegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply witha permit or enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation. 
B. 	The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter, its regulations, and permits issued thereunder by violation notices, noncriminal citations under MGL c. 40, § 21D, and civil and criminalcourt actions. Any person who violates provisions of this chapter may beordered to restore the property to its original condition and take other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, orboth. 
C. 	When a violation is believed to have occurred, the following procedures for violations shall be followed by the Conservation Agent or member(s)of the Commission: 
(1) 	
Contact the property owner to: 

(a) 	
Request oral permission from the property owner to conduct asite visit; or 

(b) 	
If the property owner cannot be contacted or refuses entry onto the property, verify violation from a public way or a cooperative neighboring property; or 

(c) 	
Obtain the necessary court order to allow entry onto the property and send a certified letter to the property owner'smailing address according to the most recent Tax Assessorinformation, notifying the property owner of a scheduled site visit. 



(2) 	
Conduct a site visit. Determine if a violation has occurred and the extent of the violation through examination, survey, or sampling as determined by the Commission. 


1:353 

(3) 	Based upon the severity of the violation, issue a cease-and-desistorder and require any of the following remedies: 
(a) 	
Stoppage of work and implementation of soil erosion controlmeasures if necessary. 

(b) 	
Owner to attend a scheduled Commission meeting to present a "mitigation plan." 

(c) 	
Filing of a request for determination of applicability. 

(d) 	
Filing of a notice of intent. 


D. 	If the property owner does not comply with the cease-and-desist orderor order of conditions in a timely manner, the Commission shall issuean enforcement order as per 310 CMR 10.08. 
E. 	If the property owner fails to comply with the enforcement order by thespecified date, a fine of $500 per day shall be levied at the discretion ofthe Conservation Commission under the Noncriminal Disposition Act. The property owner shall be notified of the fine by certified mail orserved by the enforcing person(s), which shall be the ConservationCommission, any of its designees or any police officer.92 
F. 	Upon request of the Commission, the Town shall take legal action forenforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the Chiefof Police shall take legal action for enforcement under criminal law. 
G. 	Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or otherofficer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement. 
H. 	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or regulations,permits, or administrative orders issued thereunder, shall be punishedby a fine of not more than $300 per day. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues, or unauthorized fill or other alteration remains in place, shall constitute a separate offense, andeach provision of the chapter, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
I. 	As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Commission may issue citations with specific penalties pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, whichhas been adopted by the Town in Chapter 1, Article III, §§ 1-16 and 1-17,of the Town Code. 
§ 423-12. Burden of proof. 
The applicant requesting a permit under this chapter shall have the burdenof proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not have a significant or cumulative effect 

92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). 
1:354 
upon the jurisdictional resource areas protected by this chapter. Failure toprovide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permitwith conditions. 
§ 423-13. Appeals. 
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court inaccordance with MGL c. 249, § 4. 
§ 423-14. Relation to Wetlands Protection Act; expandedjurisdiction. 
A. 	This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of theMassachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulationsthereunder (310 CMR 10.00). It is the intention of this chapter thatthe purposes, jurisdiction, authority, exemptions, regulations, specifications, standards, and other requirements shall be interpretedand administered as stricter than those under the Wetlands Protection Act and regulations. 
B. 	This chapter establishes expanded jurisdiction over all resource areas,beyond the Act. The standards applied, however, are not intended to be identical for all resource areas, as they differ. For instance, it is expected that the Commission's regulations and decisions will bestricter for wetlands and vernal pools than they will be for floodplains.It is expected that the test of avoid-minimize-mitigate set forth in the chapter will be applied to activities within all resource areas, but thatthe stricter two-part "no practicable alternative" and "no significantadverse impact" test set forth in the chapter will be applied within the riverfront area. The Commission will develop and apply its ownstandards within the buffer zone, especially to protect its bufferingfunction. 
Chapter 431 
VACANT AND FORECLOSING PROPERTY 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Demolition delay — See Ch. 241. 
§ 431-1. Authority and purpose. 
Pursuant to the general powers granted to cities and towns by Article 89of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution, and the specificpowers granted by MGL c. 139, §§ 1 through 3A, this chapter is adopted to help protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Greenfield by 
1:355 
preventing blight, protecting property values and neighborhood integrity,protecting the Town's resources, avoiding the creation and maintenance of nuisances and ensuring the safety and sanitary maintenance of all buildingsand structures. Inadequately maintained residential or commercial/business buildings are at an increased risk for fire, unlawful entry, or other public health and safety hazards. This chapter will help secure thewelfare of the Town's residents and neighborhoods by requiring all propertyowners, including lenders, trustees and service companies and the like, to register and properly maintain their respective properties. 
§ 431-2. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BUILDING — An enclosed structure, either a principal building or shed,garage, stable, greenhouse, or other accessory building. 
DILAPIDATED — A condition of decay or partial ruin by reason of neglect,misuse, or deterioration. The term includes, but is not limited to: 
A. 	Property having deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including broken or inadequatelysecured windows or doors. 
B. 	Personal property that is broken, rusted, worn, partially or wholly dismantled or otherwise due to deterioration is unsuitable for the purpose for which designed. 
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrowerdefaults. 
HAZARD — A condition likely to expose persons to injury or negative health impacts, or property to damage, loss or destruction, including butnot limited to burned structures not otherwise lawfully habitable or usable,dilapidated real or personal property, and/or dangerous or unsafe structures or personal property. 
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Taking any of the following actions: 
A. 	Taking possession of a property pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 1; 
B. 	Delivering the mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose to the borrower pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 17B; or 
C. 	Commencing a foreclosure action on a property in either the LandCourt or Superior Court. 
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including, but not limited to, service companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant, oremployee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee 
1:356 

of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. 
OWNER — Every person who alone or jointly or severally with others: 
A. 	Has legal title to any building, structure or property pursuant to thischapter; or 
B. 	Has care, charge, or control of any such building, structure or propertyin any capacity, including but not limited to as agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, guardian or conservator of the estate of the holder of legal title; or as life tenant; or 
C. 	Is a lessee under a written lease agreement; or 
D. 	Has a mortgage in possession; or 
E. 	Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts. 
VACANT PROPERTY — Any property not currently legally occupied and notproperly maintained or secured. 
§ 431-3. Registration required; term; fee. 
A. 	All owners must register vacant and/or foreclosing properties with theInspector of Buildings on forms provided by the Building Inspector. All registrations must state the individual owner's or agent's telephonenumber and mailing address located within the commonwealth as required by MGL c. 59, § 57D, MGL c. 156D, § 5.02, and 950 CMR 
113.20. The mailing address shall not be a P.O. box. This registrationmust also certify that the property was inspected and identify whetherthe property is vacant at the time of filing. If the property is vacant, the owner and/or registrant must designate and retain a local individualor local property management company responsible for the securityand maintenance of the property. This designation must state the individual's or company's name, telephone number, and local mailingaddress. The mailing address shall not be a P.O. box. If the propertyis in the process of foreclosure, then the registration must be received within seven days of the initiation of the foreclosure process. If theBuilding Inspector determines that the property is vacant and thatforeclosure proceedings have not been initiated, the registration must be received within 14 days of the Building Inspector's first citation forimproper maintenance. 
B. 	All property registrations are valid for one calendar year. A one-time registration fee of $25 must accompany the registration form. Subsequent annual registrations are due within 30 days of the expiration of the previous registration and must certify whether the foreclosing and/or foreclosed property remains vacant or not. 
C. 	Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold, the owner must provideproof of sale or written notice and proof of occupancy to the Building Inspector. 
1:357 

§ 431-4. Maintenance requirements. 
A. 	Owners of vacant and foreclosing properties must fulfill the following minimum adequate maintenance requirements for any such propertythey own: 
(1) 	
Properties subject to this chapter must be maintained in accordance with the relevant sanitary codes, building codes, andlocal regulations concerning external and/or visible maintenance.The owner, local individual or local property management company must inspect and maintain the property on a monthly basis for theduration of the vacancy; 

(2) 	
The property must contain a posting with the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone number of the local individual or property management company responsible for the maintenance.This sign must be posted on the front door of the property. 

(3) 	
Secure vacant and foreclosing properties subject to this chapter toprevent unauthorized entry and exposure to the elements. 

(4) 	
Maintain vacant and foreclosing properties subject to this chapter in a manner that ensures their external/visible maintenance, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of major systems, theremoval of trash and debris, and the upkeep of lawns, shrubbery, and other landscape features. 

(5) 	
Repair or replace broken windows or doors within 30 days. 


B. 	Compliance with this section shall not relieve the owner of any applicable obligations set forth in any other codes, regulations, covenant conditions or restrictions, and/or homeowners' or condominium association rules and regulations. 
§ 431-5. Administration; violations and penalties. 
A. 	Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.The Building Inspector shall have the authority and the duty to inspect properties subject to this chapter for compliance and to issue citationsfor any violations. 
B. 	Penalties. 
(1) 	
Failure to initially register with the Inspector of Buildings ispunishable by a fine of $300. 

(2) 	
If applicable, failure to properly identify the name of the local individual or local property management company is punishable bya fine of $300. 

(3) 	
Failure to maintain the property is punishable by a fine of $300 for each week the property is not maintained. 

1:358 


C. 	
Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the requirements of this section mayseek an administrative appeal to the Building Inspector. Any person aggrieved by a final decision issued under this section by the BuildingInspector may seek relief in any court of competent jurisdiction asprovided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 

D. 	
Applicability. If any provision of this chapter imposes greaterrestrictions or obligations than those imposed by any other general law,special law, regulation, rule, ordinance, bylaw, order, or policy, then the provisions of this chapter shall control. 

E. 	
Regulatory authority. The Building Inspector has the authoritynecessary to implement and enforce this section. 


Chapter 507 
BOARD OF HEALTH 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Smoking — See Ch. 364. 	Underground storage tanks — See Ch. 377. 
1:359 

ARTICLE I 
Tobacco Use on School Property by Employees and Visitors[Adopted as amended 8-15-2000 (Ch. 785, Art. I, of the 2002Bylaws)] 
§ 507-1. General principle. 
The Greenfield Public Schools (GPS) are committed to ensuring a tobacco-free environment for the entire school community. Education about the consequences of tobacco use is an integral part of the GPS curriculum at many grade levels and it is essential that staff actions support the educationprovided. 
§ 507-2. Applicability of state law; scope. 
A. 	Smoking, and the use of tobacco products by students, staff, volunteersand visitors, is prohibited on all school property at all times, accordingto MGL c. 71, § 37H, effective June 4, 1993. 
B. 	School property includes school buildings, school facilities, schoolgrounds, school parking lots and school buses, and any propertycontrolled by the School Committee. 
§ 507-3. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, or any other forms of tobacco. 
TOBACCO USE — Smoking, inhaling, or chewing tobacco or tobacco products. 
§ 507-4. Disciplinary consequences. 
At the beginning of the school year, and/or upon hire, each employee will read and sign the attached agreement (See Form GBK-193). Upon determination by the Principal or Superintendent that a violation has occurred, in accordance with the attached regulations, the following consequences will result: 
A. 	School employees during contracted hours. 
(1) 	First offense: 
(a) 	At the violator's option, a fine of $50 or attendance at twomeetings with a tobacco cessation counselor or a tobacco education program compensated per the Drug-Free/Alcohol­

93.Editor's Note: Said form is on file at the Town offices. 
1:361 
Free/Tobacco-Free Workplace Policy. The fine will be waivedwith verification of attendance at two sessions or classes. 
(b) 	Written notification of violation. 
(2) 	
Second offense: 

(a) 	
Fine of $50. 

(b) 	
Written reprimand to be filed in personnel file. 



(3) 	
Third offense and subsequent offenses: 

(a) 	
Fine of $50. 

(b) 	
Progressive disciplinary action, as per applicable contract ofemployment. 




B. 	Visitors (regardless of age) and school employees during noncontracted hours. 
(1) 	
First violations will result in a written warning. 

(2) 	
Second violations and subsequent violations will result in a fine of $50. 


§ 507-5. Procedures. 
A. 	Reporting. Any school employee who observes a school employee or visitor using tobacco products on school property must report theobservation to the Principal within 48 hours. (NOTE: In the event thatthe employee observed using tobacco is a Principal, the report of the violation will be made to the Superintendent.) Any adult observingtobacco use on school property may also make a report to the Principal.The observer shall complete the tobacco reporting form available in each Principal's office. 
B. 	Investigation. After receiving the report, the Principal shall investigatethe circumstances surrounding the incident. The investigation shall include an interview with the employee or visitor, the reporter, and anyidentified witnesses. The employee or visitor shall have the opportunity to related his/her side of the incident and substantiate his/her statements. 
C. 	Determination. After completion of the investigation, the Principal shallmake a determination. The Principal shall determine whether or not the evidence supports a finding that the employee or visitor used tobaccoproducts in violation of this policy. The Principal shall provide writtennotification to the employee or visitor of the determination and the consequences as set forth in this policy. A determination will be madewithin three days from the date that the incident was reported to thePrincipal. 
D. 	Enforcement. 
1:362 

(1) 
The Principal may initiate the disciplinary consequences as setforth by this policy. 

(a) 	
Visitors. 

[1] 	Warnings shall be kept on file in the Principal's office. 
[2] 	Subsequent offenses shall result in fines. 

(b) 	
Employees. 


[1] 	If the offender chooses a described alternative to payingthe fine as stated in this policy, the violation will be documented in writing pending completion of the alternative consequence. 
[2] 	If the employee fails to satisfactorily complete the alternative obligation, a ticket will be issued. 
[3] 	The date on the ticket will reflect the date the ticket was issued. 

(2) 	
Fines. In the event that a fine is levied, the following proceduresshall apply: 

(a) 	
As enforcing agents of the Board of Health, designated GPS school officials are authorized to sign noncriminal tickets forschool smoking regulation violations, as described in MGL c.40, § 21D, and GPS policy. 

(b) 	
When a ticket is to be issued, the enforcing agent writes anoncriminal ticket (in four copies) and issues copies to thefollowing: 

[1] 	Offender's copy: handed to the violator after violation. 
[2] 	Town Clerk's copy: sent or delivered to the Town Clerk'soffice. 
[3] 	Board of Health copy: sent or delivered to the Board ofHealth office. 
[4] 	School copy: kept on file at the school office. 
[5] 	(Optional) District Court copy: mailed to the Clerk Magistrate, Greenfield District Court. 

(c) 	
School district officials, or their designees, shall enter tickets issued on a control list to track the disposition of the violations. 

(d) 	
Options available to the offender within 21 days of the issuanceof the ticket are: 


[1] 	Appear in person at the office of the Town Clerk to pay thefine; or 
1:363 

[2] 	Pay the fine by mail to the office of the Town Clerk; or 
[3] 	Request a hearing in the Greenfield District Court. This request must be submitted in writing and be accompaniedby the offender's copy of the ticket. 

(e) 	
Payment of the fine, either in person or by mail, serves as the final disposition of the case. After 21 days, school district staffwill check whether the fine has been paid. The Town Clerkshall notify the Board of Health and GPS of the payment. 

(f) 	
If a hearing is requested with the District Court, a designatedschool official will be present at the hearing. There are threepossible outcomes to such a court hearing: 

[1] 	If the Court finds that the violation did not occur, or that the person appearing did not commit the violation, thematter will be dismissed. 
[2] 	If the Court finds that the offender committed the violation, and such person pays the fine, this will serve asfinal disposition of the case. 
[3] 	If the Court finds that the violation was committed by theoffender, and the offender refuses to pay, the Town maypursue the matter by means of a criminal complaint. 

(g) 	
If 21 calendar days elapse and the offender has neither paidthe fine nor requested a hearing, the Board of Health shalldecide whether to file a criminal complaint. 


§ 507-6. Training and information. 
The Principal shall provide information and cause training of all schoolemployees to occur with regard to the implementation of this policy. 
1:364 

ARTICLE II 
Smoking and Youth Access to Tobacco
[Adopted as amended 1-12-1999 (Ch. 764 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 507-7. Purpose and authority. 
A. 	The Board of Health of the Town of Greenfield does hereby find that: 
(1) 	
The Environmental Protection Agency (1993) has designatedenvironmental tobacco smoke as a Class A carcinogen, for whichthere are no known safe levels of exposure. Conclusive evidence exists that tobacco smoke causes lung cancer, heart disease, negative birth outcomes, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, bronchi-constriction, and bronchi-spasm, allergies and irritations to the eyes, nose and throat of both thesmoker and nonsmoker exposed to secondhand smoke. 

(2) 	
Accordingly, the Board of Health finds and declares that the purposes of this regulation are to protect the public health andwelfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and to guaranteethe right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over thedesire to smoke. 

(3) 	
Further, the Board of Health finds cigarette smoking and other tobacco use by minors to be a continuing problem with gravepublic health consequences. A third purpose of this regulation isto implement a strict and enforceable system to prevent the illegal sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors. 


B. 	These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31. 
§ 507-8. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ADEQUATE VENTILATION — An enclosed area that is separately vented and under a negative pressure environment sufficient to prevent tobaccosmoke from entering all nonsmoking areas in a building. The ventilationrate in a designated smoking area shall conform to the current American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers(ASHRAE) recommendations for a smoking lounge [ventilation rate of 60cubic feet per minute (CFM) per person based on occupancy of no more than seven people per 100 square feet of net occupied space]. Particulateair cleaners or filtration systems are not considered adequate ventilation. 
BAR — Any freestanding establishment which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and inwhich the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of suchbeverages. 
1:365 

BAR AREA OF A RESTAURANT — An area of a restaurant which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which revenues from the sale of food constitute 20% orless of the total revenues in that area. The number of seats in a bar area of a restaurant shall not exceed 25% of the establishment's total seating capacity. 
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Town of Greenfield. 
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professionalcorporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services. 
EMPLOYER — Any person, business, partnership, corporation, includinga municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, who or which employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
ENCLOSED AREA — All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosedon all sides by solid walls, doors, or windows, which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which donot extend to the ceiling or are not solid, "office landscaping" or similar structures. 
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any enclosed area under the control of apublic or private employer which employees normally frequent during thecourse of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and rest rooms, conferences and classrooms, employee cafeteriasand hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it isused as a child-care or health-care facility. 
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed, indoor area when open to and used bythe general public, including, but not limited to, the following facilities:licensed child-care locations; educational facilities; elevators accessible to the public; clinics and nursing homes; inns, hotel and motel lobbies,stairwells, halls, entranceways, and public rest rooms; libraries; schools;municipal buildings; museums; retail stores; retail food establishments; indoor sports arenas; theaters; auditoriums; public transit facilities; andany rooms or halls when used for public meetings. A room or hall used forprivate social functions in which the sponsor of the private function and not the owner or proprietor has control over the seating arrangements shall notbe construed as a public place. 
RESTAURANT — Coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria, and other eating establishments which give or offer foodfor sale to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens in whichfood is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term "restaurant" shall not include a "bar." 
1:366 

RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — A retail store utilized for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Self-service distribution of tobacco productsfrom which individual packages or cartons may be selected by the customer. 
SERVICE LINE — Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waitingfor or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves theexchange of money. 
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, or any other tobacco product. 
SPORTS ARENA — Sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice skating rinks, bowling alleys andother similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any machine or device designated foror used for the vending of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco products upon the insertion of coins, trade checks, or slugs. 
§ 507-9. Smoking in public places prohibited. 
A. 	Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the Town of Greenfield, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1) 	
Restaurants. 

(2) 	
Retail stores and malls. 

(3) 	
Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health­care facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics,physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices. 

(4) 	
Child-care facilities. 

(5) 	
Municipal buildings. 

(6) 	
Schools (MGL c. 71, § 2A). 

(7) 	
Elevators. 

(8) 	
Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the Town of Greenfield, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots (including airports). 

(9) 	
Rest rooms. 


(10)All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public,including, but not limited to, attorneys' offices and other offices, 
1:367 

banks, laundromats, haircutting establishments, hotels and motels,including 75% of hotel/motel guest rooms [see § 507-11A(3)]. 
(11)Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums. 
(12)Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motionpicture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except where smoking is part of the stageproduction. 
(13)Sports arenas, auditoriums and conventions halls. 
(14)Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly underthe control of any board, council, commission, committee, includingjoint committees, or agency of the Town of Greenfield or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a publicmeeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to thejurisdiction of the Town of Greenfield. 
(15)Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in multiple-unitcommercial facilities. 
(16)Polling places. 
B. 	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
§ 507-10. Workplace regulations. 
A. 	It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees, except as otherwise provided bySubsection C of this section and § 507-11 of these regulations, butemployers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or physical modifications. 
B. 	Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located withinthe Town of Greenfield shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written policy containing the following requirements: Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within or controlled by a place of employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, privateoffices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employeelounges, stairs, rest rooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
C. 	Each employer may specifically designate enclosed areas in which employees may smoke; provided, however, that nonsmokers are notrequired to use and/or pass through that enclosed area. Hallways, elevators, entranceways, stairwells, rest rooms and waiting areas inall the above facilities may not be designated as smoking areas. Designated smoking areas must be separately ventilated to the 
1:368 

outdoors. Nonsmoking areas of comparable size and capacity must beavailable and provided for those who do not wish to be exposed to tobacco smoke. Smoking areas must be conspicuously marked. 
D. 	All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy uponrequest to any existing or prospective employee. 
§ 507-11. Permitted smoking locations. 
A. 	Notwithstanding any other provision of this regulation to the contrary,smoking may be permitted in the following places and/or circumstances: 
(1) 	
Private residences, except when used as a child-care facility orhealth-care facility.94 

(2) 	
Retail tobacco stores. 

(3) 	
Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms andprivate and public assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions and 25% of hotel and motel sleepingrooms designated as smoking rooms [see § 507-9A(10)]. 

(4) 	
Private or semiprivate rooms of nursing homes and long-term care facilities, occupied by one or more patients, all of whom are smokers who have requested in writing on the facility admissionform to be placed in rooms where smoking is permitted. 

(5) 	
Limousines for hire, when the driver and all passengersaffirmatively consent to smoking in such vehicle. 

(6) 	
Performers upon the stage, provided that smoking is part of a theatrical production. 

(7) 	
Bar areas of restaurants which are enclosed and equipped withadequate ventilation as defined in § 507-8. Upon request by the Greenfield Board of Health, the establishment shall provide proofof adequate ventilation, as defined in § 507-8, from a certified heating, ventilation and air conditioning engineer. The configuration of the restaurant shall not require nonsmoking dining patrons to pass through any portion of the bar area of the restaurant. Signs indicating the nonsmoking section shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every nonsmoking area. 

(8) 	
Bars. 


B. 	Bars and bar areas of restaurants that permit smoking must conspicuously post signage approved and supplied by the Board atthe entrance prohibiting persons under 18 and advising patrons of the health hazards of environmental tobacco smoke. 

94.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:369 
C. 	Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment as described in this section may declare that entire establishment as anonsmoking establishment. 
§ 507-12. Posting of signs. 
A. 	"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosedin a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking isprohibited by this regulation by the owner, operator, manager or otherperson having control of such building or other place. 
B. 	Every restaurant shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuoussign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
§ 507-13. Enforcement. 
A. 	Enforcement of this regulation shall be implemented by the Board ofHealth, its staff, or other officials who may be designated by the Boardof Health. 
B. 	Any citizen who desires to do so may file a complaint requestingenforcement of this regulation by the Board of Health. 
§ 507-14. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Any person who smokes in a smoke-free area as specified in §§ 507-9and 507-10 shall be subject to a fine of $20 for each violation. 
B. 	Any proprietor(s) or other person(s) in charge of a public place or place of employment who fails to comply with these regulations shall besubject to a fine of $200 for each day a violation continues. 
§ 507-15. Effect on other regulations. 
These regulations shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smokingwhere it is otherwise prohibited by other applicable health, safety or firecodes, regulations or statutes. 
§ 507-16. Tobacco sales to minors prohibited; tobacco retailerspermit. 
A. 	Sales to minors. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 6, it is a violation of these regulations to sell a cigarette, chewing tobacco, snuff, or anytobacco in any of its forms to any person under the age of 18 or, notbeing his parent or guardian, to give a cigarette, chewing tobacco, snuff, or tobacco in any of its forms to any person under the age of 18. 
B. Posting of state law. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 7, a copyof MGL c. 270, § 6 shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or 
1:370 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to sellcigarettes at retail. The notice shall be that notice provided by the Massachusetts Department of Health. Such notice shall be at least 48square inches and shall be posted at the cash register which receivesthe greatest volume of single cigarette package sales in such a manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or approachingthe cash register. Such notice shall directly face the purchaser and shallnot be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor. For all other cash registersthat sell cigarettes, a notice shall be attached which is no smaller thannine inches, which is the size of the sign provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Such notice must be posted in a mannerso that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or approachingthe cash register. Such notice shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than four feetor more than nine feet from the floor. 
Identification required. No retailer shall sell or permit to be sold cigarettes or other tobacco products to an individual without requesting and examining photographic identification establishing thepurchaser's age as 18 years or greater. 
Permit required. After November 15, 1994, it shall be unlawful for aretailer to sell cigarettes or other tobacco products unless that retailerholds and maintains a valid permit from the Board of Health for each location in which tobacco products are sold. The term of the permitshall be one year. 
(1) 	
Fee for permit. The fee for a one-year tobacco retailer's permit is $25. 

(2) 	
Nontransferability. A tobacco retail permit is nontransferable, except a new permit will be issued to a tobacco retailer who changes locations. 


Vending machines. After November 15, 1994, cigarette vendingmachines or any other mechanical self-service devices for the sale or distribution of tobacco products are prohibited. 
Out-of-package sales prohibited. It is unlawful to sell cigarettes outof the manufacturer's package with required health warnings. Sale or distribution of cigarettes in any form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited. 
Free distribution/free samples prohibited. No person or entity shall distribute without charge tobacco products in any public place or at anyevent open to the public. 
Self-service displays prohibited. Self-service distribution of tobacco products, from which individual packages or cartons may be selectedby the customer, is prohibited. 
1:371 

I. 	Violations and penalties of § 507-16. A permit shall be suspended afternotice and opportunity to be heard as follows: 
(1) 	
In the case of a first violation, the permit holder shall be notified inwriting of penalties levied for further violations, including permitsuspension. 

(2) 	
In the case of a second violation within a twenty-four-month period,the permit holder shall be fined $200. The Board may waive thefine and require the offending retailer to appear before the Board to outline plans for compliance in the future. 

(3) 	
In the case of a third violation within a twenty-four-month period,the permit shall be suspended for three days from the date of suspension. 

(4) 	
In the case of fourth and subsequent violations within a twenty­four-month period, the permit shall be suspended for 30 days from the date of suspension. 

(5) 	
The Board shall provide notice to the permit holder of the intentto suspend a tobacco sales permit, which notice shall contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a hearing, whichdate shall be no earlier than seven days after the date of saidnotice. The permit holder shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Board's decision, and thereasons therefor, in writing. All tobacco products shall be removedfrom the premises upon suspension of the tobacco sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco products shall constitute a separateviolation of this regulation. 


§ 507-17. Variances. 
A. 	The proprietor(s) of a public place may make written application to theBoard of Health for a variance from these regulations which the Boardof Health may grant to avoid manifest injustice or hardship, provided that the decision shall not conflict with the spirit of any minimumstandard established by these regulations. 
B. 	Notice of a hearing upon an original application for a variance must be posted with the public notice of the Board of Health meeting at whichit is to be considered. 
C. 	Variances may be granted for up to one year and extended for like periods upon submission of a renewal application. 
D. 	A copy of any variance granted under this section shall be maintainedon the premises for which it is issued for public inspection and a notice of the variance posted at the entrance. 
1:372 

ARTICLE III 
Tobacco Use or Possession on School Property by Students
[Adopted 5-23-2000 (Ch. 785, Art. II, of the 2002 Bylaws)] 
§ 507-18. General principle. 
The Greenfield Public Schools (GPS) are committed to ensuring a tobacco-free environment for the health and well-being of the entire school community. Education about the consequences of tobacco use is an integralpart of the GPS curriculum at many grade levels. 
§ 507-19. Applicability of state law; school policy. 
A. 	Smoking, and the use of tobacco products by students, staff, volunteersand visitors, is prohibited on all school property at all times in accordance with MGL c. 71, § 37H, effective June 4, 1993. 
B. 	District policy prohibits student possession of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia on school property and at school-sponsored trips and events. School property includes school buildings, school facilities,school grounds, school parking lots and school buses and any propertycontrolled by the School Committee. 
§ 507-20. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
SCHOOL-SPONSORED TRIPS AND EVENTS — Includes, but is not limited to, such activities as field trips, graduation events, sporting events, workinternships and dances. 
STUDENT — Students enrolled in the Greenfield Public Schools, regardlessof age. 
TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, or any other forms of tobacco. 
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA — Equipment, products, or materials of anykind which are intended or designed for producing, possessing, or using tobacco products. This shall not include cigarette rolling papers. 
TOBACCO USE — Smoking, inhaling, or chewing tobacco or tobacco products; reasonable cause to believe tobacco products are being used. 
§ 507-21. Disciplinary consequences. 
Upon determination by the Principal, or his/her designee, that a violationhas occurred, in accordance with the attached regulations (JFCG-R), the following consequences will result: 
A. 	First offense (within a given school year). 
1:373 

(1) 	
Removal of tobacco product or paraphernalia with return to theparent or legal guardian upon written request by the parent or legal guardian within 30 days of the violation. 

(2) 	
Parent/Guardian notification by letter or phone. 

(3) 	
Notification of sports and activities directors. (MIAA regulations will apply to athletes.) 

(4) 	
At the violator's option, fine of $50 or after-school tobacco education classes; three days, 1.5 hours per day. 


B. 	Second offense (within a given school year). 
(1) 	
Removal of the tobacco product or paraphernalia with return tothe parent or legal guardian upon written request by the parent or legal guardian within 30 days of the violation. 

(2) 	
Parent/Guardian conference. 

(3) 	
Notification of sports and activities directors. (MIAA regulations will apply to athletes.) 

(4) 	
At the violator's option, fine of $50 or a service project about therealities of tobacco use and attendance at after-school tobacco education classes; three days, 1.5 hours per day. 


C. 	Third offense and all subsequent offenses (within a given school year). 
(1) 	
Removal of the tobacco product or paraphernalia with return to the parent or legal guardian upon written request by the parent orlegal guardian within 30 days of the violation. 

(2) 	
Parent/Guardian conference. 

(3) 	
Notification of sports and activities directors. (MIAA regulationswill apply to athletes.) 

(4) 	
Fine of $50. 

(5) 	
Mandatory attendance at after-school tobacco education classes;three days, 1.5 hours per day. 


§ 507-22. Procedures. 
A. 	Reporting. Any school employee who observes a student in possessionof, or using, a tobacco product, or who has reasonable cause to believea student is in possession of, or using, a tobacco product, shall direct the student to the Principal, or his/her designee, and report theincident. If the violation is alleged to have occurred during a school-sponsored activity off school grounds, the person who made the observation shall report the violation to the Principal, or his/herdesignee, within 48 hours, and shall make out a written statementincluding the student's name, the date, time and circumstances 
1:374 

B. 

C. 

D. 

surrounding the incident, to include a list of witnesses who may haveobserved the incident. 
Investigation. After receiving the report by the employee, the Principal,or his/her designee, shall investigate the circumstances surroundingthe incident. The investigation shall include an interview with the student, the reporter, and any identified witnesses. The student shallhave the opportunity to relate his/her side of the incident and substantiate his/her statements. The Principal shall notify the student's parent or guardian that the student is the subject of the investigation. 
Determination. After completion of the investigation, the Principal, orhis/her designee, shall make a determination. The Principal, or his/her designee, determines whether or not the evidence supports a findingthat a student possessed or used tobacco products in violation of thispolicy. The Principal shall provide written notification to the student and his/her parents of the determination and the consequences as setforth in this policy. A determination will be made within three days fromthe date that the incident was reported to the Principal. 
Enforcement. 
(1) 	
The Principal, or his/her designee, shall initiate the disciplinaryconsequences as set forth by this policy. If the offender chooses a described alternative to paying the fine, the violation will bedocumented pending completion of the alternative consequence.If the student fails to satisfactorily complete the alternative obligation, the ticket will be issued. The date of the ticket willreflect the date that it is issued. 

(2) 	
Fines. When a fine is levied, the following procedures shall apply: 

(a) 	
As enforcing agents of the Board of Health, designated GPSschool officials are authorized to sign noncriminal tickets forschool smoking regulation violations, as described in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and the GPS Policy (JFCG). 

(b) 	
When a ticket is to be issued, the enforcing agent writes anoncriminal ticket (in four copies) and issues copies to the following: 


[1] 	Offender's copy: handed to violator after violation. 
[2] 	Town Clerk's copy: sent or delivered to Town Clerk's office. 
[3] 	Board of Health copy: sent or delivered to Board of Healthoffice. 
[4] 	School copy: kept on file at school office. 
[5] 	(Optional) District Court copy: mailed to Clerk Magistrate,Greenfield District Court. 
1:375 


(c) 	
School district officials, or their designees, shall enter ticketsissued on a control list to track the disposition of the violations. 

(d) 	
Options available to the offender within 21 days of the issuanceof the ticket are: 

[1] 	Appear in person at the office of the Town Clerk to pay the fine; or 
[2] 	Pay the fine by mail to the office of the Town Clerk; or 
[3] 	Request a hearing in the Greenfield District Court. This request must be submitted in writing and be accompaniedby the offender's copy of the ticket. 

(e) 	
Payment of the fine, either in person or by mail, serves as the final disposition of the case. After 21 days, school district staffwill check whether the fine has been paid. The Town Clerk willnotify the Board of Health and GPS of the payment. 

(f) 	
If a hearing is requested with the District Court, a designatedschool official will be present at the hearing. There are threepossible outcomes to such a court hearing: 

[1] 	If the Court finds that the violation did not occur, or that the person appearing did not commit the violation, thematter will be dismissed. 
[2] 	If the Court finds that the offender committed the violation, and such person pays the fine, this will serve asfinal disposition of the case. 
[3] 	If the Court finds that the violation was committed by theoffender, and the offender refuses to pay, the Town maypursue the matter by means of a criminal complaint. 

(g) 	
If 21 calendar days elapse and the offender has neither paidthe fine nor requested a hearing, the Board of Health shalldecide whether to file a criminal complaint. 


§ 507-23. Training and information. 
The Principal shall provide information and cause training of all schoolemployees to occur with regard to the implementation of this policy. Parents and students shall be notified each year of the provisions of this policythrough publication in the student handbook. 
1:376 

ARTICLE IV 
Body Art Establishments
[Adopted effective 2-1-2001 (Ch. 707 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 507-24. Findings and intent. 
Body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the Commonwealth; and knowledge and practice of universal precautions, sanitation, personalhygiene, sterilization and aftercare requirements on the part of the practitioner should be demonstrated to prevent the transmission of disease or injury to the client and/or practitioner. Therefore, the Board of Health ofthe Town of Greenfield passes these rules and regulations for the practiceof body art in the Town of Greenfield as part of its mission to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public. 
§ 507-25. Authority. 
These regulations are promulgated under the authority granted to the Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31. 
§ 507-26. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the bodyart procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if necessary. 
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a body art establishment permit or practitioner permit. 
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at aspecific temperature over a period of time. 
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms ofmicrobial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclavefor a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a temperature of 270° F. 
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — OSHA guidelines containedin 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens." 
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health that has jurisdictionin the community in which a body art establishment is located, including the board or officer having like powers and duties in towns where there is noBoard of Health. 
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the followingtechniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, andscarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered 
1:377 

medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as implants under the skin, which are prohibited. 
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — A location, place, orbusiness that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public orprivate, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for profit. 
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identifiedindividual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board. 
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client withpresterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry or other adornment into the opening. This definition excludes piercing of theearlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufacturedexclusively for ear piercing. 
BRAIDING — The cutting of strips of skin of a person, which strips are thento be intertwined with one another and placed onto such person so as tocause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin to heal in such intertwined condition. 
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually becomes a scar. 
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in thesterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment used for the practice of body art. 
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at abody art establishment. 
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000: Storageand Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or BiologicalWaste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII and/or 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. This includes any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectiousmaterial; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentiallyinfectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and whichare capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and anywastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials. 
COSMETIC TATTOOING (ALSO KNOWN AS "PERMANENT COSMETICS,""MICROPIGMENT IMPLANTATION" or "DERMAL PIGMENTATION") — Theimplantation of permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the face and hair imitation. 
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the UnitedStates Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms oninanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for useor handling. 
1:378 

EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilizedsingle-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's instructions. 
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operationof a body art establishment. 
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucus membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodilyfluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucousmembrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially infectious matter. 
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water underpressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body. 
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature 110° F. to130° F. 
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's bodyor may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure. 
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other meansintended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa. 
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must be made of surgical-implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k whiteor yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosityplastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been properly sterilized prior to use. 
LIGHT-COLORED — A light reflectance value of 70% or greater. 
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years. 
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van, camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movablestructure, bar, home or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or other event whereat one desires to or actually does conduct body art procedures,excepting only a licensed body art establishment. 
OPERATOR — Any person who individually, or jointly or severally with others, owns or controls an establishment, but is not a body art practitioner. 
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either 1) operate a body artestablishment or 2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice ofbody art pursuant to these regulations. Said permit is exclusive of theestablishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements that may exist within the community or political subdivision comprising theBoard's jurisdiction. 
1:379 

PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organizationor any other nongovernmental legal entity, including but not limited to corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trustsor unincorporated organizations. 
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 2. 
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contactsthe client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associatedwork area which may require sanitizing. 
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
SANITIZE — The application of a United States EPA-registered sanitizer ona cleaned surface in accordance with the label instructions. 
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result inpermanently raised wheals or bumps known as "keloids." 
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limitedto, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass. 
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that islabeled with the International Biohazard Symbol. 
SINGLE-USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, butnot limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper orplastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. 
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy allmicrobial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores. 
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced byinsertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of theskin. 
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or underthe skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used topuncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. 
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body art establishment." 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL "3D" BODY ART or BEADING or IMPLANTATION 
— The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection orinsertion of an object, device or other thing made of matters such as steel,titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials, beneath the surface of the skin of a person. This term does not include "body piercing." 
1:380 

ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physicallylarge enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillationstransmitted through the contained liquid. 
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelinesfor Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of HumanImmunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8.This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee toassume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention; andproper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body-fluid-contaminated products. 
§ 507-27. Exemptions. 
A. 	Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2 who perform body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from theseregulations. 
B. 	Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from theseregulations. 
§ 507-28. Restrictions. 
A. 	No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall beperformed on a person under the age of 18. 
B. 	Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed on a person under the age of 18, provided that the person is accompaniedby a properly identified parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardianwho has signed a form consenting to such procedure. 
C. 	No body art shall be performed upon an animal. 
D. 	The following body piercings are hereby prohibited: piercing of theuvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck; piercing of the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the webarea of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenum (tongue web);piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings, excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus; piercing of an eyelid,whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skeweringof a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing through the shaft of the penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any areafrom the corona glandis to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing 
1:381 

of the scrotum, meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal"piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina, to include but not limited to so-called "triangles." 
E. 	The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed bya medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: tongue splitting; braiding; three dimensional/beading/implementation;tooth filing/fracturing/removal; cartilage modification; amputation;genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquids. 
§ 507-29. Operation of body art establishments. 
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the following minimum requirements: 
A. 	Physical plant. 
(1) 	
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth, durable, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, andin good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained ina clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/ benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned andsanitized after each client. 

(2) 	
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall separate the establishment's space from any other room used forhuman habitation, any food establishment or room where food isprepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. 

(3) 	
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to ensure against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents within the establishment. 

(4) 	
Each operator area shall have a minimum of 45 square feet offloor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an area that may be screened from public view for clients requestingprivacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a dividersor partitions at a minimum. 

(5) 	
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with anartificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles threefeet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be provided at the level where the body art procedure is beingperformed, where instruments and sharps are assembled and allcleaning areas. 

(6) 	
All electrical outlets in operator areas and cleaning areas shall beequipped with approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles. 


1:382 

(7) 
(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

(13) 

(14) 


A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold runningwater under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist-or foot-operated controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposablepaper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessiblewithin the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand sink. 
There shall be a sharps container in each operator area and eachcleaning area. 
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toiletand sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquidhand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. A body art establishment permanently located within a retail shopping center,or similar setting housing multiple operations within one enclosedstructure having shared entrance and exit points, shall not be required to provide a separate toilet room within such body artestablishment if Board-approved toilet facilities are located in theretail shopping center within 300 feet of the body art establishment so as to be readily accessible to any client or practitioner. 
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shallbe protected by a testable, reduced pressure backflow preventor installed in accordance with 142 CMR 248, as amended from time to time. 
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptaclesin the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall bestored in covered, leakproof, rodent-resistant containers and shall be removed from the premises at least weekly. 
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body artestablishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper disposal of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with allapplicable federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be ofadequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and anyequipment used for cleaning. 
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and supplies. 
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning areashall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or othersterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from the required ultrasonic cleaning unit. 
(15)The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusiveand separate from any workstation, instrument storage area, 
1:383 

cleaning area or any other area in the body art establishment usedfor body art activity. 
(16)No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishmentexcept service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g.,Seeing Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting rooms and nonprocedural areas. 
(17)Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where bodyart is performed, with the exception of fluids being offered to a client during or after a body art procedure. 
B. 	Requirements for single-use items, including inks, dyes and pigments. 
(1) 	
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediatelydisposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR

480. 

(2) 	
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to bodyart stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single-use anddisposable. 

(3) 	
Hollow-bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused. 

(4) 	
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid-core needles, and equipment shall bespecifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions. 

(5) 	
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be dilutedwith water from an approved potable source. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall betransferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use papercups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded. 


C. 	Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures. 
(1) 	
All nondisposable instruments used for body art, including all reusable solid-core needles, pins and stylets, shall be cleanedthoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soapor disinfectant solution and hot water, (to remove blood and tissue residue), and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit sold for cleaningpurposes under approval of the United States Food and DrugAdministration and operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 

(2) 	
After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for bodyart shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently sterilized in a steam autoclave sold for medical sterilization purposes under approval of the United States Food and DrugAdministration. All sterilizer packs shall contain either a sterilizer 


1:384 

indicator or internal temperature indicator. Sterilizer packs mustbe dated with an expiration date not to exceed six months. 
(3) 	
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must be available for inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall belocated away from workstations or areas frequented by the public. 

(4) 	
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attainingsterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shallbe verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's abilityto destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shallbe retained by the operator for a period of three years and made available to the Board upon request. 

(5) 	
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain storedin sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body artprocedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightlycovered container reserved for the storage of such instruments. 

(6) 	
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has beenbreached or after the expiration date without first repackaging andresterilizing. 

(7) 	
If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposableinstruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclaveshall not be required. 

(8) 	
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, theoperator shall wear sterile disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated. 

(9) 	
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergentand mechanically dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored in a dry, clean environment until used. 


D. 	Posting requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed: 
(1) 	
A disclosure statement, a model of which shall be available from the Board. A disclosure statement shall also be given to each client,advising him/her of the risks and possible consequences of body artprocedures. 

(2) 	
The name, address and phone number of the Greenfield Board ofHealth and the procedure for filing a complaint. 

(3) 	
An emergency plan, including: 

1:385 


(a) 	
A plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergencymedical services in the event of an emergency; 

(b) 	
A telephone in good working order shall be easily availableand accessible to all employees and clients during all hours ofoperation; and 

(c) 	
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correctemergency telephone numbers. 


(4) 	
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building official. 

(5) 	
A current establishment permit. 

(6) 	
Each practitioner's permit. 


E. 	Establishment recordkeeping. The establishment shall maintain thefollowing records in a secure place for a minimum of three years, andsuch records shall be made available to the Board upon request: 
(1) 	
Establishment information, which shall include: 

(a) 	
Establishment name. 

(b) 	
Hours of operation. 

(c) 	
Owner's name and address. 

(d) 	
A complete description of all body art procedures performed. 

(e) 	
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps, and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or packing slips shall satisfy this requirement. 

(f) 	
Material Safety Data Sheets, when available, for each ink anddye used by the establishment. 

(g) 	
Copies of waste hauler manifests. 

(h) 	
Copies of commercial biological monitoring tests. 

(i) 	
Exposure incident reports (kept permanently). 

(j) 	
A copy of these regulations. 



(2) 	
Employee information, which shall include: 

(a) 	
Full legal name and exact duties; 

(b) 	
Date of birth; 

(c) 	
Home address; 

1:386 

(d) 	
Home/Work phone numbers; 

(e) 	
Identification photograph; 

(f) 	
Dates of employment; 

(g) 	
Hepatitis B vaccination status or declination notification; and 

(h) 	
Training records. 



(3) 	
Client information. 

(a) 	
Client information shall include: 

[1] 	Name; 
[2] 	Age and valid identification; 
[3] 	Address of the client; 
[4] 	Date of the procedure; 
[5] 	Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s); 
[6] 	Description of procedure(s) performed and the location onthe body; 
[7] 	A signed consent form as specified by § 507-30D(2); and 
[8] 	If the client is a person under the age of 18, proof ofparental or guardian identification, presence and consent, including a copy of the photographic identification of theparent or guardian. 

(b) 
Client information shall be kept confidential at all times. 



(4) 	
Exposure control plan. The establishment shall require that allbody art practitioners have either completed, or were offered anddeclined, in writing, the Hepatitis B vaccination series. Records documenting compliance with this requirement shall be providedto the Board upon request. 



F. 	
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art establishment. 


§ 507-30. Standards of practice. 
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health standards: 
A. 	A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordancewith Universal Precautions set forth by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
1:387 

B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under theinfluence of alcohol or drugs. 
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the manufacturer's directions for use, and to applicable United States Foodand Drug Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear-piercing system on any part of the client's body other than the lobeof the ear. 
Health history and client informed consent. Prior to performing a body art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall: 
(1) 	
Inform the client, verbally and in writing, that the following healthconditions will increase health risks associated with receiving a body art procedure: 

(a) 	
History of diabetes; 

(b) 	
History of hemophilia (bleeding); 

(c) 	
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities tosoaps, disinfectants, etc.; 

(d) 	
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other sensitivities; 

(e) 	
History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy; 

(f) 	
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and 

(g) 	
Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV. 



(2) 	
Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above information was provided, that the client does not have a conditionthat prevents him/her from receiving body art, that the clientconsents to the performance of the body art procedure, and that the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required bySubsection K of this section. 


A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness, conform to the best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clotheswhen performing body art procedures. Before performing body artprocedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his/her hands in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry withdisposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary toremove contaminants. 
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear steriledisposable single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they becomepierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shallbe discarded, at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure 
1:388 

G. 

H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
on an individual client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection E before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than oneperson. The use of disposable single-use gloves does not preclude orsubstitute for hand-washing procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program. 
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shallwork in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in whichthere is a likelihood that the person could contaminate body art equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with anew disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before theprocedure resumes. 
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the following: 
(1) 	
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be free of rash or any visible infection. 

(2) 	
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin areaand the areas of skin surrounding where the body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed with soap and water and an approvedsurgical skin preparation, such as a five minute Betadine scrub. Ifshaving is necessary, single-use disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall be used. Blades shall be discardedafter each use, and reusable holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap and water. The washing pad shallbe discarded after a single use. 

(3) 	
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding or to absorb blood shall be single-use, and discarded immediatelyafter use in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of inaccordance with 105 CMR 480. 


Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application ofstencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a bodyart procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicatoror gauze shall be used once and then discarded. 
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written instructions on the aftercare of the body art site. 
(1) 	
The written instructions shall advise the client: 

1:389 


(a) 	
On the proper cleansing of the area which received the body art; 

(b) 	
To consult a health care provider for: 


[1] 	Unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site ofthe body art procedure; 
[2] 	Any rash; 
[3] 	Unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body artprocedure; or 
[4] 	A fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and 
[5] 	Of the address, and phone number of the establishment. 
(2) 	A copy shall be provided to the client. A model set of aftercare instructions shall be made available by the Board. 
L. 	Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed of in accordance with 105 CMR 480: Storage and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State Sanitary Code,Chapter VIII. 
§ 507-31. Exposure incident reports. 
A. 	An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of thebusiness day during which an exposure has or might have taken placeby the involved or knowledgeable body art practitioner for every exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art activity. 
B. 	Each exposure incident report shall contain: 
(1) 	
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity completed by any client or minor client involved in the exposureincident; 

(2) 	
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of the body involved therein; 

(3) 	
Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated; 

(4) 	
A copy of body art practitioner license of the involved body art practitioner; 

(5) 	
Date and time of exposure; 

(6) 	
A copy of any medical history released to the body art establishment or body art practitioner; and 

(7) 	
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physicianor waiver to consult a physician by persons involved. 


1:390 

§ 507-32. Injury reports. 
A written report of any injury, infection, complication or disease as a result of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection, complication ordisease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued thepermit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include: 
A. 	The name of the affected client. 
B. 	The name and location of the body art establishment involved. 
C. 	The nature of the injury, infection, complication or disease. 
D. 	The name and address of the affected client's health-care provider, if any. 
E. 	Any other information considered relevant to the situation. 
§ 507-33. Complaints. 
A. 	The Board shall investigate complaints received about an establishment's or practitioner's practices or acts which may violateany provision of the Board's regulations. 
B. 	If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and thereasons on which it is based. 
C. 	If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the allegedact or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Boardshall investigate; and if a finding is made that the act or practice is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall applywhatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation andshall notify the complainant of its action in this manner. 
§ 507-34. Body art establishment permits. 
A. 	No person may operate a body art establishment except with a validpermit from the Board. 
B. 	Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by andavailable from the Board. An applicant shall submit all informationrequired by the form and accompanying instructions. The term "application" as used herein shall include the original and renewalapplications. 
C. 	An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire one year from the date of issuance unlessrevoked sooner by the Board. 
1:391 

D. 	The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, thefollowing information in order to be issued an establishment permit: 
(1) 	
Name, address, and telephone number of: 

(a) 	
The body art establishment; 

(b) 	
The operator of the establishment; and 

(c) 	
The body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment; 



(2) 	
The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number,where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment; 

(3) 	
A signed and dated acknowledgment that the applicant has received, read and understood the requirements of the Board'sbody art regulations; 

(4) 	
A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment to scalefor a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application process; 

(5) 	
An exposure report plan; and 

(6) 	
Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require. 


E. 	The annual fee for the body art establishment permit shall be $150. 
F. 	A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from oneplace or person to another. 
§ 507-35. Body art practitioner permits. 
A. 	No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedurewithout first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board. The annualfee for the body art practitioner permit shall be $100. 
B. 	A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age. 
C. 	A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shallautomatically expire one year from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the Board. 
D. 	The application for a practitioner permit shall include: 
(1) 	
Name; 

(2) 	
Date of birth; 

(3) 	
Residence address; 

(4) 	
Mailing address; 

(5) 	
Phone number; 

(6) 	
Place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and 

1:392 

(7) 	Training and/or experience as set out in Subsection E below. 

E. 	
Practitioner training and experience. 

(1) 	
In reviewing an application for a practitioner permit, the Boardmay consider experience, training and/or certification acquired inother states that regulate body art. 

(2) 	
Training. 

(a) 	
Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Boardand, at a minimum, shall include the following: 

[1] 	Bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent)which includes infectious disease control; waste disposal;hand-washing techniques; sterilization equipment operation and methods; and sanitization, disinfection andsterilization methods and techniques; and 
[2] 	Current certification in first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 

(b) 	
Examples of courses approved by the Board include "Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and "Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA). 



(3) 	
The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall providedocumentation, acceptable to the Board, that she/he completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a grade of C or better ata college accredited by the New England Association of Schoolsand Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This course must include instruction on the integumentary system (skin). 

(4) 	
The applicant for a tattoo, branding or scarification practitionerpermit shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that she/he completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a gradeof C or better at a college accredited by the New EnglandAssociation of Schools and Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This course must include instruction on the integumentarysystem (skin). 

(5) 	
The applicant for all practitioner permits shall submit evidence satisfactory to the Board of at least two years of actual experiencein the practice of performing body art activities of the kind forwhich the applicant seeks a body art practitioner permit to perform, whether such experience was obtained within or outsideof the commonwealth. 




F. 	A practitioner permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations. 
§ 507-36. Denial, revocation or refusal to renew permit. 
1:393 

A. 

B. 

C. 

The Board may deny a permit, revoke a permit or refuse to renew apermit on the following grounds, each of which, in and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for revocation or refusal to renew: 
(1) 	
Any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of thepublic would be at risk; 

(2) 	
Fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or itsrenewal; 

(3) 	
Criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such a nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicantunfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedingsresulting in a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or an admission of sufficient facts; 

(4) 	
Any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governingthe practice of body art; 

(5) 	
Practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired byalcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability; 

(6) 	
Being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or a habitual user of, narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or otherdrugs having similar effects; 

(7) 	
Knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person to perform activities requiring a permit; 

(8) 	
Continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended,or revoked; 

(9) 	
Having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by theproper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same asthose set forth in the Board's regulations; and 


(10)Other just and sufficient cause which the Board may determinewould render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit topractice body art. 
The Board shall notify an applicant, establishment or practitioner inwriting of any violation of the Board's regulations, for which the Boardintends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant, establishment or practitioner shall have seven days after receipt of suchwritten notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations. TheBoard may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit if the applicant, establishment or practitioner fails to comply after said seven days. 
Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial. 
1:394 

§ 507-37. Suspension of permit. 
The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence beforeit, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is animmediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice ofsuch suspension by the Board. 
§ 507-38. Hearing procedures. 
A. 	Suspension of a permit. 
(1) 	
After a Board suspension of a permit, a hearing shall be initiatedpursuant to 801 CMR 1.00 et seq. (Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure), no later than 21 calendar days after theeffective date of the suspension. 

(2) 	
Upon written request to the Board of Health, the establishment or practitioner shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard concerning the suspension of the permit by the Board. 

(3) 	
In cases of suspension of a permit, the hearing officer shall determine whether the Board has proved by a preponderance ofthe evidence that there existed immediately prior to or at the timeof the suspension an immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The hearing officer shall issue a writtendecision which contains a summary of the testimony and evidenceconsidered and the reasons for the decision. 


B. 	Denial, revocation, or refusal to renew a permit. 
(1) 	
If the Board determines that a permit shall be denied, revoked, ornot renewed pursuant to the Board's regulations, the Board shall initiate a hearing in accordance with 801 CMR 1.00 et seq. 

(2) 	
Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a writtendecision that contains a summary of the testimony and evidence considered and the reasons for the decision. 


§ 507-39. Unauthorized practice of body art. 
The Board shall refer to the appropriate District Attorney, Attorney General, or other law enforcement official any incidents of unauthorized practice. 
§ 507-40. Violations and penalties. 
The fine for a violation of any provision of these rules and regulations shall be $100 for the first offense. The establishment permit shall be suspendedfor 30 days for a second offense. The establishment permit shall be revokedfor a third offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
1:395 

§ 507-41. Noncriminal disposition. 
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 1, Article III, of the Code of the Town of Greenfield, whoever violates any provision of these rules andregulations may be penalized by noncriminal disposition. 
1:396 

ARTICLE V 
Hazardous Materials 
[Adopted as amended 2016 (Ch. 730 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 507-42. Authority. 
This regulation is adopted by the Town of Greenfield under its Home Rule powers, its police powers to protect the public health and welfare and itsauthorization under the provisions of MGL c, 111, §§ 31 and 122. 
§ 507-43. Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this regulation is to protect, preserve and maintain theexisting and potential groundwater supply, groundwater recharge areasand surface water within the designated Water Resource District(s) of the Town of Greenfield, as identified in 1) the Zoning Ordinance of the Townof Greenfield or 2) as shown on a plan titled "Water Resource District(s)8-8-1985" and as approved and defined by the Board of Health. Nothing in this regulation shall be construed as inconsistent with, or in interferencewith, the authority vested upon the Greenfield Fire Chief under MGL c. 148,or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
§ 507-44. Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this regulation: 
ABANDONED — Being out of service for a period in excess of six months,in the case of a storage facility for which a license is required under theprovisions of MGL c. 148, § 13, or for a period of 12 months, in the case of any other storage facility. 
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Town of Greenfield Board of Health or its designated agent. The Board of Health may designate as its agent for the purpose of the administration and/or enforcement of any or all of thisregulation the Director of the Board of Health, head of the Fire Departmentor any other Town official that the Board judges to be appropriate. 
DESIGNATED WATER RESOURCE DISTRICT — A district so designated bywritten and/or plan definition by a majority vote of the Board of Health at aproperly convened meeting. 
DISCHARGE — The disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking,incineration or placing of any hazardous material or any constituent thereofinto or on any land or water so that such material may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,including groundwaters. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or combination of substances which, because of quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectiouscharacteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to watersupplies or to human health if disposed into or on any land or water in 
1:397 

the Town of Greenfield. Any substance deemed a "hazardous waste" underSection 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, 40 CFR Part 261, shall also be deemed a hazardous material for the purposes of this regulation.95 
LEAK — Any uncontrolled movement, measurable by a testing method accurate to 0.05 gallon per hour or less, of any hazardous material out of atank or its components, or any uncontrolled movement of water into a tankor its components. 
TANK — Any structure used, or designed to be used, for the storage ofhazardous materials of any kind. 
TOWN — The Town of Greenfield. 
UNDERGROUND STORAGE — Storage below ground level, but shall notinclude storage for heating purposes in a freestanding container within abuilding. 
§ 507-45. Registration. 
A. 	Every owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment,including home occupations, storing hazardous materials in quantities totaling more than 50 gallons liquid volume or 25 pounds dry weightshall register with the Town Board of Health, on a form so obtained, thefollowing information: 
(1) 	
Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the owner or operator. 

(2) 	
Capacity and contents of the tank(s), with a specific description of the type of hazardous materials being stored. 

(3) 	
The date of installation of the tank, if available. 

(4) 	
The type of tank construction and indication of any leak detection system in place. 

(5) 	
The depth below ground level of the lowest and highest points ofthe tank if the tank is subsurface. 

(6) 	
Description of any previous leaks, including approximate dates,causes, estimated amounts, and repairs undertaken. 


B. 	Owners or operators of commercial or industrial establishments who meet the registration requirement of Subsection A shall registerinitially by January 15, 1987, and annually thereafter within 30 days ofJanuary 15 each year. Owners or operators of commercial or industrial establishments who later meet the registration requirement shall register initially within 30 days of meeting such requirements, andthereafter within 30 days of January 15 each year. 

95.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:398 
C. 	In addition to registration, owners or operators of commercial or industrial establishments registered in accordance with Subsections A and B shall maintain, on premises, an inventory, reconciled on amonthly basis, of purchase, sale, use, disposal or discharge of hazardous materials. The purpose of this inventory is to detect any product loss and to provide an ongoing record of all quantities ofhazardous materials within the Town over the registration period. Ifunaccounted-for product loss is discovered in the monthly reconciliation, the owner or operator shall comply with the provisionsof § 507-51B below. Accurate daily inventory records required pursuantto MGL c. 148 and 527 CMR 5.05(3)(a) shall suffice for the purposes of this section, and may be submitted under Subsection D below, inaccordance with this regulation. 
D. 	Upon the request of the Board of Health, owners or operators shall produce within 24 hours the latest reconciled inventory. 
E. 	Wastes containing hazardous materials shall be held on the premises inproduct-tight containers for removal by a licensed carrier for disposal in accordance with MGL c. 21C, the Hazardous Waste Management Act. 
F. 	Surfaces underlying areas where hazardous materials are stored aboveground, or used, transferred or delivered to such tanks, shall be impermeable to the materials being stored and shall be enclosed by apermanent dike of impermeable construction. 
(1) 	
At a minimum, the capabilities of the dike system must be sufficient to contain 10% of the total volume of the containers or the largestcontainer, whichever is greater. 

(2) 	
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to replace the application of Chapter 148 dike requirements to tanks licensedpursuant to that chapter of the General Laws, or licenses under 527CMR 9.09. 


§ 507-46. Underground storage tanks. 
A. 	Required information. 
(1) 	
All owners, including but not restricted to owners of buried fuel, gasoline and diesel fuel storage tanks, shall file with the Boardof Health the following information on a form obtained from theTown Clerk, if hazardous materials are stored underground in any quantity: 

(a) 	
The size of the tank. 

(b) 	
The type of subsurface tank. 

(c) 	
The type of hazardous material being stored and its quantity. 

(d) 	
The location of each tank on the premises, complete with sketch map. 


1:399 


(e) 	
The age of each tank and evidence of the date of installationand purchase, including any permits, if available. 


(2) 	
Such information shall be filed in the same manner and at the same times as that information required by § 507-46B above. 

(3) 	
Owners of tanks for which evidence of installation date is not available shall, at the order of the Board of Health, have such subsurface systems tested as per Subsection C below. If the Boardof Health determines that the tank is not product-tight, it shall be disposed of under the direction of that authority. The provisions ofthis subsection shall be in addition to the provisions of MGL c. 148and 527 CMR 10. 

(4) 	
All steel subsurface tanks shall be subject to mandatory testing15 years after the date of installation, and annually thereafter,or if evidence of the date of installation is not available and the Board of Health so determines, in accordance with the standards of National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 329, Chapter4-3.10, or other test of superior or equivalent accuracy. Owners may demonstrate to the Board of Health that such tests are notappropriate when, after a showing to the Board of Health ofmonitoring devices, double -walled construction, or equivalent safety precautions, the Board of Health determines that the subsurface tank does not represent a threat to groundwater orsurface water quality. Such waivers shall be required yearly. Nothing in this section shall be construed to replace or supersedethe testing requirements of MGL c. 148 or 527 CMR 9.00 et seq.,as amended. 

(5) 	
All materials used in the construction of any tank or container shallbe suitable for the purpose, and such tank or container shall bedesigned and constructed to withstand any normal stress to which it may be subjected. Where applicable, tanks shall be constructedin accordance with MGL c. 148 and 527 CMR 9.00 et seq. 


§ 507-47. Abandonment of storage tanks. 
A. 	The holder of any license issued for underground storage of any liquidshall notify the local licensing authority and the head of the FireDepartment whenever provisions of said license cease to be exercised. Upon notification, the Fire Chief shall prescribe appropriate actionunder 527 CMR 10.12(2), as amended, and MGL c. 148. 
B. 	All other tanks not regulated by MGL c. 148 shall be regulated as follows: 
(1) 	To abandon a tank which is located under a building and whichcannot be removed from the ground without first removing the building, the owner shall promptly notify the Board of Health of thisdecision and, subject to the directions of the Board of Health, have 
1:400 

all hazardous materials removed from the tank and the tank filled with sand or other inert material as prescribed by the authority. 
(2) 	
Except as provided in Subsection B(1), no tank may be abandonedin place. Above-ground tanks shall be disposed of after beingemptied of all hazardous materials. Underground storage tanks out of service for a period in excess of 12 months shall be consideredabandoned and the tank shall be thereafter emptied of all hazardous materials under the direction of the Board of Health. The product and the tank shall be disposed of at the owner'sexpense, as directed by that authority. 

(3) 	
The owner of a tank which will be out of service for less than 12 months shall promptly notify the Board of Health of the decisionand, where the tank is subsurface, the materials remaining shall beremoved from the tank and disposed of as per the instructions of that authority and the tank filled with water. 

(4) 	
If the Board of Health determines that a tank and its componentsshall be removed, any removal shall be completed within 90 days after that authority has notified the owner, in writing, of its decision. 


§ 507-48. Defects in tanks. 
All leaking tanks must be emptied by the owner or operator within 12 hoursafter detection of the leak and removed by the owner or operator as per§ 507-48B(4) above, or, where applicable, under the provisions of 527 CMR 
9.00 or MGL c. 148. 
§ 507-49. Variances. 
A. 	The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of this regulation unless otherwise required by law, and, in any case, when, inits opinion, the applicant has demonstrated that an equivalent degreeof environmental protection required under this regulation will still be achieved. The applicant, at his/her own expense, must notify allabutters by certified mail at least 10 days before the hearing at whichtime such variance request shall be considered. The notification shall state the variance sought and the reasons therefor. The Board of Healthshall also notify the Mayor, Conservation Commission, Fire Departmentand Director of Public Works of any variance requested under this section for their response, in writing. Any variance granted by theBoard of Health shall be in writing; any denial of a variance shall alsobe in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the denial.96 
B. 	Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with or replacethe authority of the Fire Chief under MGL c. 148. 

96.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:401 
§ 507-50. Enforcement. 
A. 	All discharges of hazardous materials within the Town are prohibited. 
B. 	Any person having knowledge of any discharge of hazardous materialsshall immediately report the discharge to the Fire Chief and to thePolice Department. The Police Department shall alert the Board of Health of the discharge. 
C. 	The Board of Health or its agents may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this regulation. 
D. 	Any person who violates any provision of this regulation shall bepunished by a fine of not more than $100. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; ifmore than one, each condition shall constitute a separate offense. Uponthe request of the Board of Health, the Board of Selectmen shall take such legal action as is necessary to enforce this regulation. 
1:402 

Chapter 515 
CONSERVATION COMMISSION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Development review — See Ch. 244. Stormwater management — See Ch. 381. Use of conservation land — See Ch. 322, Art. Wetlands protection — See Ch. 423. 
I. 
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 550, Art. V. 
1:403 

ARTICLE I 
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted as amended 2-10-2004 (Ch. 974 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 515-1. Meetings. 
A. 	The Conservation Commission, hereinafter called the "CC," shall meet on the second and fourth Tuesday evenings of the month. 
B. 	If the meeting date coincides with a holiday, the meeting will be rescheduled to the earliest possible date. 
C. 	Meetings may be cancelled if no scheduled public hearings, no oldbusiness, and/or if no quorum exists. There must be one meeting permonth. 
D. 	The annual organizational meeting shall be the first meeting of the CCin July of each year. The Chair, Vice Chair and any other officers deemednecessary for the smooth and efficient running of the Commission shall be elected by a majority vote of a quorum. All full members attendingthe meeting shall vote. 
E. 	The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in Robert's current edition of "Rules of Order" shall govern the CC and its deliberations. 
F. 	Special meetings of the CC may be called by: 
(1) 	
The Chair. 

(2) 	
In that person's absence, the Vice Chair. 

(3) 	
A majority of the CC. 


G. 	The order of business of regular meetings shall be: 
(1) 	
Call to Order. 

(2) 	
Approval of Last Meeting's Minutes. 

(3) 	
Public Hearings. 

(4) 	
Other Business. 

(5) 	
Enforcement Updates. 

(6) 	
Project Monitoring. 

(7) 	
Correspondence. 

(8) 	
Site Visit Scheduling. 

(9) 	
Set Next Meeting Date. 


(10)Adjourn Motion. 
1:405 

§ 515-2. Membership; quorum. 
A. 	Per the Greenfield Home Rule Charter, the CC consists of five full members and two alternate members. The five full members have voting power at all meetings. Alternate members may participate in adeliberation of the CC, but may not vote. 
B. 	A quorum will consist of three voting members of the CC. Alternatemembers cannot help constitute a quorum. 
§ 515-3. Appointments. 
The Mayor is the appointing authority. Recommendations can be made by amajority vote of the full members. 
§ 515-4. Officers; resignations. 
A. 	Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings and shall exercise suchpowers as properly pertain to that office. 
B. 	Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall assume the responsibilities of the Chair in that person's absence. 
C. 	Chair Pro Tem. In the absence of the Chair and Vice Chair, a Chair Pro Tem may be elected for that meeting. 
D. 	All resignations shall be made in writing and sent to both the Mayorand the Town Clerk. Verbal resignations will not be accepted. 
§ 515-5. Clerk. 
A. 	A Clerk will be provided by the Planning Department and usually havethe title of "Permits Manager" (agent). The Permits Manager should befamiliar with all facets of wetlands protection laws and be able to offer direction when requested and do research as needed. 
B. 	The agent will be responsible for establishing, updating and/or maintaining the following: 
(1) 	
A copy of MGL c. 131, § 40. 

(2) 	
A copy of Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00). 

(3) 	
A copy of the Wetlands Reference Manual for Conservation Commissions. 

(4) 	
The Town Wetlands Ordinance.97 

(5) 	
Policy Bylaw. 

(6) 	
Full and accurate records of all regular and special CC meetings. 



97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 423, Wetlands Protection. 
1:406 
(7) 	
Any other records deemed necessary for the CC's operation. 

(8) 	
Databases. 


C. 	The agent shall be responsible for mailing to members, at least threeworking days prior to each regular meeting, notice of the meeting,agenda materials, and the minutes of the previous meeting. 
D. 	The agent shall act as the corresponding agent for the CC, preservingcopies of all correspondence. 
E. 	The agent shall perform all other duties incident to the office or that may be required by the CC. 
§ 515-6. Board operation; member conduct. 
A. 	The CC shall act as a unit and decisions relative to conservation issues, especially those concerning public hearings, shall be settled by a formalvote at a legally called meeting. 
B. 	Following three unexplained consecutive absences from scheduled meetings, the absent CC member will be contacted by the CC Chair todetermine the intention of that member regarding future membership. 
C. 	Members must be on time and stay for the duration of the meeting or site visit. If attendance becomes problematic to the smooth workingof the Commission, the Chair will address the issue with the member. If it continues to be an issue, the Chair will contact the Mayor for resolution. Excused absences should be reported to the Chair anddesignated in the meeting minutes. CC members must act professionally at all times while representing the Town. 
D. 	Only CC members who have attended all portions of a wetlands hearingshould vote on that application. Other members should abstain. Positivevotes of three members are required for passage. 
§ 515-7. Alternate members.98 
A. 	Alternate members can be appointed by a majority vote of the CC asunpaid consultants. 
B. 	Alternate members' terms expire at the end of June each year. A vote atthe organizational meeting during July may reappoint them. They neednot attend the meeting to reapply. 
C. 	Alternate members are to receive copies of the agenda and minutes. 
§ 515-8. Conservation land. 
A. 	The CC shall keep a list of all the land it is responsible for by map/parcel and acreage. 

98.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:407 
B. 	Separate bank accounts will be kept for each address. Those funds willbe used for passive recreation purposes. 
C. 	The CC shall set rules and regulations for the use of conservation landunder its jurisdiction and can amend these rules and regulations by amajority vote of the CC. 
§ 515-9. Education. 
A. 	The Mayor and the CC recognize the fact there is a long learning curvefor a new member to become a competent member. The CC budget carries educational dollars for this purpose. 
B. 	It is recommended that members attend the spring and/or fall seminarsoffered by the Massachusetts Association of Conservation Commissions (MACC). MACC also offers courses that a CC member will find useful. 
C. 	Approval of these expenditures takes a majority vote of the CC andmust be sent to the Mayor for approval prior to the meeting. 
1:408 

Chapter 520 
COUNCIL ON AGING 
§ 520-1. Name and establishment. 
The name of the organization shall be the "Greenfield Council on Aging,"hereinafter referred to as the "GCOA," as established by Town Meeting of the Town of Greenfield, Massachusetts on March 18, 1967. 
§ 520-2. Purpose. 
A. 	The statement of purpose of the Greenfield Council on Aging is based on this premise: the community shares a collective responsibility forthose who are seniors, that seniors have a right to participate indetermining matters which vitally affect them, and that there is an important community resource in the wisdom, experience, skills, andabilities which the senior population has to share. 
B. 	In accordance with this philosophy, the GCOA is committed to fulfilling the following functions: 
(1) 	
Provide, through its multi-purpose Senior Center, an environmentthat supports personal dignity, opportunities for sharing, creative expression, learning, and a general encouragement of initiative andself-fulfillment. 

(2) 	
Provide meaningful educational, social, recreational, cultural, and volunteer opportunities to encourage independence, participationand community involvement. 

(3) 	
Provide healthy lifestyle support through health promotion, health education, physical activities, and other wellness programs. 

(4) 	
Be responsive and accessible to the changing needs of seniors,in cooperation with community organizations, agencies and individuals; offer assistance in coping with the challenges of agingby providing information, referrals, and counseling as appropriate. 


§ 520-3. Senior Center location. 
The location of the Senior Center will be determined by the GCOA. 
§ 520-4. Membership. 
A. 	The duties of the GCOA members shall be to support the GCOA Director in implementing the statement of purpose. The terms "member" and"membership" refer to voting GCOA members. 
B. 	The GCOA shall consist of not less than five voting members nor more than 15 voting members, inclusive of the Chair, and all shall be residents of the Town of Greenfield. 
1:409 

C. 	The membership term for the GCOA shall be for a period of threeyears and may be renewed for one additional term. After two terms, the member shall take at least one year off. After the year off, the membershall be eligible to serve on the GCOA for another cycle. The first of thetwo consecutive terms would begin with the next appointment to the GCOA beginning in July following appointment. Member terms shall bestaggered to ensure that five positions shall be up for reappointmenteach year. Appointments are subject to the approval of the Mayor.99 
D. 	All members of the GCOA shall be sworn in at the beginning of theirterm by the Town Clerk's office at the regular July meeting, or at theClerk's office. GCOA members are encouraged to have served as an associate member prior to their service on the GCOA. 
E. 	Associate (nonvoting) members may be appointed as deemed appropriate and shall serve for a period of up to two years. The term of appointment shall expire at the end of the two-year period, or priorto such time if the associate member is made a GCOA member. An associate member's term may be renewed indefinitely. 
F. 	Attendance, resignations and vacancies. 
(1) 	
Regular attendance is expected of all GCOA members. In the eventof the unexcused absence of any member for three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings, except for reasons of health or extenuating circumstances as duly reported to the Chair or Director in advance of GCOA meetings, the GCOA shall request resignation of that member. If a requested resignation is not forthcoming from the member, the GCOA will ask the Mayor torequest termination of this member. 

(2) 	
In the event that a member wishes to resign from the GCOA, he/she shall notify both the Mayor and the GCOA in writing. 

(3) 	
Unexpired terms resulting from death, resignations, or moving from the Town of Greenfield may be filled at the time of vacancy,for the duration of that term, through the regular appointmentprocess. This would be considered the first of the two consecutive term maximum. 


§ 520-5. Voting rights of members. 
A. 	All voting rights shall be vested in the GCOA members, and each individual member shall be entitled to one vote with respect to anyquestion or matter which may come before a meeting of the membersof the GCOA. Associate members may suggest or advise the GCOA, but may not propose motions or have voting privileges. 

99.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:410 
B. 	Except as otherwise provided in these bylaws, the vote of a simplemajority of the members at which a quorum is present shall be necessary and sufficient to decide such a question or matter. 
C. 	Quorum. At all meetings of the members of the GCOA, the presence ofone more than 1/2 of the present GCOA membership entitled to vote at such meeting shall be necessary and sufficient to constitute a quorumfor the transaction of any business. Subcommittee meetings shall alsohave attendance of one more than 1/2 of their members to transact business. 
§ 520-6. Officers; Director. 
A. 	The officers of the GCOA shall consist of a Chair, a Vice-Chair, a Secretary, and a Treasurer and may also include such number ofAssistant Secretaries and Assistant Treasurers as the GCOA may fromtime to time deem advisable. 
B. 	Officers of the GCOA shall be elected annually by simple majority voteat the June meeting and shall take office upon the beginning of thenew fiscal year. Members of Greenfield Senior Foundation Board of Directors shall not be eligible to serve as an officer of the GCOA, butmay serve as voting members. 
C. 	Chair. The Chair shall preside at GCOA meetings, shall appoint all committees, and shall be an ex officio member of all committees. The term of office for the Chair shall be for a period of one year, with theoption of renewal. 
D. 	Vice-Chair. During the absence or disability of the Chair, the Vice-Chairshall exercise all the functions of the Chair and, when so acting, shallhave all the powers of the Chair. If the office of the Chair should become vacant, the Vice-Chair will assume such office for the unexpired term.The term of office for the Vice-Chair shall be for a period of one year,with the option of renewal. 
E. 	Secretary. The Secretary, or designated recorder, shall record proceedings of the GCOA meetings and/or read correspondence. Theterm of office for the Secretary shall be for a period of one year, with the option of renewal. 
F. 	Treasurer. The Treasurer shall report to the GCOA on financial matters.A yearly budget and monthly statements of expenditures shall be reviewed by the Treasurer. The term of office for the Treasurer shall befor a period of one year, with the option of renewal. 
G. 	Director of the Council on Aging and Senior Center. 
(1) 	The Council on Aging shall select and submit to the Mayor forappointment the candidate to serve as Director of the Council onAging. The Director shall be responsible for the administration of the Senior Center, subject to the direction of the Mayor, the 
1:411 

bylaws and policies of the Council on Aging, and in accordance withthe personnel policies, procedures and practices of the Town as administered by the Department of Human Resources. 
(2) 	
The Director shall be responsible for the efficient operation of theSenior Center. The Director will have charge of all activities of the GCOA and assist in the development of projects sponsored or co­sponsored by the GCOA. The Director is further responsible forkeeping aware of new developments as they affect Senior Center operations. 

(3) 	
The Director shall hire, subject to the approval of the Mayor, allemployees of the Senior Center; and shall supervise all employees in accordance with the personnel policies, procedures, and practices of the Town as administered by the Department of HumanResources, and/or the policies of the Council on Aging. 


§ 520-7. Committees. 
A. 	Standing committees of the Council shall include: 
(1) 	
Executive Committee. 

(2) 	
Personnel Committee. 

(3) 	
Nominating Committee. 

(4) 	
Legislative Committee. 

(5) 	
Bylaw Committee. 

(6) 	
Building Committee. 


B. 	Additional committees may be established as deemed necessary by the GCOA through its Chair and Executive Committee. 
C. 	Executive Committee. The committee shall meet monthly with theDirector to review long-range planning, financial records, and shall review the annual budget. The Chair shall call meetings of the Executive Committee whenever in his/her judgment the business of theGCOA so requires. In case of an emergency, the Executive Committee may make decisions on behalf of the GCOA. The committee shall reportto the GCOA on all its committee meetings at the next regularlyscheduled GCOA meeting. 
D. 	Personnel Committee. The committee members shall review and make recommendations to the Mayor upon a vacancy in the Office of Director.The committee shall report to the GCOA on all its committee meetings at the next regularly scheduled GCOA meeting.100 

100.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:412 
E. 	Nominating Committee. The committee shall nominate members anda slate of officers annually and present the slate to the GCOA at the May meeting. It shall be the responsibility of this committee to presentcandidates for associate membership to the GCOA and to recommendreplacements as vacancies occur on the GCOA. The committee shall report to the GCOA on all its meetings at the next regularly scheduledGCOA meeting. 
F. 	Legislative Committee. The committee shall monitor the local, state and federal developments as they affect the senior population. Thecommittee shall work with the Director to contact Legislators and otherofficials to advocate for seniors on behalf of the GCOA. The committee shall report to the GCOA on all its committee meetings at the nextregularly scheduled GCOA meeting. 
G. 	Bylaw Committee. The committee shall review the GCOA bylaws upon request of any GCOA member. The committee shall report to the GCOAon all its meetings at the next regularly scheduled GCOA meeting. 
H. 	Building Committee. The committee shall meet no less than two times per year to tour and inspect the facility. The committee shall overseethe general maintenance of the Senior Center, renovations, and building projects. The committee shall report to the GCOA on all its meetings at the next regularly scheduled GCOA meeting. 
I. 	Each GCOA member is encouraged to serve on a minimum of onecommittee, and a member may serve on more than one committee. Associate members may also serve on committees as requested by theGCOA Chair. 
§ 520-8. Meetings. 
A. 	Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the members of the GCOA shallbe held at the Senior Center monthly and posted in accordance withOpen Meeting Law. 
B. 	Special meetings. Special meetings of the GCOA members may becalled at any time by the Chair, or by the Secretary based on a requestby the majority of the members, with five working days' notice sent to each member of the GCOA, and posted in accordance with the OpenMeeting Law. 
C. 	Rules of order. The rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised shall govern the GCOA in all cases in which they are applicable and inwhich they are consistent with these bylaws. 
§ 520-9. Amendments. 
These bylaws or any section thereof may be amended or repealed by a two-thirds vote of the GCOA at any scheduled meeting. Written notices of suchproposed changes shall be presented to each voting member of the GCOA 
1:413 

at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which such proposed changes shallbe submitted for a vote. 
§ 520-10. Effective date; availability of bylaws; review. 
A. 	The effective date of these bylaws shall be the date of the meeting atwhich the bylaws shall have been approved as hereinbefore set out by an affirmative vote of not less than 2/3 of the GCOA. 
B. 	The GCOA shall make copies of these bylaws available to each memberof the GCOA, the Mayor's office and the Town Clerk's office. Review of the bylaws shall take place as needed. 
Chapter 538 
LICENSE COMMISSIONERS 
1:414 

Part 1 
[Adopted As Amended 9-1-2008 (Ch. 376 Of The 2002 Bylaws)] 
Vehicles For Hire
ARTICLE I 
Definitions 
§ 538-1. Terms defined.101 
Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, as used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BOARD — The Board of License Commissioners. 
EXAMINER — The Chief of Police of the Town of Greenfield or any person or persons so designated by the Chief of Police. 
INSPECTIONAL SERVICES — The Chief of Police of the Town of Greenfield or any person or persons so designated by the Chief of Police. 
LIVERY — A private passenger vehicle (including, but not limited to, limousines) registered as a livery, the designed seating capacity of whichdoes not exceed 15 passengers including the driver, without a taxi meter, for hire for the transport of passengers for designated events (such asweddings, funerals, celebrations, airport transport, touring, or similar contractual purposes). This type of vehicle must be rented by means of a telephone request to the registered place of business of the owner ora contract arranged in advance of the time of the designated pickup. Nolicensed limousine/livery vehicle may pick up a person in response to a street hail or may stand in special areas authorized for taxis. This does notinclude vehicles engaged exclusively to provide services to funeral homes,hospitals or other medical assistance/special needs vehicles, nor any mass transit authority vehicles. 
NUMBER PLATE — The sign or markers furnished by the Registry of MotorVehicles on which is displayed the license number or marks assigned to a vehicle-for-hire. 
OPERATOR — Any person who operates a vehicle-for-hire. 
SEAT — The space in a vehicle-for-hire ordinarily occupied by one person. 
TAXI — A private passenger motor vehicle registered as a taxi, with orwithout a taximeter, used or designed to be used for the conveyance ofpassengers for hire from place to place but not over a fixed route or between fixed and regular termini. This type of vehicle may be requestedby call to a dispatcher or "hailed" on public ways for securing a ride. It alsomay pick up passengers in areas designated for taxis. 
TAXI STAND — An area within the public way designated as a taxi standby posted signs, painted curbs, or marked spaces, and as approved by theDepartment of Public Works. 
TOWN — The Town of Greenfield. 

101.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:415 
VEHICLE-FOR-HIRE — Any vehicle used or to be used as a taxi or livery orlimousine vehicle. 
VEHICLE-FOR-HIRE BUSINESS LICENSE — A license issued by the Boardof License Commissioners authorizing the operation of a vehicle-for-hirebusiness. 
VEHICLE-FOR-HIRE LICENSE — A license issued by the Chief of Police toa vehicle-for-hire business license holder authorizing the use of a particularvehicle. 
VEHICLE-FOR-HIRE OPERATOR'S LICENSE — A license issued by theChief of Police to authorize the holder thereof to operate a vehicle-for-hire. 
WAY — Any public way, any private way laid out for public use, any way dedicated to public use or any place to which the public has a right of accessas invitees or licensees. 
1:416 

ARTICLE II 
Business Licenses 
§ 538-2. License required. 
A. 	Prior to operating a vehicle-for-hire business in the Town of Greenfield, an applicant must secure a vehicle-for-hire business license from theBoard of License Commissioners and any other licenses and permitsrequired by the Town of Greenfield or Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
B. 	No taxi or taxi service shall accept a fare within the Town of Greenfield without conforming to all of these regulations. [Amended 2-15-2012 by Order No. FY 12-085] 
§ 538-3. Application. 
Applications for a vehicle-for-hire business license shall be made in writing, on Town-approved forms, to the Board of License Commissioners, and shallprovide under oath such information as the Board of License Commissionersmay require, including the following: 
A. 	Name and address. 
(1) 	
If an individual: the name and address of the applicant. 

(2) 	
If a corporation: the name, date of incorporation, address of its principal place of business, and the name and address of its officers. 

(3) 	
If a partnership, association, or unincorporated company: the name and addresses of the partners or associates and the address of itsprincipal place of business. 

(4) 	
If a foreign corporation, partnership, or unincorporated company: the name and address of an agent for service of process. 


B. 	Whether the applicant seeks a license for a taxi or livery/limousineservice. 
C. 	The intended place of business within the Town of Greenfield. 
D. 	The intended principal place of operation or garage of said vehiclewithin the Town of Greenfield. This location must be indicated on the vehicle registration. 
E. 	The name of the manager or principal representative. 
F. 	Proposed hours of operation. 
G. 	Telephone number where the licensee may be contacted during the dayand in the evening. 
H. 	Evidence of workers' compensation insurance. 
1:417 

§ 538-4. Grant or denial. 
A. 	In determining whether to issue a license, the Board may consider: public demand for the proposed service; the effect of the proposedservice upon relevant traffic and safety conditions; the suitability andfinancial stability of the applicant; and any and all other relevant facts and circumstances. 
B. 	Vehicle-for-hire business licenses may be granted only to suitable persons and corporations who are owners of taxis and liveries, and provided the established place of business is in the Town. 
C. 	The Board of License Commissioners may, upon receipt of a completedapplication, issue a license under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and in the public interest. The Board of LicenseCommissioners may require that the licensee provide the Board andChief of Police with a continuously updated list of those persons employed by the licensee as operators of vehicles for hire. 
§ 538-5. Suspension or revocation. 
A. 	A license may be revoked or suspended for a violation of the law or these regulations or if the public health and safety so requires.The Board of License Commissioners shall, as soon as is practicable,provide the licensee with written notice of the revocation or suspension and inform the license holder of the right to a hearing before the Board. 
B. 	A request for a hearing must be made in writing within 10 days ofreceipt of the notice. At the hearing, the licensee will have the opportunity to present testimony and other evidence and to be represented. Upon suspension or revocation, said license shall be immediately surrendered to the Board of License Commissioners. A request for a hearing shall not delay any suspension or revocation. 
§ 538-6. Term; renewal applications. 
A vehicle-for-hire business license shall be valid until December 31 of each year and may be renewed for one-year periods unless sooner revoked orsuspended. Application for a renewal must be submitted by November 15 ofeach year. 
§ 538-7. Conditions and restrictions. 
No later than June 1 of each year, the Board shall determine the conditionsand restrictions applicable to vehicles-for-hire businesses. Such determination shall be made based upon public need and convenience andthe promotion of public health and safety. 
§ 538-8. Fee. 
The annual fee for a vehicle-for-hire business license or renewal of same shall be $50. 
1:418 

ARTICLE III 
Vehicle Licenses 
§ 538-9. License required. 
A. 	Prior to the operation of any vehicle as a vehicle-for-hire, a vehicle-for­hire business licensee must secure a vehicle-for-hire license for each vehicle. The Chief of Police may only issue a vehicle-for-hire license ifthe vehicle has passed an inspection administered by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, as provided in § 538-12 of these regulations. 
B. 	A vehicle-for-hire license shall set forth the applicant's name and address, name and place of business of the vehicle-for-hire business licensee, a description of the vehicle, the vehicle's identification number or numbers, and the number of seats, exclusive of the operator.Such license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended. 
§ 538-10. Application. 
Application for a vehicle-for-hire license shall be made to the Chief of Police by the holder of a vehicle-for-hire business license. Such application shallset forth under oath all information that the Chief of Police may require,including: 
A. 	The make, model, vehicle identification number, and age of the vehicle. 
B. 	A copy of the certificate of insurance coverage page for the vehicle,indicating vehicle insurance covering at a minimum of $100,000/$300,000 personal liability and $100,000 property damage.
[Amended 2-15-2012 by Order No. FY 12-085] 
C. 	Vehicle registration. 
D. 	The place at which the vehicle-for-hire will be stored when not in usewithin the Town of Greenfield. 
§ 538-11. Insurance certificate. 
All licensees shall maintain appropriate vehicle insurance as required by§ 538-10 and by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and shall carryevidence of such insurance in the licensed vehicle at all times. A copy of this insurance certificate must be provided to the Chief of Police at timeof application and each year at renewal time. The policy shall state that ifit is revoked or amended, the insurance company will notify the Chief of Police no later than 30 days prior to the effective date of the revocation oramendment. 
§ 538-12. Semi-annual inspection. 
A. Before a vehicle-for-hire is licensed, and semi-annually thereafter inorder to renew the vehicle-for-hire license at a time selected by the 
1:419 

Chief of Police, such vehicle-for-hire shall be thoroughly inspectedand examined by a designee of the Chief of Police for the purpose of determining that the vehicle-for-hire is in good condition, cleaninside and outside, of good appearance, and well painted. The Townwill provide a vehicle-for-hire license inspection card for each vehicle-for-hire. At the time of the semi-annual inspection, the operator ofthe vehicle-for-hire shall present to the Chief of Police's designee thevehicle-for-hire license inspection card. The Inspectional Services designee shall, after inspecting the vehicle, either date and sign thevehicle-for-hire license inspection card and return it to the operator orinform the operator of corrections that must be made before the license inspection card will be returned. Any vehicle having failed an inspectionand requiring reinspection shall be subject to a reinspection fee of $20. 
B. 	Nothing herein shall relieve a vehicle-for-hire business licensee of its sole responsibility to ensure the safety of the vehicle and compliancewith all applicable laws and regulations, and the vehicle-for-hire business licensee is at all times responsible for the vehicle and shall be liable for all penalties and/or damage resulting from the operation ofthe vehicle by an employee, agent, or any other person operating thevehicle. 
§ 538-13. Unfit vehicle-for-hire. 
The Chief of Police shall refuse to issue a vehicle-for-hire license or, if already issued, revoke or suspend said license for any vehicle-for-hire found to be unfit, uninspected by the Massachusetts Department of Motor Vehicles, or unsuited for the purposes herein set forth. The Chief of Policeshall, as soon as is practicable, provide the applicant or licensee with written notice of the denial, revocation, or suspension, and inform theapplicant or license holder of the right to a hearing before the Board. Arequest for a hearing must be made in writing within 10 days of receipt of the notice. At the hearing, the licensee will have the opportunity to presenttestimony and other evidence and be represented by a person of his/herchoice. Upon suspension or revocation, said license shall be immediately surrendered to the Board of License Commissioners. A request for a hearingshall not delay any suspension or revocation. 
§ 538-14. Number plates. 
Any vehicle-for-hire shall have affixed thereto such number plates as areprescribed for use by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, which shall beattached to the vehicle in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Registry of Motor Vehicle and the laws of the Commonwealth ofMassachusetts. 
1:420 

§ 538-15. Vehicle colors. 
No owner of a licensed vehicle-for-hire shall color his/her vehicle-for-hire in colors or designs so closely resembling other licensed vehicles-for-hire as tomislead the public as to its identity. 
§ 538-16. Vehicle markings. [Amended 2-15-2012 by Order No. FY12-085] 
A. 	Taxis. No taxi shall be made so closely to resemble the taxi of anotheras to mislead the public as to its identity. All taxis will conform to MGL 
c. 40, § 22: 
(1) 	
Every taxi shall be identifiable with the word "Taxi," "Cab," or"Taxicab," the name of the vehicle-for-hire business, and the name "Town of Greenfield." Markings shall appear on both sides of thevehicle with letters not less than four inches high and 1/2 inchwide. All wording must be in contrasting colors to the vehicle and legible. 

(2) 	
All taxis in the Town shall display an "identity light" on top of thetaxi vehicle, which must be visible from the front and rear and be illuminated at night. 

(3) 	
If the license holder operates more than one taxi, each taxi shallhave an identification number, not less than four inches high and 1/2 inch wide, painted in two conspicuous places on the taxi incontrasting colors and also displayed within the interior of thevehicle. 

(4) 	
The above provisions do not apply to livery vehicles. 


B. 	Limousine or other livery vehicle. Limousines or other livery vehiclesmay place upon the rear quarter panel, on either or both sides of the vehicle, with letters no bigger than two inches high and one inch wide,the vehicle-for-hire's business name, address, and telephone number,provided it does not violate any provision, including but not limited to MGL c. 90, § 7, 9, or 13, or any applicable section of the Code ofMassachusetts Regulations. No livery vehicle shall be equipped withany distinguishing lights or other externally mounted instrument. 
C. 	Tour vehicle. Vehicles used exclusively for tours may place the vehicle-for-hire's business name, address, and telephone number upon thevehicle, provided it does not violate any provision, including but not limited to MGL c. 90, § 7, 9, or 13 or any applicable section of the Codeof Massachusetts Regulations. 
§ 538-17. License to be displayed. 
No vehicle-for-hire shall be operated without a valid vehicle-for-hire licensedisplayed in clear view of the passengers. 
1:421 

§ 538-18. Vehicle rates to be displayed. 
Every vehicle-for-hire shall have displayed a notice of the current rates. This notice must be displayed in such a way that passengers may clearly view it.This section is not applicable to livery and tour vehicles. 
§ 538-19. Suspension or revocation.102 
The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a vehicle-for-hire license orlicenses at any time if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, any section ofthe law or these regulations has been violated by the license holder or his/ her employees or agents, or as the public health and safety so require. TheChief of Police shall, as soon as is practicable, provide the licensee withwritten notice of the revocation or suspension, and inform the license holder of the right to a hearing before the Board. A request for a hearing must bemade in writing within 10 days of receipt of the notice. At the hearing, thelicensee will have the opportunity to present testimony and other evidence and to be represented by a person of his/her choice. Upon suspension orrevocation, said license shall be immediately surrendered to the Chief ofPolice. A request for a hearing shall not delay any suspension or revocation. 
§ 538-20. Transfer or sale of license prohibited. 
No vehicle-for-hire license provided for in these regulations shall be sold,assigned, or transferred, and such sale, assignment, or transfer shall automatically terminate said license; nor shall a majority interest of anyentity holding such a license be sold, assigned, or transferred. Such sale,assignment, or transfer shall automatically terminate said license. 
§ 538-21. Sale of vehicle-for-hire. 
Any vehicle-for-hire business licensee who shall cease to be the owner ofsaid vehicle shall at once surrender the vehicle-for-hire license for said vehicle to the Chief of Police. 
§ 538-22. Change of address. 
When a vehicle-for-hire business license holder changes his/her address or the place at which a vehicle-for-hire is kept, the licensee shall notify theChief of Police and Board within three days of such change. 
§ 538-23. Advertising on vehicles-for-hire. 
Vehicles-for-hire may display advertising, but only in the form of a triangular three-way roof mount, with or without continuous illumination,the dimensions of which must be a maximum of approximately 23 inches long by 12.75 inches high by 20 inches deep, and which are made of durablelightweight plastic that bolts to the roof with wiring installation similar tostandard toplights. 

102.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:422 
§ 538-24. Fees. 
The annual fee for a vehicle-for-hire license or renewal of same shall be $25, which amount shall include the semi-annual inspection as required in§ 538-12 of these regulations and also administrative expenses. The fee fora duplicate or amended vehicle-for-hire license shall be $5. If a vehicle-for-hire is replaced during that twelve-month period, a fee of $25 will becharged for the licensing of that new vehicle. 
1:423 

ARTICLE IV 
Operator's Licenses § 538-25. License required. 
A. 	All vehicle-for-hire operators shall be required to hold a valid Town of Greenfield vehicle-for-hire operator's license issued by the Chiefof Police. The Chief of Police of the Town shall have the authority,subject to the approval of the Board of License Commissioners, to grant vehicle-for-hire operator's licenses. Written application shall be madeunder penalty of perjury to the Chief of Police on a form provided bythe Chief of Police. No application shall be processed until all required information is provided to the Chief of Police. Any license so grantedmay be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police at any time for cause. 
B. 	Each taxi business will be allowed three licensed operators for eachlicensed taxi. Additional licenses will be considered as a case-by-case request. 
§ 538-26. Application. 
Application for a vehicle-for-hire operator's license shall be made at theoffice of the Chief of Police. All applicants shall set forth, under the penalties of perjury, such information as the Chief of Police may require, including thefollowing: 
A. 	Name of applicant. 
B. 	The applicant's residence, date of birth, place of birth, father's name,mother's name, height, weight, complexion, color of hair and of eyes,and social security number. 
C. 	The number of the applicant's license to operate motor vehicles in thecommonwealth and the date of expiration of such license; said licenseshall be displayed at the time of making application. 
D. 	Any convictions, admission to sufficient facts, or pleas of nolo contendere with regard to felony or misdemeanor offenses, stating thecourts in which such matters were heard, and the date of such offenses. 
E. 	Any traffic violations for which there was a finding of responsibility for aperiod of three years prior to the date of the application for the licenseor for such additional time as the Chief of Police shall require. 
F. 	Any civil or criminal court restraining orders currently in effect againstthe applicant. 
§ 538-27. Applicant qualifications. 
An applicant must: 
A. 	Be at least 18 years of age. 
1:425 

B. 	Be the bearer of a valid Massachusetts operator's license issued inaccordance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 
90. 
C. 	Provide a copy of the applicant's Massachusetts operator's license. 
D. 	Provide a letter from the vehicle-for-hire business licensee by whom the applicant is to be employed requesting such services. 
E. 	Provide a one-inch-by-one-inch size photograph of the applicant. 
F. 	Provide a copy of the applicant's driving record from the Registry of Motor Vehicles. 
G. 	Authorize the Chief of Police to obtain a criminal history backgroundcheck from the Criminal History Systems Board. 
H. 	Obtain thumbprints from the Police Department to be included in theapplication and license. 
§ 538-28. Grant or denial. 
The Chief of Police may reject an application for a vehicle-for-hire operator'slicense, or suspend, revoke, or fail to renew an existing license if theoperator fails to comply with these regulations or commits any moving traffic violations. Further, when considering whether to issue or deny anapplication, or to suspend, revoke, or fail to renew an existing license, theChief of Police will give significant consideration and appropriate weight to any felony or misdemeanor conviction, admission to sufficient facts, or entrance of a plea of nolo contendere, taking into account all factors,including the nature and gravity of the offense (including whether the crime is a felony or a misdemeanor, a violent crime, a crime that posesa substantial degree of dangerousness to minors and/or other vulnerablepopulations, or a crime for which a person has been finally classified as having a high risk of re-offense), the time that has passed since theconviction, admission or entrance of a plea of nolo contendere, and thesensitive nature of serving the public as an operator of a vehicle-for-hire. 
§ 538-29. Appeal of denial. 
The decision to approve or reject an application for a vehicle-for-hire operator's license shall be made within 30 days after filing of the application with the Chief of Police. If the application is rejected, the applicant shallbe informed in writing of the specific reasons for the rejection and of theopportunity for a hearing before the Board to review the decision. Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Chief of Police to grant a license mayfile a written appeal to the Board of License Commissioners containing acomplete statement of the reasons why said refusal is unreasonable within 10 calendar days of the denial. If the Board of License Commissioners findsthat said refusal is unreasonable, it may request the Chief of Police togrant the license. The Board's failure to act within 30 days constitutes a disapproval of the application. 
1:426 

§ 538-30. Display of license. [Amended 2-15-2012 by Order No. FY12-085] 
No vehicle-for-hire shall be operated unless the vehicle-for-hire operator'slicense is conspicuously posted within the vehicle. Vehicle-for-hire operators shall have in their possession a copy of these regulations, which shall be exhibited to a passenger or police officer on demand. 
§ 538-31. Suspension or revocation.103 
The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a license at any time for violation of the law or these regulations or as the public health and safety so require.The Chief of Police shall, as soon as is practicable, provide the licensee withwritten notice of the revocation or suspension and inform the licensee of the right to a hearing before the Board. A request for a hearing must bemade in writing within 10 days of receipt of the notice. At the hearing, thelicensee will have the opportunity to present testimony and other evidence and to be represented by a person of his/her choice. Upon suspension orrevocation, said license shall be immediately surrendered to the Chief ofPolice. A request for a hearing shall not delay any suspension or revocation. A revoked license shall not be reinstated or reissued until the licensee has reapplied for a license as outlined in §§ 538-26 and 538-27 and the Boardfinds that the licensee meets all the requirements for a license. 
§ 538-32. Change of address. 
When the holder of a vehicle-for-hire operator's license changes his/herhome address or place of employment, the holder shall notify the Chief of Police in writing within five days. 
§ 538-33. Termination of licensed operator. 
Written notice shall be given to the Chief of Police by a vehicle-for-hire business license holder when a licensed vehicle-for-hire operator ceases tobe employed by the business. This notice shall be given within five days ofsuch termination. 
§ 538-34. Term. 
A vehicle-for-hire operator's license shall be valid from the date of issueuntil December 31 and then renewable on an annual basis, unless sooner revoked or suspended. On payment of the prescribed fee, a licensee shallbe issued a new license unless the license has been previously revoked orsuspended or the licensee is otherwise in violation of these regulations. If said license is under suspension, the license may be renewed upon theexpiration of the suspension, provided that the licensee makes payment ofthe prescribed fee and meets the other requirements of these regulations. New applications for licenses may be filed with the Chief of Police at anytime, but applications for renewal of a license already in force shall be 

103.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:427 
filed with the Chief of Police annually, on or before November 15. Anyapplications received after November 15 will be considered after January 1. 
§ 538-35. Fees. 
The annual fee for the issuance or renewal of a vehicle-for-hire operator'slicense shall be $25, which amount shall include the administration fee. The fee for a duplicate or amended vehicle-for-hire operator's license, or toreinstate a suspended operator's license, shall be $15. 
1:428 

ARTICLE V 
Operation of Vehicles-for-Hire 
§ 538-36. Improper operation or equipment. 
No person operating a vehicle-for-hire shall have or permit to be on or in such vehicle or on or about any person within the vehicle-for-hire anythingwhich may interfere with the proper operation of such vehicle. No vehicle-for-hire shall be operated if it is unsafe or improperly equipped. At no time shall any vehicle-for-hire be operated when the passengers therein are inexcess of its licensed seating capacity. A seatbelt must be available for eachpassenger and used. 
§ 538-37. Licensed operator required. 
No owner or person having the care of a vehicle-for-hire shall permit, suffer,or allow any person other than a vehicle-for-hire operator who is licensed by the Chief of Police to operate such vehicle-for-hire. 
§ 538-38. Trip records. 
A. 	The operator of a vehicle-for-hire shall maintain a legible written record of all trips during all shifts worked. This record must contain the nameand address of the vehicle-for-hire operator, time of the beginning andtermination of each trip, location of the first and last stop on each trip, and the total fare charged for each trip. 
B. 	The written record of trips must be available for inspection upondemand by a police officer and must also be turned in to the vehicle-for-hire business owner for recordkeeping purposes at the end of theoperator's shift. Upon demand of the examiner, the owner of a licensedvehicle-for-hire must produce a record of all trips made by such vehicle for a period of 180 days prior to the date of demand. [Amended2-15-2012 by Order No. FY 12-085] 
§ 538-39. Hired vehicles. 
No person having charge of a vehicle-for-hire shall take up or carry anypassenger after the vehicle has been occupied or engaged by a priorpassenger without the permission of the first passenger. 
§ 538-40. Passenger seating. 
No person in charge of a vehicle-for-hire shall allow anyone to ride upon thedriver's seat or adjacent to the driver's seat; provided, however, that a bona fide passenger may ride adjacent to the driver's seat when: 
A. 	The seats inside the vehicle-for-hire are fully occupied; or 
B. 	The physical condition of the passenger necessitates the use of the front seat. 
1:429 

§ 538-41. Illegal activities. 
No owner or operator of a vehicle-for-hire shall participate in, or allow passengers to participate in, any illegal activities. It shall be unlawful forany operator of a vehicle-for-hire to drink any intoxicating liquor while onduty or to use any profane or obscene language, or to disturb the peace in any way, or to smoke while transporting passengers. No employee shallsmoke in any public room or area where the general public has access as acustomer or visitor. 
§ 538-42. Found property. 
The driver of a vehicle-for-hire shall search the interior of the vehicle, including the trunk if used by a passenger, at the end of each shift. Found property shall be brought to the vehicle-for-hire business office. If anydangerous or illegal item is found in the vehicle, then the licensed vehicle-for-hire operator shall notify the Police Department immediately. The vehicle-for-hire business owners shall be responsible for bringing any founditems to the Police Department within 24 hours of discovery. 
§ 538-43. Receipts. 
Every operator or owner of a vehicle-for-hire shall, when requested, give thecustomer a receipt. The receipt must contain the date, starting and endingtime, fare, miles traveled in whole miles and tenths of a mile, vehicle-for­hire license number, and the phone number of the vehicle-for-hire businesslicense holder. 
§ 538-44. Taxi stands; fee. [Amended 2-15-2012 by Order No. FY12-085] 
The Board of License Commissioners, in coordination with the Departmentof Public Works, may designate taxi stands, the number and location of which may be at their discretion. No taxi shall occupy any part of the publichighway for the purpose of soliciting business except at designated taxistands. No operator of a taxi shall pick up a fare at a taxi stand designated for another licensed taxi business without its permission, nor shall a taxipick up a fare who has called another licensed taxi. The license fee for eachtaxi stand shall be $100 annually and shall be collected by the Chief of Police and turned over to the Town Treasurer. 
§ 538-45. Required acceptance of passengers. [Amended 2-15-2012by Order No. FY 12-085] 
It shall be the duty of the operator of any taxi to accept as passengers anyperson who seeks to use the taxi, provided such person conducts himself/herself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxi occupied by a passenger without consent of the passenger. 
1:430 

§ 538-46. Inappropriate solicitation. 
Loud or importunate solicitation of passengers for taxis on the public way is prohibited. 
§ 538-47. Transportation of alcohol. 
No taxi shall be used as transportation-for-hire for the delivery of any alcoholic beverages or alcohol without a common carrier's license issuedby the Department of Public Utilities and without a permit issued by theAlcoholic Beverage Control Commission as required by MGL c. 138, as amended. This section is not intended to prohibit passengers from purchasing and transporting alcoholic beverages. 
§ 538-48. Violations and penalties. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any rule or regulation hereincontained shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200 for each offense.The Chief of Police may also revoke or suspend a license. 
1:431 

ARTICLE VI 
Fares 
§ 538-49. Fee schedule. 
No person shall charge or receive fares for the hire of vehicles-for-hire within the Town of Greenfield for any sums of money other than thoseprescribed by the fee schedule promulgated by the Board as from time totime amended. 
§ 538-50. Taxi rates.104 
A. 	The fare to be taken by or paid to the owner, operator, or other personhaving charge of any vehicle-for-hire shall be per the following schedule, which is based on zones that are delineated on a map ofthe Town of Greenfield (see Figure 1). These zones are indicated byconcentric circles, with the center of the circle being at the Main Street, Bank Row, Federal Street intersection. These concentric circles are established at one-half-mile radii from said intersection and shall be numbered from Zone 1 (from 0.00 mile to 0.50 mile) to Zone 10 (from 
4.51 miles to 5.00 miles). 
B. 	Determination of fares shall be the fare of the most distant zone, whether it be the point of pick-up or discharge. 
C. 	Rates at distances beyond Zone 10 will be negotiated or disclosed prior to transport. 
D. 	Waiting time shall be charged at $0.45 per minute after a grace period of five minutes. 
E. 	There will be a senior (65 years old or older) discount of $1 from thebase fare. 
F. 	All fares must be clearly posted within the taxi. 
§ 538-51. Livery rates. 
Prior to the commencement of transport, the livery fee shall be disclosed to the passenger(s). 
104.Editor's Note: This section was amended during codification to delete the reference to the2008-2009 rates. 
1:433 
ARTICLE VII 
Administration 
§ 538-52. Authority. 
These regulations are adopted under the authority of MGL c. 40, § 22 and Town of Greenfield Home Rule Charter Section 6-9. 
§ 538-53. License terms and conditions. 
All licenses required by these regulations shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Board of License Commissioners shall from time to time prescribe. 
§ 538-54. Enforcement; noncriminal disposition penalties. 
A. 	The provisions of these regulations may be enforced by the Board ofLicense Commissioners and any police officer of the Town of Greenfield,by any available means in law or equity, including, but not limited to, enforcement by noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D.Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
B. 	When enforced through noncriminal disposition, the penalties shall be as follows: 
(1) 	
First violation: $100. 

(2) 	
Second violation: $200. 

(3) 	
Third and subsequent violations: $300. 


C. 	In addition to noncriminal disposition, any vehicle-for-hire license orpermit held by any person(s) convicted of a violation of any provision of these rules and regulations may be revoked or suspended.105 
§ 538-55. Title. 
These rules and regulations shall be designated as the "Town of Greenfield Vehicle-For-Hire Regulations of 2006." 
§ 538-56. Review and amendment. 
These vehicle-for-hire regulations shall be reviewed and upgraded as needed. 
§ 538-57. Liaison. 
A Greenfield police officer designated by the Chief of Police shall be a liaison between the Town of Greenfield and all business license owners. This officer 
105.Editor's Note: Original § 376-7-4, regarding license expiration, which immediatelyfollowed this section, was repealed during codification. 
1:435 shall investigate any complaints and shall approve or disapprove all newdrivers. 
1:436 

Chapter 550 
PLANNING BOARD 

1:437 

ARTICLE I 
Site Plans 
[Adopted as amended 7-6-1992 (Ch. 865 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 550-1. Application form. 
Every application for site plan approval shall be made on the official form of the Planning Board, which may be obtained from the Town Clerk or theDepartment of Planning and Community Development. Any communicationpurporting to be an application shall be treated only as a notice of intention to apply until such time as it is made on the official application form andfiled with the Planning Board. The application form is hereby made a partof these rules and regulations. 
§ 550-2. Filing and submittal requirements. 
A. 	Each application for a site plan approval from the Planning Board shallbe filed with the Board in the Planning Department, in the Town of Greenfield. 
B. 	The completed application form shall be accompanied by seven copiesof a site plan. 
(1) 	
All site plans shall be prepared to scale and shall, at a minimum,accurately show the following information if applicable: 

(a) 	
The name of the applicant and property owner, the name of the person preparing the plan, the scale, and a locus map. 

(b) 	
The location, boundaries, and dimensions of the lot, lot area, adjacent streets or ways, the location, use, and owner's names of all adjacent properties, the zoning of the proposed lot andall adjacent properties. 

(c) 	
Existing and proposed vegetation and topography, including contours, the location of wetlands, streams, water bodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique naturalland features. 

(d) 	
Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions. 

(e) 	
The location of parking and loading areas, driveways,walkways, access and egress points and distance to the nearest driveways and intersections. 

(f) 	
The location and a description of all existing and proposedseptic systems, water supply, storm drainage systems, utilities, lighting, refuse and other waste disposal methods, exteriorstorage, and easements. 

(g) 
Proposed landscape features, including the location and a description of screening, fencing and plantings. 


1:439 


(h) 	
The locations, dimensions, height and characteristics of proposed signs. 

(i) 	
The location and a description of proposed open space or recreation areas. 

(j) 	
A snow removal plan. 


(2) 	
The applicant shall also submit the following information: 

(a) 	
Measures to prevent pollution of surface water and groundwater, increased runoff, changes in groundwater levels, and flooding. 

(b) 	
Design features which will integrate the proposeddevelopment into the existing landscape, maintain neighborhood character, enhance aesthetic assets and screenobjectionable features from neighbors and roadways. 

(c) 	
Control measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation during and after construction and the sequence of grading and construction activities, location of temporary control measures, and final stabilization of the site. 

(d) 	
Estimated average daily and peak-hour vehicle trips to begenerated by the site and traffic flow patterns for both vehiclesand pedestrians, showing adequate access to and from the site and adequate circulation within the site. 



(3) 	
Failure to comply with these requirements may result in a dismissalof an application as incomplete. The Planning Board may require further information to be shown on the plan if deemed necessaryfor a complete review of the proposed project. In addition, anapplication for site plan approval shall contain all other information required by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. For larger projects,the preferred scale is one inch equals 40 feet. The Planning Boardshall have the authority to alter or waive these requirements as it deems necessary or appropriate in particular cases. 


C. 	Fees and other costs. 
(1) 	
All applications for site plan approval shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check, payable to the Town of Greenfield, in anamount set by the Planning Board.106 

(2) 	
The services of an outside consultant may be obtained by the Planning Board to review and advise the Board on the applicant'sproposed project. All reasonable expenses incurred by the Boardfor such review shall be paid by the applicant. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of the estimated costs for thereview. The review fees shall be paid by the applicant within 10 



106.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:440 
days of receipt of the notification. The review fees shall be held bythe Town Treasurer in a separate account. The Board may request additional funds if needed to cover the cost of outside review in the same manner as above. Failure by the applicant to make timelypayments shall be adequate reason to deny the application. 
(3) 	
The selection of an outside consultant may be appealed to theBoard of Selectmen. Such appeals are limited to claims that theconsultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualificationsconsist of either an educational degree in the field at issue or arelated field, or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limits for action uponan application by the Planning Board shall be extended by theduration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one month following thefiling of the appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shallstand. 

(4) 	
Any excess amount in review fees paid by the applicant, includingany accrued interest, at the completion of the project shall berepaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest, and a final report on expenditures made from the fees shall bemade available. 


§ 550-3. Review of applications. 
A. 	The Planning Board shall, within 10 days of receiving the application,transmit one copy of the site plan to the Department of Public Works,Fire Department, Inspector of Buildings, Zoning Board of Appeals, Conservation Commission and Historical Commission for review and comment. Failure of the above to comment within 30 days shall bedeemed as no objection to the site plan.107 
B. 	The Planning Board shall review the site plan at a regularly scheduledpublic meeting. The applicant or his/her representative may be presentto discuss the project with the Board. In the absence of any appearance by the applicant or representative, the Board may decide on the planusing the information it has otherwise received. 
§ 550-4. Decisions by Planning Board. 
A. 	A decision on a site plan shall be made by the Board within 45 daysof receipt of the application. The required time limits for a decisionmay be extended by written agreement between the petitioner and the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to take action within 45days, or extended time, shall be deemed to be approval of the site plan. 

107.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:441 
B. 	The site plan may be approved or approved with conditions. Beforeapproval of a site plan, the reviewing authority may request the applicant to make modifications in the proposed design of the project.If the site plan does not comply with the purposes and requirements ofthis regulation, it may be disapproved. If disapproved, the plan may be revised and resubmitted without prejudice at any time. 
C. 	The reviewing authority may require the posting of security to ensurecompliance with the plan and conditions. A permit or license may be suspended when work is not performed as approved. 
§ 550-5. Withdrawal of application. 
Any application for site plan approval may be withdrawn without prejudice by notice in writing to the Planning Board at any time. 
§ 550-6. Expiration of approval. 
Site plan approval shall expire within two years if a substantial use thereof has not commenced, except the Planning Board may grant an extension forgood cause. 
§ 550-7. Appeals. 
Decisions on site plans made by the Planning Board may be appealed tothe Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with § 200-8.6 of the ZoningOrdinance and with Sections 8 and 15 of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A. 
§ 550-8. Opinions and advice to be nonbinding. 
Any advice, opinion, or information given by any Board member or any otherofficial or employee of the Town shall not be binding on the Board. 
§ 550-9. Amendments. 
These rules may be amended by a majority vote of the members of theBoard, provided that such amendment shall be presented in writing at a regular meeting and action taken thereon at a subsequent regular meeting.The amendment of the General Laws or the Zoning Ordinance in respect toany matter covered by these rules and regulations will constitute automatic amendment. 
§ 550-10. Waivers. 
Strict compliance with these rules and regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in the public interest. 
1:442 

ARTICLE II 
Special Permits
[Adopted as amended 7-6-1992 (Ch. 870 of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 550-11. Application form. 
Every application for a special permit shall be made on the official form of the Planning Board, which may be obtained from the Town Clerk or theDepartment of Planning and Community Development. Any communicationpurporting to be an application shall be treated as a notice of intention to apply until such time as it is made on the official application form and filedwith the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. The application form is herebymade a part of these rules and regulations. 
§ 550-12. Filing and submittal requirements. 
A. 	Each application for a special permit from the Planning Board shallbe filed with the Town Clerk. A copy of the application, including the date and time of filing, certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed immediately by the applicant with the Planning Board. The PlanningBoard's copy shall be submitted to the Planning Department, 253 Main Street, Greenfield. 
B. 	The completed application form, certified by the Town Clerk, shall beaccompanied by seven copies of a site plan. 
(1) 	
All site plans shall be prepared to scale and shall, at a minimum,accurately show the following information if applicable: 

(a) 	
The name of the applicant and property owner, the name of the person preparing the plan, the scale, and a locus map. 

(b) 	
The location, boundaries, and dimensions of the lot, lot area, adjacent streets or ways, the location, use, and owners' names of all adjacent properties, the zoning of the proposed lot andall adjacent properties. 

(c) 	
Existing and proposed vegetation and topography, including contours, the location of wetlands, streams, water bodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique naturalland features. 

(d) 	
Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions. 

(e) 	
The location of parking and loading areas, driveways,walkways, access and egress points and distance to the nearest driveways and intersections. 

(f) 	
The location and a description of all existing and proposedseptic systems, water supply, storm drainage systems, utilities, lighting, refuse and other waste disposal methods, exteriorstorage, and easements. 


1:443 


(g) 	
Proposed landscape features, including the location and a description of screening, fencing and plantings. 

(h) 	
The locations, dimensions, height and characteristics of proposed signs. 

(i) 	
The location and a description of proposed open space or recreation areas. 

(j) 	
A snow removal plan. 


(2) 	
The applicant shall also submit the following information: 

(a) 	
Measures to prevent pollution of surface water and groundwater, increased runoff, changes in groundwater levels,and flooding. 

(b) 	
Design features which will integrate the proposeddevelopment into the existing landscape, maintain neighborhood character, enhance aesthetic assets and screen objectionable features from neighbors and roadways. 

(c) 	
Control measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation duringand after construction and the sequence of grading and construction activities, location of temporary control measures, and final stabilization of the site. 

(d) 	
Estimated average daily and peak-hour vehicle trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns for both vehiclesand pedestrians, showing adequate access to and from the siteand adequate circulation within the site. 



(3) 	
Failure to comply with these requirements may result in a dismissalof an application as incomplete. The Planning Board may requirefurther information to be shown on the plan if deemed necessary for a complete review of the proposed project. In addition, anapplication for a special permit shall contain all other informationrequired by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. For larger projects, the preferred scale is one inch equals 40 feet. The Planning Boardshall have the authority to alter or waive these requirements as itdeems necessary or appropriate in particular cases. 


C. 	Fees and other costs. 
(1) 	All applications for a special permit shall be accompanied by cash or a certified check, payable to the Town of Greenfield, in an amount set by the Planning Board. The applicant shall also beresponsible for the cost of advertising and notice of the publichearing. The application fee for major developments shall be set by the Planning Board.108 

108.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:444 
(2) 	
The services of an outside consultant may be obtained by thePlanning Board to review and advise the Board on the applicant's proposed project. All reasonable expenses incurred by the Boardfor such review shall be paid by the applicant. The Planning Boardshall notify the applicant in writing of the estimated costs for the review. The review fees shall be paid by the applicant within 10days of receipt of the notification. The review fees shall be held bythe Town Treasurer in a separate account. The Board may request additional funds if needed to cover the cost of outside review in the same manner as above. Failure by the applicant to make timelypayments shall be adequate reason to deny the application. 

(3) 	
The selection of an outside consultant may be appealed to theBoard of Selectmen. Such appeals are limited to claims that theconsultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualificationsconsist of either an educational degree in the field at issue or arelated field, or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limits for action uponan application by the Planning Board shall be extended by theduration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one month following thefiling of the appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shallstand. 

(4) 	
Any excess amount in review fees paid by the applicant, includingany accrued interest, at the completion of the project shall berepaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest, and a final report on expenditures made from the fees shall bemade available. 


D. 	Abutters list. Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a list of all the names and addresses of all abutters,abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of theapplicant, and landowners directly opposite on any public or private street. Names and addresses shall be in label format and shall be listed as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list. 
§ 550-13. Hearings. 
A. 	Hearing date and notice. A public hearing on an application for specialpermit shall be held within 65 days of filing the application with theTown Clerk. Notice of hearings shall be advertised as required by the provisions of MGL c. 40A. In addition, a copy of the advertisednotice shall be sent by mail, at least 14 days prior to the date of thehearing, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to the Planning Board of every abutting town, to the Inspector of Buildings, to the abutters, tothe abutters of the abutters within 300 feet of the property line, andany landowners directly opposite on any public or private street as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list. 
1:445 

B. 	Hearings to be public. All hearings shall be open to the public. Noperson shall be excluded unless considered by the Chairperson to be a "serious hindrance" to the workings of the Board. 
C. 	Representation and absence. An applicant may appear in his/her ownbehalf, or be presented by an agent or attorney. In the absence of any appearance without due cause on behalf of an applicant, the Board maydecide on the matter using the information it has otherwise received. 
seeking information. 
D. Meetings.  
(1)  Order of business.  
(a)  Reading of petition and legalpresentation of exhibits, if any.  notices,  together  with  
(b) Applicant's presentation.  
(c)  Opponent's presentation,  if  any,  and  questions by  those  

(d) 	Applicant's rebuttal, restricted to matters raised by opponent'spresentation. 
(2) 	Members of the Board who are hearing the case may direct questions during the hearing. 
§ 550-14. Actions by Planning Board. 
A. 	Decisions. A decision on a special permit shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 90 days after the public hearing is closed. The requiredtime limits for a public hearing and decision may be extended bywritten agreement between the petitioner and the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to take action within 90 days, or extendedtime, shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit. 
B. 	Voting requirements and records. A special permit decision shall require a concurring two-thirds vote of the seven-member PlanningBoard. The record shall show the vote of each member upon eachquestion. The record shall also show if a member is absent or fails to vote. The Board shall also clearly set forth the reasons for its decision.A detailed record of the proceedings, including the decision, the voteon the decision, and the reasons for the decision, shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 14 days of the decision. A notice of such decisionshall be mailed forthwith to the petitioner, to all parties to whom noticeof the hearings was mailed, and to every person present at the hearing who requested a notice to be sent and stated the address to which suchnotice was to be sent, the Inspector of Buildings and, where applicable,to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission and other Town boards or departments. Each notice shall specify that appeals, if any,shall be made pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, and shall be filed within 20days after the date of filing such notice with the Town Clerk. 
1:446 

§ 550-15. Withdrawal of application. 
Any application for a special permit may be withdrawn without prejudice by notice in writing to the Planning Board with a copy to the Town Clerkprior to the publication of the public hearing notice by the Board. Requeststo withdraw without prejudice after publication of the public hearing notice may be granted by a majority vote of the Board upon written request fromthe applicant. 
§ 550-16. Reconsideration. 
Once a decision has been voted upon and the meeting adjourned, there shallbe no reconsideration of a decision by the Board. 
§ 550-17. Expiration of permit. 
Special permits shall expire within two years of approval, if a substantialuse thereof or if construction has not commenced. An extension may begranted by the Board for the time period required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal under MGL c. 40A, § 17, or for other good cause. 
§ 550-18. Reapplication. 
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the Planning Board shall be acted favorably upon withintwo years after the date of final unfavorable action unless the PlanningBoard finds, by a two-thirds vote of a Board of more than five members, specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previousunfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the recordof its proceedings, and unless all but one of the members of the Planning Board consents thereto and after notice is given to parties in interest of thetime and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent willbe considered. Such notice shall be paid for by the applicant. 
§ 550-19. Opinions and advice to be nonbinding. 
Any advice, opinion, or information given by any Board member or any otherofficial or employee of the Town shall not be binding on the Board. 
§ 550-20. Amendments. 
These rules may be amended by a majority vote of the members of theBoard, provided that such amendment shall be presented in writing at a regular meeting and action taken thereon at a subsequent regular meeting.The amendment of the General Laws or the Zoning Ordinance in respect toany matter covered by these rules and regulations will constitute automatic amendment. 
1:447 

§ 550-21. Waivers. 
Strict compliance with these rules and regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in the public interest. 
§ 550-22. Consideration of other criteria. 
When considering approval of special permits, the Planning Board may require ongoing monitoring of certain aspects of the project at the applicant's expense. 
1:448 

ARTICLE III 

Recommendations for Membership
[Adopted as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-111 (Ch. 856 of
the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 550-23. Procedure. 
Upon receiving a written request from the Mayor for a recommendationregarding the appointment of a candidate for membership on the PlanningBoard, the Planning Board shall follow the following procedure: 
A. 	The Planning Board will notify the candidate that he/she is required toattend at least three regular meetings of the Board. 
B. 	The Board shall interview the candidate at an appropriate time. 
C. 	After all candidates for a vacancy on the Board have been interviewed,the Board shall vote on which candidate(s) to recommend and shallforward its recommendation to the Mayor. 
1:449 

ARTICLE IV 

Rules and Regulations
[Amended as amended 6-15-2011 by Order No. FY 11-112 (Ch. 860
of the 2002 Bylaws)] 

§ 550-24. Meetings. 
A. 	Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Greenfield Planning Board,hereinafter called the "Board," shall be held on that day or days of eachmonth set by the Board at its annual organizational meeting. Meetings shall be once a month at a minimum. 
B. 	Organizational meeting. The annual organizational meeting of theBoard shall be the first regular meeting of the Board in July of each year. 
C. 	Rules of procedure. The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised inRobert's current edition of "Rules of Order" shall govern the Board and its deliberations. 
D. 	Special meetings. 
(1) 	
Special meetings of the Board may be called by: 

(a) 	
The Chairperson. 

(b) 	
In his absence, the Vice Chairperson. 

(c) 	
A majority of the Board. 



(2) 	
The Clerk shall be responsible for posting notice thereof at least 48hours, not including Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays, prior tosuch meeting in accordance with the Open Meeting Law, MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25 (effective July 1, 2010) and 940 CMR 29.00. 

(3) 	
The Clerk shall be responsible for notifying all members by mail insuch cases, if possible. In all other cases, the Clerk shall make a reasonable effort to notify all members by telephone. In all cases,the Clerk shall be responsible for informing members of the agendaof the meeting. 


E. 	Order of business. The order of business of regular meetings shall be: 
(1) 	
Call to order. 

(2) 	
Clerk's report of the last meeting. 

(3) 	
Old business. 

(a) 	
Reports of subcommittees. 

(b) 	
Other old business. 



(4) 	
New business. 


1:451 

(5) 	
Any other business. 

(6) 	
Adjournment. 


F. 	Quorum. At any of the aforementioned meetings a quorum shall consistof four voting members of the Board. In the absence of any one ofthe full members of the Board, an associate member shall have full voting power and can help constitute the quorum. A number less than amajority may adjourn. In the case of a special permit, a two-thirds voteof the full Board (five out of seven) is required in accordance with MGL 
c. 40A, § 9. 
§ 550-25. Chairperson. 
The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and shall exercise such powers as properly appertain to his/her office or as may be delegated tohim/her by the Board. 
§ 550-26. Vice Chairperson. 
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall assume theresponsibilities of the Chairperson. 
§ 550-27. Chairperson Pro Tem. 
In the absence of the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson, a ChairpersonPro Tem may be elected. 
§ 550-28. Clerk. 
A. 	Notice and agenda of meeting; minutes. The Clerk shall be responsiblefor mailing to the Board members, at least three working days priorto each regular meeting, a notice of the meeting, the agenda of the meeting, and the minutes of the previous meeting(s). 
B. 	Meeting records. The Clerk shall be responsible for keeping full andaccurate records of all regular and special meetings of the Board. 
C. 	Board's bylaws and policies. The Clerk shall be responsible for maintaining the official copy of the Board's bylaws. The Clerk shallimmediately post all amendments and changes which have been accomplished in accordance with § 550-31 of these bylaws. In additionand in the same official reference book, the Clerk shall maintain a record of all official policies set forth by the Board (§ 550-32). 
D. 	Correspondence. The Clerk shall act as the corresponding agent of theBoard, preserving copies of all correspondence, and shall perform allother duties incident to the office or that may be required by the Board. 
E. 	Dissemination of information. The Clerk shall be responsible for transmitting copies of all votes, orders, resolutions, and documentswhich are to be sent to members of the Board and shall promptly notify 
1:452 

subcommittee members of their appointment, of the reference of anymatter to them and furnish them with all papers, copies of orders, or other matters included in such reference; or of any changes that maybe made by the Board in their assignments. 
§ 550-29. Appointment of subcommittees. 
The Chairperson may appoint such subcommittees from time to time as maybe voted by the Board. A subcommittee shall exist until the next annualorganizational meeting of the Board. 
§ 550-30. Board operation. 
A. 	Formal vote required for action. The Board shall act as a unit anddecisions relative to planning matters and policy shall be settled by formal vote of the Board at a legally called meeting. Individual members, when not in a legally called meeting, shall have no authorityto take action on Board matters. 
B. 	Recording of decisions. All policies or decisions formally voted by theBoard shall be recorded by the Clerk and maintained in a central place.They shall be standard in format, be sequentially numbered, and shall be reviewed at least once a year. 
C. 	Confidentiality. Any deliberations or votes taken in executive sessionshall be kept confidential by Board members so long as the reason for confidentiality prevails. 
§ 550-31. Amendments. 
These bylaws may be added to, amended, or rescinded by a majority vote of the Board members present at any regular meeting, and a copy of theproposed amendment shall be given to each member of the Board. 
§ 550-32. Approval of policy. 
A suggested policy can be presented to the Board in writing at any regularmeeting. An item will become policy after written presentation when votedupon favorable by a majority of Board members present at the following successive regular meeting. 
§ 550-33. Regular attendance required. 
Following two unexplained consecutive absences, a Board member will be contacted by the Chairperson to ascertain the intentions of said memberabout his/her future attendance. If any member has more than six unexplained absences a year, the Planning Board shall ask the Mayor for a replacement. 
1:453 

ARTICLE V 
Subdivision Regulations
[Adopted as amended effective 5-18-2006 (Ch. 880 of the 2002
Bylaws)] 

§ 550-34. Purpose. 
The Subdivision Control Law has been enacted for the purpose of protectingthe safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of Greenfield byregulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways,and ensuring sanitary conditions in the subdivisions and, in proper cases,parks and open areas. The power of the Planning Board and of a Board of Appeals under the Subdivision Control Law shall be exercised with dueregard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivisionby ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to lifeand limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in thecase of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequateprovision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire,police, and other similar municipal equipment, and streetlighting and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating theways in a subdivision with each other and the public ways in the Town andwith the ways in neighboring subdivisions. 
§ 550-35. Interpretation of rules and regulations. 
The Town of Greenfield shall not be held responsible for any individualinterpretation of these rules and regulations. The word "shall" is mandatory and the words "should" and "may" are permissive. In the event of conflictingprovisions in the text of these regulations, the more restrictive shall apply. 
§ 550-36. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unlessthe context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
ATTORNEY — The attorney employed by the Town unless otherwise stated. 
BLOCK — The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property linesor boundaries of the subdivision. 
CONCEPT PLAN or SKETCH PLAN — A generalized plan of a proposed subdivision indicating lot layouts, streets, park areas and water and sewersystems presented to the Town officials at the pre-application meeting. 
CONTOUR MAP — A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" is thevertical height between contour lines. 
CORNER LOT — A lot bordered on at least the front and side by streets. 
1:455 

DEFINITIVE PLAN — The final map or drawing indicating the proposedlayout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration and which meets all the requirements of this article. 
EASEMENT — A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by personsother than the owner. 
ENGINEER — A registered engineer. 
FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot fronting upon a street to be measuredcontinuously along one street line between its side lines and their intersection with the street line. The required frontage dimension shallextend from the street line to the building line. Frontage shall provide bothrights of access and potential vehicular access across that lot line to a potential building site. The portion of a lot fronting on a discontinued orunconstructed road does not constitute frontage. 
LOCUS MAP — A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely shows the area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it to agiven distance. 
LOT — A parcel of land. 
LOT, FLAG — A lot which abuts a right-of-way via a narrow strip of landwhich connects that portion of the lot containing the required lot widthto the right-of-way and is in conformance with § 200-7.8 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS — The specifications of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietaryinterest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A public right-of-way across or within a block intended to be used by pedestrians. 
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership,corporation, trust or any other legal entity. 
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The preliminary map or drawing indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Boardfor its consideration, and which meets all the requirements of this article. 
PRIVATE STREET — A street serving as vehicular access to one or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public as a right-of-way. 
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS — Contracts entered into between privateparties and constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to providemutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which wouldtend to impair stability of values. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated and used for public purposes, such as astreet, alley or crosswalk. 
1:456 

STREET — A public way, a private way shown on a plan approved under theSubdivision Control Law, or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield having, in the opinion of the PlanningBoard, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the abutting land or land to be served thereby and for the installationof municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or toerected thereon. 
A. 	PRINCIPAL STREET — A street which carries traffic equivalent to thatgenerated by 40 or more dwelling units or which serves property eitherused or zoned for commerce or industry. 
B. 	MAJOR STREET — A street which carries traffic equivalent to thatgenerated by more than 20 but fewer than 40 dwelling units, which hasno abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of extension to serve more than 40 dwelling units. 
C. 	MINOR STREET — A street which:109 
(1) 	
Carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than 10 but 20 or fewer dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and theSuburban Residential (RB) Zoning Districts; or 

(2) 	
Carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than one but 20 or fewer dwelling units in the Urban Residential (RA) ZoningDistrict; and 

(3) 	
Has no abutting property either used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of extension to serve more than20 dwelling units. 


D. 	RURAL STREET — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than one but fewer than 10 dwelling units in theRural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential (RB) ZoningDistricts, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of extension to serve more than 40dwelling units. 
STREET WIDTH — The width of the paved way. 
SUBDIVIDER — The owner of land proposed for subdivision or his or herauthorized agent who commences proceedings under this article to effect asubdivision of land. 
SUBDIVISION — 
A. 	The described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into two or more parcels. 
B. 	The term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context,relates either to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 

109.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:457 
TRAIL — A right-of-way designed for movement of nonmotorized traffic. 
§ 550-37. Approval required for plan filing. 
No plan, whether of a subdivision or not, shall be accepted at the Registryof Deeds or Land Court unless it has been endorsed by the Planning Board(or in special cases is accompanied by a Town Clerk's certificate) as either being approved or not requiring approval. 
§ 550-38. Building permits. 
No building permits will be issued for lots in a subdivision unless the subdivision plans have been endorsed and any conditions endorsed on theplan have been satisfied or waived. 
§ 550-39. Street acceptance. 
Street acceptance and installation of municipal services on any way withina subdivision but not shown on an endorsed subdivision plan can be doneonly with a two-thirds vote of Town Council. (See MGL c. 41, § 81Y.) 
§ 550-40. Plans believed to require endorsement only. 
A. 	Endorsements. These plans require only an endorsement by the Planning Board. 
(1) 	
The applicant for such endorsement must submit to the PlanningBoard the original plan, including a locus map showing majortransportation routes and other major landmarks, which will be returned; five copies which will not be returned; and a Form A,Application for Subdivision Believed Not to Require Approval, witha description of the intended use of the land. The applicant must also notify the Town Clerk by either delivering or sending byregistered mail a notice giving the date of submission, descriptionof the land sufficient for location (including map and parcel number) and the name and address of the owner. In order to beconsidered, it is the intent of the Subdivision Control Law that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive approval if said plan conforms to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions ofland; provided, however, that such Board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in MGL c. 41, § 81R, such portions of therules and regulations as deemed advisable. The Planning Boardshall act on the plan within 21 days after its submission. 

(2) 	
Plan submissions. In order to be considered by the Board, a feeshall be paid in accordance with § 550-46C, and such plans shallshow all of the following: 

(a) 	
Any existing structures on the land and dimension of yardsrelating to such structures; 

1:458 

(b) 	
Any existing structures on any remaining adjoining land ownedby the applicant and dimensions of yards relating to such structures; 

(c) 	
Remaining frontage of any adjoining land in the same ownership; 

(d) 	
Present owner of the land shown on the plan, and all abuttingowners; and 

(e) 	
Location of any easement or way, public or private, across the land, with a designation as to the use of the same. 



(3) 	
Electronic file. The applicant shall also submit two copies of anelectronic file of the plan on a CD or diskette prepared in a version specified by the Greenfield Planning Department. 



B. 	
Endorsements by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall endorsesuch plan as not requiring approval unless it shows a subdivision. MGL 


c. 41, § 81L states that "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract ofland into two or more lots and shall include resubdivision. However, the division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision ControlLaw if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so dividedhas frontage on 1) a public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or 2) a way shown on a plantheretofore approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law,or 3) a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board,sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to providefor the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation ofmunicipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or tobe erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance for erection ofa building on such lot. Conveyances or other instruments adding to,taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as to leave any lot so affected without said required frontageor the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings werestanding when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect on March 16, 1966, in Greenfield into separate lots on each of which one of suchbuildings remains standing shall not constitute a subdivision. 
(1) 	Specifications for ways in existence. Grounds on which an existing way will be found adequate for providing frontage should be thesame as any other way in existence when the Subdivision ControlLaw became effective in Greenfield, which has in those portions that provide a means of reaching the premises in question thefollowing: right-of-way width generally of 33 feet or more with nolocations of less than 24 feet; horizontal and vertical alignment of the traveled way providing at least 150 feet stopping sight 
1:459 

distance; grades not exceeding 10% except for short intervals;adequate provisions for drainage and snow removal; traveled way constructed at least 18 feet wide with at least eight inches ofgravel and, in cases where the way potentially provides accessto 10 or more dwelling units, bituminous paving of the traveled way as of January 1, 1983; or where provisions satisfactory to thePlanning Board and the Town Engineer have been made to securecompliance with these standards without cost to the Town. 
C. 	Notice to Town Clerk. The Planning Board must act and notify the TownClerk within 21 days of submission, or it is deemed to have determinedthat approval was not required. 
§ 550-41. Preliminary plans for subdivisions requiring approval. 
A. 	General. To save costly changes in detailed engineering drawings, itis suggested but not required that a preliminary plan of any proposed residential subdivision be submitted so that any differences betweenthe developer and the Town may be resolved at an early stage in theprocess. A preliminary plan must be submitted for all nonresidential subdivisions. 
B. 	A request for a waiver of a requirement, rule, or regulation shall bemade in writing by the applicant, and submitted, whenever feasible, with the submission of the preliminary plan. 
C. 	Fees. The applicant for approval of a preliminary plan must submit tothe Department of Planning and Development 12 copies of the plan, one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches, a Form B, Applicationfor Approval of a Preliminary Plan, and a certified check made payableto the "Town of Greenfield." The cost of a preliminary plan and the application fee shall be set by the Planning Board.110 
D. 	Submissions. If a preliminary plan is submitted, it is requested that thefollowing be included as part of the submission: 
(1) 	
The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend,and stating "Preliminary Plan." 

(2) 	
The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of the designer, engineer, and/or surveyor. 

(3) 	
The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent local tax list. 

(4) 	
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements andany public areas within the subdivision in a general manner. 

(5) 	
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural waterways in a general manner; proposed sewer system in 



110.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:460 
a general manner; and if the system is to be by individual on-sitesewage disposal systems, then sufficient deep hole and percolation tests to establish the general suitability of the locus for subsurfacesewer disposal. 
(6) 	
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions. 

(7) 	
The approximate location of all proposed houses and accessory structures. 

(8) 	
The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets. 

(9) 	
The topography of the land in a general manner. 


(10)A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its relation to the surrounding area, at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet. 
(11)In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land ownedby the developer, a plan showing in a general manner the proposed overall development of all of said land. 
(12)Location of all zoning district boundaries, if encountered. 
E. 	Review by Board. The Planning Board shall act within 45 days of submission of a preliminary plan. Approval of a preliminary plan doesnot constitute approval of a subdivision, and a preliminary plan shallnot be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. 
F. 	Town agency review. At this stage, arrangements for sanitary sewagedisposal, performance guarantees, and required installation of facilitiesshall be discussed in a general manner with the appropriate Town agencies. This shall be directed through the Planning Board to theBoard of Health, the Fire Chief, the Department of Planning andDevelopment, Town Attorney, Town Engineer, and the Conservation Commission if appropriate. 
§ 550-42. Definitive plans. 
A. 	General. 
(1) 	The following must be filed at the Town Clerk's office for submittalto the Planning Board in applying for approval of a definitive plan:111 
(a) 	
A properly completed application form, Form C, Application forApproval of a Definitive Plan. 

(b) 	
The cost of a definitive plan and the application fee are set by the Planning Board. The applicant is responsible for paying alladvertising costs. 



111.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:461 
(c) 	
Twelve copies of the definitive plan and road profiles, dark lineon white background. 

(d) 	
A list of all landowners abutting the land shown on the subdivision plan as appearing on the most recent tax list. Thelist shall be typewritten and in label format. 


(2) 	The applicant must submit a total of 12 prints and one set reducedto 11 inches by 17 inches to be distributed as follows: PlanningBoard (seven copies); Town Engineer (one copy); Board of Health (one copy); Fire Chief (one copy); Inspector of Buildings (one copy);and Department of Planning and Development (one copy). Oneadditional copy must be submitted for the Conservation Commission if the Wetlands Protection Act112 is involved. The final, original plan is to be retained by the applicant until signed by theBoard. 
B. 	Definitive plan submission requirements. 
(1) 	
The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor.Construction details shall be designed by a registered civil engineer. The plan shall be prepared on linen or polyester film,single matte with a thickness of 0.004 mils, and must have anopacity so as to allow consistent diazo and microfilm reproduction. All plans shall be prepared using a compatible ink with excellentcohesiveness which will produce a permanent bond and result ina plan with long-term durability. Linen or polyester reproductions shall be accepted, provided they comply with the other requirements. 

(2) 	
Scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet or another scale acceptable to the Board, sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches, usingan index sheet if necessary. The plan shall contain the followinginformation: 

(a) 	
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date and scale. 

(b) 	
Name and address of record owner, subdivider, surveyor andengineer. 

(c) 	
Location and names of all abutters as they appear in the mostrecent tax list. 

(d) 	
Existing watercourses. 

(e) 	
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction, width, and length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line,and to establish these lines on the ground. The areas of all lots shall be shown, and all lots shall be numbered. 





112.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A. 
1:462 
(f) 	
Location of all permanent monuments, properly identified as towhether existing or proposed. 

(g) 	
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding orapproaching the subdivision. 

(h) 	
Indication of purpose, width, and location of easements outside of the road lines. 

(i) 	
Suitable space for recording the action of the Planning Boardand the Town Clerk. 

[NOTE: Items in Subsection B(2)(j), (k), (l) and (m) may besubmitted on the same sheet as the definitive plan or on separate sheets.] 

(j) 	
Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals whenever it is deemed necessary. 

(k) 	
Existing and proposed center-line profiles of proposed streets and of intersecting streets for at least 100 feet each sideof the intersection of the street center lines at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet and vertical scale of one inch equals four feet, or such other scales acceptable to the Board.Elevations shall be indicated every 50 feet on straight gradesand every 25 feet on vertical curves. All elevations shall refer to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (USGS) datumwhere available. Profile stationing shall be referenced to a plandrawing. 

(l) 	
Proposed layout (including cross sections and profiles) ofsewerage, storm drainage and water supply, including invertelevations, slopes, capacity, and velocity. 

(m) 
Where sewage disposal is to be by individual on-site sewagedisposal systems, the definitive plan shall be accompanied bya feasibility report of the proposed sanitary sewage systems certified by a registered civil engineer. 

(n) 	
Indication of all areas believed to be subject to control underthe Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, under procedures outlined at 310 CMR 10.00. 

(o) 	
Identification of zoning districts. 

(p) 	
A locus plan of the subdivision, showing the outline of the parcel being subdivided, the pattern of streets within it, streetsin the surrounding area, and zoning district and overlaydistrict boundaries, at the same scale as the Assessor's map which includes that parcel (one inch equals 50 feet or one inchequals 200 feet). 


1:463 

(q) 	
An overlay at the same scale as the definitive plan showingthe Natural Resources Conservation Service interpretation of suitability for on-site sewage disposal, or showing USGS surfacial geology, or both. 

(r) 	
Test pit logs for locations selected by the Planning Board and shown on one of the above overlays, with not more than one pitper four proposed lots, selected to reveal general patterns ofsubsurface characteristics, after consultation with the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission. 

(s) 	
Where connection to the public water system is not proposed,information indicating why such connection is not feasible, description of provisions to be made for water for fire fighting,and information adequate to allow determination of compliance with Section IV-D-3(b) requirements regarding potable water quality and quantity. 

(t) 	
Stormwater management plan in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 381, Stormwater Management, of the Greenfield Code. 

(u) 	
An erosion control plan, indicating the erosion control measures to be employed, including description of locations of temporary stockpiles, spoil areas, temporary drainagesystems, slope stabilization techniques, sediment basins, etc.,and narrative description of how erosion from individual lots onto streets and into drainage systems is proposed to becontrolled. Review comments on the plan by the ConservationCommission and by the Natural Resources Conservation Service or by others acceptable to the Board as expert in soilerosion. Any site disturbing more than one acre must havea detailed stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and an erosion control plan submitted to and approved by theEPA or its designee in accordance with EPA's NPDES Phase IIregulations. 

(v) 	
Landscaping plan showing the location of all existing andproposed landscaping. Indicate which mature trees are proposed to be removed. 


C. 	Electronic file. The applicant shall also submit two copies of an electronic file of the plan on a CD or diskette prepared in a versionspecified by the Greenfield Planning Department. 
D. 	Sewer extension permits. 
(1) 	Under the provisions of MGL c. 21, § 43, an application mustbe submitted by the applicant to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection for a permit to allow constructionof any sewer extensions of a public sewerage system, including 
1:464 

construction plans for pumping stations, forced mains, siphons andother appurtenances. 
(2) 	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prepare saidapplication, submit it for signature to the Town Engineer, and forward the completed application form to the Department of Environmental Protection. 
E. 	Wetlands Protection Act. 
(1) 	
In accordance with MGL c. 131, § 40, no person shall remove, fill, dredge or alter any bank, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow orswamp bordering on any existing creek, river, stream, pond, lakeor any land under said waters or subject to flooding without filing a written notice of intention to perform said work with the localConservation Commission and the Department of EnvironmentalProtection. 

(2) 	
In order to determine if the proposed subdivision, or parts thereof,are subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, thePlanning Board will, where it deems necessary, submit a copy of the definitive plan to the Conservation Commission. The ConservationCommission shall, to the extent practicable, file a report with thePlanning Board not later than 45 days after receipt of the plan stating that the proposed plans are not subject to the provisions ofthe Wetlands Protection Act, or the Wetlands Protection Act appliesto certain designated areas. In the event the plan shall be governed by said Act, the Planning Board shall include in its decision forapproval a condition that the applicant shall obtain approval fromthe Conservation Commission prior to any construction activity in the affected areas. 


F. 	Review by Board of Health. 
(1) 	
The Board of Health shall, within 45 days after filing of the plan, report to the Planning Board, in writing, approval or disapprovalof said plan. If the Board of Health disapproves such plan, it shallmake specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the publichealth, and include such specific findings and the reasons thereforin such report, and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof. 

(2) 	
Such Health Board or Officer shall send a copy of such report, ifany, to the person who submitted said plan. Any approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall then only be given on conditionthat the lots or land, unto which such doubt exists, shall not be built upon without prior written consent of the Board of Health to the Planning Board, and shall endorse on the plan such condition,specifying the lots or land to which said condition applies. Anylot so located that it cannot be serviced by a connection to the 


1:465 

municipal sewer system shall be provided with a septic tank andleaching system satisfactory to the Board of Health. 
G. 	Public hearing. 
(1) 	
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the definitiveplan in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81T, which requires advertising twice, the first time at least two weeks before thehearing, and notification of all abutters by registered mail. TheBoard shall submit copies of the plan for review by the Department of Planning and Development, Department of Public Works, Inspector of Buildings, and Fire Department. Within 90 days fornonresidential and 90 days for residential if preliminary plans were submitted, 135 days if a preliminary plan has not been submitted(unless an extension is agreed upon), the Planning Board shallapprove, modify and approve, or disapprove the plan, and shall notify the applicant and the Town Clerk of its action, in accordancewith MGL c. 41, § 81U. 

(2) 	
Following approval, there is a twenty-day appeal period, after which the Planning Board will endorse its approval of the plan,provided no appeals have been filed and that by then the Board hasreceived satisfactory security for performance of required street and utility improvements, and a linen or polyester reproduction ofthe approved plan has been provided for the Board's file. 

(3) 	
If the endorsed plan replaces a previously endorsed plan, the applicant shall withdraw the original plan from the Registry ofDeeds prior to the endorsement and filing of the new plan. 

(4) 	
The developer is to provide the Town with a satisfactory performance guarantee within 30 days after the twenty-dayappeals period has expired, and upon acceptance of guarantee, theplan will be endorsed within 30 days by the Planning Board. 


H. 	Approval not acceptance. Approval of a definitive plan does not constitute layout or Town acceptance of any ways, nor does subsequentrelease of security upon completion of such ways constitute layout or Town acceptance of any street, which action is reserved by statute tothe Town Council. 
§ 550-43. Design requirements. 
A. 	Streets. 
(1) 	General design guidelines. All subdivisions shall be designed andimprovements made by the developer consistent with the requirements of § 550-44. Design and construction shall do the following: 
(a) 
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible, the following: 

1:466 

[1] Volume of cut and fill. 

[2] 	Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed; especially if within 200 feet of a river, pond, or stream, orhaving a slope of more than 15%. 
[3] 	Number of mature trees removed. 
[4] 	Extent of waterways altered or relocated. 
[5] 	The number of driveways exiting onto existing streets. 
[6] 	Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary for safety or orientation. 
[7] 	Erosion and siltation. 
[8] 	Flood damage. 
(b) Increase, to the extent reasonably possible, the following: 
[1] 	Use of major streets to avoid traffic on streets providinghouse frontages.113 
[2] 	Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape. 
[3] 	Vistas and water views from public ways. 
[4] 	Street layout facilitating south orientation of houses. 

(2) 	
Classification and design of streets. 

(a) 	
Principal street: a street which carries traffic equivalent tothat generated by 40 or more dwelling units or which serves property either used or zoned for commerce or industry. 

(b) 	
Major street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to thatgenerated by more than 20 but fewer than 40 dwelling units, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce orindustry and which is not capable of extension to serve morethan 40 dwelling units. 

(c) 	
Minor street: a street which: 1) carries traffic equivalent tothat generated by more than 10 but 20 or fewer dwelling unitsin the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential (RB) Zoning Districts, or 2) carries traffic equivalent to thatgenerated by more than one but fewer than 20 dwelling unitsin the Urban Residential (RA) Zoning District; and 3) has no abutting property either used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of extension to serve morethan 20 dwelling units.114 




113.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 114.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:467 
(d) 	Rural street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to thatgenerated by more than one but fewer than 10 dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential(RB) Zoning Districts, which has no abutting property used orzoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable of 
extension to serve more than 40 dwelling units. 

Principal  
Layout width(feet)  60  
Number of  2  
moving lanes  
Width of  20  
lanes (feet)  
Total width  40  
of pavement(curb tocurb) (feet)  
Sidewalks/ Pathways/trails  Yes  
required  
Sidewalk  4.5  
width (feet)  
Curbing required  Yes  
Curbing type  Granite or Concrete  

Horizontal alignment 

Curve at  250  
center line ­ 
minimum  
radius (feet)  
Grade:  
Maximum  6%  
Minimum  0.8%  
Safe  300  
stoppingsight distance (3.5feet above  
pavement) (feet)  
Intersections  

Major 
50 2 15 30 
Determined by theBoard 
4.5 
Determined by Board 
Bituminous 
Concrete 

125 
10% 0.8% 200 
Minor 
50 2 13 26 
Rural 
450 
2 
12 
24 (end of pavementto end of pavement) 
DeterminedDetermined by Board by Board 
4.5 4.5 
DeterminedDetermined 
by Board by Board 

BituminousBituminous 
Concrete Concrete 

125 125 

10% 10% 

0.8% 0.8% 

150 150 

1:468 

§ 550-43  GENERAL PROVISIONS  § 550-43  
Principal  Major  Minor  Rural  
Angle ­minimum  70°  60°  60°  60°  
Offsets 125 125 125 150 (street jogs) ­minimum (feet) 


Radius of 40 30 30 30 edge of layout (feet) 
Sight 300 200 200 200 stoppingdistance (feet) 
Culs-de-sac 
Length -800 800 800 800 maximum (feet) 
Minimum 120 120 120 120 turnaround diameter (layout)(feet) 
Minimum 100 100 100 100 turnaround diameter (roadway)(feet) 
Maximum 40 40 40 40 turnaround diameter (roadwayinner edge) (feet) 
NOTES: 
** 	A cul-de-sac or a dead-end street shall be defined as a street closed at one end. The length of a cul-de-sac streetshall be measured along its center line from the street lineof the intersecting street to the center of the turnaround. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted to connect intoanother cul-de-sac street unless the distance measured along the center lines from the street line of the connecting non-cul-de-sac street to the center of the proposed turnaround is not more than 800 feet. 
1:469 

(3) Access. 

B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
(a) 	
No subdivision plan shall be approved unless its street system will connect with: 

[1] 	A way legally accepted by Town Council vote; or 
[2] 	A way established by county, state, or federal authority; or 
[3] 	A way established by a subdivision plan approved inaccordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or any otherway in existence on the date the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield if determined by the Planning Board to be sufficient for the needs for accessand utilities to serve potential needs of land abutting on or to be served thereby without reduction in the level oftraffic service or creation of hazard. 

(b) 	
The creation of 40 or more units requires a special permit for major development review (MDR). See § 200-7.12 of theGreenfield Zoning Ordinance. 


Open space. Where appropriate, the Planning Board may require reservation of open space for up to three years upon completion ofthe subdivision to provide an opportunity for the Town to purchaseit for open space or recreation purposes. The Planning Board shall not require reservation of more than 10% of the gross area of thesubdivision for such purposes, and shall not require reservation ofareas smaller than four acres, except in extraordinary circumstances. 
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all naturalfeatures, such as mature trees, watercourses, scenic vistas, locations of historical significance, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision. 
Easements. Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided, where necessary, and shall be at least 20 feet wide. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,drainageway, channel or stream, the Board requires that there beprovided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width (minimum of 20 feet) to conform substantially to the lines ofsuch watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, and to provide forconstruction or other necessary purposes. 
Environmental assessment. A comparative environmental assessmentmay be required for any subdivision creating frontage of 10 or moredwelling units within 1,000 feet of a perennial river or stream as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310CMR 10.00). The scope of such assessment, including developmentalternatives to be compared and consequences to be studied, shall be as agreed to by the Planning Board and may be required to includeup to two major alternatives to the plan proposed, including a cluster 
1:470 

version, with as much of the following information as determined bythe Planning Board to be necessary for plan evaluation; and shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team, to include a land surveyor, civilengineer, and an architect or landscape architect, unless otherwiseagreed to by the Planning Board. 
(1) 	
Narrative discussion of differences among alternatives regarding: 

(a) 	
Impact upon surface water quality and level. 

(b) 	
Impact upon groundwater quality and level. 

(c) 	
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstandingbotanical features, and scenic or historic environs. 

(d) 	
Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion control efforts to support proposed development without danger of erosion, silting, or other instability. 

(e) 	
Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A (the Wetlands Protection Act). 

(f) 	
Estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater andsurface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, and other activities within the development. 

(g) 	
Lot layout and house siting for potential solar energycapabilities. 



(2) 	
Discussion of impact on a waterway of a subdivision with topographical features of more than 30 feet above said waterway. 

(3) 	
Environmental assessment process. 

(a) 	
The applicant shall complete the environmental assessmentreport along with the preliminary plan or prior to submissionof a definitive plan outlining what environmental issues the applicant believes will occur because of this project, includingwetlands. 

(b) 	
The Planning Board will distribute this statement to the Town Engineer, Board of Health, Town agencies or the regionalplanning commission for review and comment. Comments willbe accepted up to 21 days from date of receipt of the environmental assessment form. 

(c) 	
The Planning Board shall review any comments within 14 daysof the close of the comment period, determine the issues to be addressed by the applicant, and issue a final scope to theapplicant. 

(d) 	
The applicant shall present responses and alternative as required elsewhere in these regulations relative to each issueraised. 


1:471 


(e) 	
The Board shall have 45 days to review the responses and maywork with the applicant to select the most desirable alternative to mitigate environmental concerns. 

(f) 	
If, upon preliminary review, additional clarification is necessary, the applicant may request a suspension of the forty­five-day period, and request an opportunity to resubmit plans. 

(g) 	
A final plan shall be prepared by the applicant based upon thedecision of the Board. 


F. 	Water Supply Protection District. Any portion of a proposed subdivisionwhich lies within the limits of the Town's Water Supply ProtectionDistrict shall conform to the requirements of said district as outlined in § 200-4.14 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 
G. 	Flood hazard areas. Any portion of a proposed subdivision which islocated within the one-hundred-year floodplain as shown on the Town of Greenfield Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), together with the FloodBoundary and Floodway Maps contained in the Flood Insurance Study,shall meet the following requirements: 
(1) 	
All requirements of § 200-4.13, Floodplain District (F), of theGreenfield Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The subdivision, including utilities and drainage, shall be designed to be consistent with the needs to minimize flood damage andprovide adequate drainage. 

(3) 	
Subdivisions shall include base flood elevation data. 


§ 550-44. Required road improvements and specifications. 
A. 	Compliance required. The following improvements shall be made by thesubdivider without expense to the Town: 
(1) 	
Street obstructions. The entire area of each street or way shall becleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, like material and alltrees not intended for preservation. 

(2) 	
Subsurface removal. All loam, clay, peat or other yielding materialshall be removed beneath all street layouts to a depth specified bythe Town Engineer and shall be replaced with a granular material acceptable to the Town Engineer. 

(3) 	
Fill types allowable. Whenever it is necessary to install fill to bringa roadway to subgrade, said fill shall be of a granular material satisfactory to the Town Engineer and the Greenfield Departmentof Public Works. All fill shall be placed in nine-inch layerscompacted to not less than 95% of maximum dry density as specified in the MassHighway Standards. The developer shall beresponsible for the costs of all soil testing and analysis required bythe Town Engineer. 

1:472 

(4) 	
Groundwater. Wherever groundwater is encountered within fourfeet of the proposed roadway surface or wherever the soil type indicates the possibility of a capillary rise of water in the subgradesoil, subdrains shall be installed under both shoulders of the roadway. The design and depth of the subdrains shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Town Engineer and theGreenfield Department of Public Works. 

(5) 	
Rock excavations. Wherever rock is encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of two feet below the subbase of the roadwayfor the full width of the street layout. The excavated rock shallbe replaced with a granular material satisfactory to the Town Engineer and the Greenfield Department of Public Works. 

(6) 	
Subbase. Roadways shall be brought to the bottom of the subbaseelevation prior to the installation of the water mains, storm drains, sanitary sewers or other utilities. 

(7) 	
Subbase compaction. The gravel base and subbase of the roadwayshall be compacted to not less than 95% of maximum dry density. 

(8) 	
Curbs. 

(a) 	
Curbing, where required, should be standard granite, precast concrete, or bituminous concrete as determined by the Planning Board with recommendations by the Town Engineerand the Department of Public Works. All catch basins shouldhave granite drop inlets. 

(b) 	
Where bituminous concrete curbs are allowed, the curb typeshall be approved by the Town Engineer before installation.Bituminous concrete curbs, with a width of 12 inches and minimum pitch of three inches to five inches, may be allowedwhere grades are less than 3%. 





B. 	
Roadway material requirements. 

(1) 	
The structure of the roadway will be composed of the followingitems: 

(a) 	
Bituminous concrete pavement. The material used for roadway pavement shall be Class I Bituminous Concrete Type I-1 applied in two courses. All work shall conform to the requirements of Section 460 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications for both the binder and top courses. All materials shall conform to Section M3 of said Standard Specifications. 

(b) 	
Base. The material used for a base course shall be a processedgravel that meets with the approval of the Town Engineer. Thegravel shall conform to the requirements of Section M1.03.1 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications. 


1:473 


(c) 	
Subbase. The material used for a subbase shall be a bank run or crushed gravel that meets with the approval of the Town Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of SectionM1.03.0 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications. 

(d) 	
Subgrade (sand borrow). When sand borrow is required below the subbase, the material used shall conform to Section M1.04.0 Type B of the MassHighway Standard Specificationsand shall be compacted to 95% of maximum dry density. 



(2) 	
Subsurface soil data. 

(a) 	
Soil information. The Board may require subsurface soil information to evaluate the adequacy of the roadway design. Such information may include test pits, borings, or probingsalong each proposed street, primarily at locations such as cutsections, areas of questionable foundation material, and areas of potentially high groundwater elevations. The requirementfor and location of test pits shall be established by the Boardduring the preliminary plan review process. If a preliminary plan did not precede the definitive plan submittal, test pit datawill be required at locations every 800 feet along roadwaycenter lines, plus areas where the proposed grade is three feet or more below existing grade, and probings will be requiredalong the center line and sideline at twenty-five-foot intervalswhere the roadway crosses wetlands or other areas of unsuitable material. 

(b) 	
Soil test pit specifications. Borings and test pits shall be toa depth at least four feet below finished grade, and the logs submitted to the Board shall indicate their location and groundelevation, a classification of the soil strata by depth, depth atwhich groundwater or rock, if any, is encountered and the date of the test. 

(c) 	
Probings. Probings shall be used to determine the depth ofunsuitable material, and the data shall be submitted to the Board on a drawing with a scale of one inch equals 20 feetshowing the roadway center line (with stations) and sidelines,and test locations with existing ground elevations and the depths of unsuitable materials. 

(d) 	
Planning Board present. All subsurface soil investigations shallbe made in the presence of a representative of the Planning Board or its designated agent. 

(e) 	
Registered engineer. All soil logs to be submitted to the Boardshall be stamped by a registered professional engineer. 



(3) 	
Street cross-section/drainage/grade and slope stabilization requirements. 

1:474 

(a) 	
Drawn to scale. Typical street cross-section for each class ofstreet within the subdivision, drawn at a scale of one inch equals four feet, showing the location of all elements withinthe street right-of-way, and typical cross-sections of any altereddrainage courses or off-street paths shall be drawn. 

(b) 	
Easements, drainage calculations, evidence of ownership,language of any easements, covenants, or restrictions applyingor proposed to apply to the area being subdivided, rights and easements obtained for utilities or drainage outside of the subdivision, description of erosion control methods to be employed shall be presented. 

(c) 	
Drain pipes, manholes, catch basins. Drain pipes and relatedmanholes and catch basins shall be constructed in conformitywith the specifications and requirements of the Greenfield Department of Public Works. 



C. 	
Roadway design standards. 

(1) 	
In general, the roadway structure designs for all streets shall be in accordance with the following, unless otherwise required by theTown Engineer. 

(2) 	
The subgrade shall be classified as follows: 

(a) 	
Poor: subgrade soils which become quite soft and plastic when wet. Included in this classification are those soils havingappreciable amounts of clay, silt, and fine sand where front penetration of the subgrade is expected. 

(b) 	
Medium: subgrade soils which retain a moderate degree offirmness when saturated. Included are such soils as fine sand, silty sand and sandy gravel with some silts and clays. 

(c) 	
Good to excellent: subgrade soils which retain a substantialamount of their load-supporting capacity when saturated shall be classified as good. Included are clean sand and gravel freefrom detrimental amounts of plastic silts and clay. 






1:475 

Required Roadway Structure 

Depth of Section for SubgradeType 
Type ofPavement 
Roadway Section (inches) 

Poor Medium Good 
Major 	Bituminous 1 1 1 Concrete Top
Minor Course 
Rural 
Bituminous 2 2 2 Concrete Binder Course 
Processed 6 6 6 Gravel Base Course 
Gravel Borrow 18 12 6 Subbase 
Principal 	Bituminous 1 1 1 Concrete Top Course 
Bituminous 2 2 2 Concrete Binder Course 
Processed 9 9 9 Gravel Base Course 
Gravel Borrow 18 12 6 Subbase 
M1.04.0 Type B12 0 0 Sand Borrow 
D. 	Gutters. Paved gutters shall be installed at the discretion of the TownEngineer, as deemed necessary due to special conditions of topography, drainage or alignment. 
E. 	Sidewalks/Pathways/Trails. Sidewalks shall be required for all proposedprincipal streets, except those within the Planned Industry (PI) Zoning District, and may be required for proposed major, minor and rural streets if deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Sidewalk construction within a roadway layout shall conform to § 550-43, Design requirements, of these regulations and the Greenfield Department ofPublic Works specifications. 
F. Utilities. All gas, telephone, electricity and cable antenna television lines shall be installed underground. Utilities shall be located in 
1:476 

G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
accordance with the Greenfield Standard Locations for Construction of Streets and Appurtenances, dated April 6, 1982, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer. 
Streetlights. Installation of streetlights shall be in accordance with theGreenfield Department of Public Works Guidelines for Approval of New Streetlights on Public Ways. 
Sewers. Sanitary sewer pipes and related equipment, such as manholesand connecting Y's, shall be constructed in conformity with specifications issued by the Greenfield Department of Public Works.Where, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, existing public sewermains are not reasonably accessible, the plan may be approved without provision of street sewers, provided that: 
(1) 	
No lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot sewagedisposal facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health in accordance with Title V of the Massachusetts Sanitary Code; and 

(2) 	
The Town Engineer may require installation of so-called "dry-sewers" in conformity with specifications of the Greenfield Department of Public Works in any street where, in its estimation,sanitary sewers may become accessible within a period of 10 years. 

Water. Water pipes and related equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff valves, shall be constructed to serve all lots on each street in the subdivision in conformity with specifications and requirements issuedby the Greenfield Department of Public Works. Where, in the opinion of the Greenfield Department of Public Works, existing water mains arenot reasonably accessible, the plan may be approved without provisionof street water lines, provided that: 

(1) 	
No lot shall be built upon without the provisions of on-lot waterfacilities specifically approved by the Board of Health; and 

(2) 	
The Town Engineer may require such special provisions of water for fire-fighting as are deemed necessary by the Chief of the FireDepartment. 

Stormwater and drainage.115 

(1) 	
Stormwater and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the stormwater specifications issued by the Greenfield Department of Public Works and require the submittal of a stormwater management plan. 

(2) 	
Proposed stormwater detention basins shall be located on a separate lot(s) and not be included as part of a building lot, and shall be deeded to the Town if the street(s) is accepted as a publicway in accordance with § 550-45E. 



115.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 381, Stormwater Management. 
1:477 
(3) 	All detention basins, drainage swales, level spreaders, and drainage outflows shall be constructed and stabilized with vegetation or erosion control matting prior to the constructionof approved roads. Inspections during and after construction bythe Department of Public Works shall take place to ensure conformance to Town regulations and specifications. 
K. 	Stone bounds; monuments. Permanent monuments of granite shall beinstalled at all street intersections, at all points of change in direction or curvature of streets, and at all other points required by goodengineering practice, after completion of all construction. Certificationin writing shall be made by the registered engineer of the developer, to the Greenfield Department of Public Works, that all monuments havebeen properly set in accordance with the final plan. 
L. 	Grass plots and trees. 
(1) 	
The entire width of the right-of-way, except for roadway, curb andgutter, and sidewalk, shall be devoted to grass plot, consisting of atleast six inches of good-quality loam and seeded. 

(2) 	
No utility poles, transformers, sign or similar items shall be placedwithin the grass plot so as to be less than two feet from the edge ofthe roadway. 

(3) 	
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, existing or proposedtress on the adjacent lot are not adequate, two or more trees perlot may be required. No trees shall be planted in the grass plot between the sidewalk area and gutter. Species, size, location, andplanting procedure for such trees shall conform to the currentpractice of the Town in planting roadside trees.116 


M. 	Construction entrances. A temporary mud tracking bed (constructionentrance) shall be put in place at each site entrance and shall consistof a four-inch minimum layer of 2 1/2 inches to four inches of crushed stone and shall be 30 feet in length and 15 feet wide. This bed shallbe maintained during construction to prevent tracking or flowing ofsediment onto the public right-of-way and shall be removed prior to the placement of gravel base and pavement. 
§ 550-45. Performance guarantees. 
A. 	Guarantee required; relationship to cost. 
(1) 	MGL c. 41, § 81U requires that no definitive plan shall be endorsedby the Planning Board until the applicant has guaranteed theconstruction of all required improvements within the subdivision as shown on the definitive plan. This guarantee may be providedby a proper bond (§ 550-45B), by a deposit of money or negotiable 

116.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Trees. 
1:478 
security (§ 550-45C), by a covenant (§ 550-45D), by a lender's agreement (§ 550-45E), or by any combination thereof. 
(2) 	
The penal sum of any such bond held under § 550-45B or anydeposit held under § 550-45C or any amount of funds retainedpursuant to an agreement under § 550-45E shall bear a direct and reasonable relationship to the expected cost, including theeffects of inflation, necessary to complete the subject work. Suchamount or amounts shall, from time to time, be reduced so that the amount bonded, deposited or retained continues to reflect theactual expected cost of work remaining to be completed. 

(3) 	
The developer is to provide the Town with a satisfactory performance guarantee within 60 days after the twenty-dayappeals period has expired, and upon acceptance of guarantee theplan will be endorsed within 60 days by the Planning Board. 


B. 	Final approval with bonds. 
(1) 	
The subdivider shall file a proper bond, sufficient, in the opinionof the Planning Board, to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services as specified in§ 550-44, and as are required for lots in the subdivision shown onthe plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which such construction shall be completed. 

(2) 	
Such bond shall be approved as to form and manner of executionby the Town Attorney; shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal serviceswithin a period to be agreed to and specified by the Planning Boardand applicant, and shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer. 


C. 	Final approval with deposit of money or negotiable securities. 
(1) 	
The subdivider shall file a deposit of money or negotiablesecurities, sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning Board, to secure performance of the construction of ways and installation ofmunicipal services, as specified in § 550-44, and as are required forlots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which suchconstruction shall be completed. 

(2) 	
Such deposit of money or negotiable securities shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Treasurer, shallbe contingent on completion of the construction of ways and theinstallation of municipal services within a period to be agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant, and shall be depositedwith the Town Treasurer. 


D. Final approval with covenant. 

1:479 

(1) 	
The subdivider shall file a covenant, executed and duly recordedby the owner of record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided as specified in § 550-44, to serveany lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other thanby mortgage deed, provided that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and anysucceeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell anysuch lot, subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have beenprovided to service such lot, and provided, further, that nothingherein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shownon subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by thePlanning Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of thecovenant but not later than three years from the date of such deed. 

(2) 	
Such covenant shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney and shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation ofmunicipal services within a period to be agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant. 


E. 	Final approval with lender's agreement. 
(1) 	
The subdivider shall file with the Planning Board an agreement executed after the recording of a first mortgage covering thepremises shown on the plan or a portion thereof given as securityfor advances to be made to the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender andshall provide for the retention by the lender of funds sufficient, inthe opinion of the Planning Board and otherwise due the applicant, to secure the construction of ways and installation of municipalservices, as specified in § 550-44. 

(2) 	
Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of variousstages of the work, and shall further provide that, in the event thework is not completed within the time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed shall be available for completion.Such agreement shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney and shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation ofmunicipal services in accordance with the schedule of disbursements which shall be approved by the Planning Board prior to execution of the agreement. 


F. Release of performance guarantee. 

(1) Upon the completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance with the rules and 
1:480 

regulations of the Planning Board, security for the performanceof which was given by bond, deposit or covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant with respect to any lot, the applicantshall submit a completed Form O stating that the constructionor installation in connection with which such bond, deposit, or covenant has been given has been completed in accordance withsaid rules and regulations. Along with the Form O, the applicantshall also submit two copies of as-built plans in an electronic format acceptable to the Department of Public Works and one Mylar. Theapplicant shall also send by registered mail to the Town Clerkand the Planning Board a written statement that the construction or installation in connection with which such bond, deposit, orcovenant has been given has been completed in accordance withsaid rules and regulations, such statement to contain the address of the applicant. If the Planning Board determines that said construction or installation has been completed, it shall releasethe interest of the Town in such bond and return the bond or the deposit to the person who furnished the same, or release thecovenant by appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged, whichmay be recorded. 
(2) 	If the Board determines that said construction or installation has not been completed, it shall specify, in a notice sent by registeredmail to the applicant and to the Town Clerk, the details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with its rules andregulations, and upon failure so to do within 45 days after thereceipt by the Town Clerk of said statement, all obligations under the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of law, any depositshall be returned and any such covenant shall become void. Inthe event that said forty-five -day period expires without such specifications, or without the release and return of the bond orreturn of the deposit or release of the covenant as aforesaid, theTown Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded. 
§ 550-46. Administration. 
A. 	Variation. Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, suchaction is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the SubdivisionControl Law. In waving strict compliance, the Board may require such alternative conditions as will serve substantially the same objective asthe standards or regulations waived. 
B. 	Appeals. Appeals may be taken to the Superior Court in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81BB. 
C. 	Administrative fees (nonrefundable).117 

117.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:481 
(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 


Fees for the various reviews listed in the following schedule are setby the Planning Board: 
Subdivision Control 
Endorsement by Planning Board (ANR Form A) 
Preliminary Plan (Form B) 
Definitive Plan (Form C) 
Amendment/Revision to a Definitive Plan 
Inspection Fee 
Such fees are to be paid in the form of a certified check made outto the "Town of Greenfield" and are to be received at the beginning of the review period. 
An additional fee in an amount set by the Planning Board will becharged to cover extra time spent by Town departments such as Engineering, DPW, Board of Health and Department of Planningand Development, if required, to review preliminary or final plansbeyond five hours for either plan review. 
All expenses for notification of abutters, legal notice advertising,and recording of plans shall be paid for directly by the applicant. 
Other costs. 
(a) 	
The services of an outside consultant may be obtained bythe Planning Board to review and advise the Board on theapplicant's proposed project. All reasonable expenses incurred by the Board for such review shall be paid by the applicant.The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of theestimated costs for the review. The review fees shall be paid by the applicant within 10 days of receipt of the notification. Thereview fees shall be held by the Town Treasurer in a separateaccount. The Board may request additional funds if needed to cover the cost of outside review in the same manner as above. Failure by the applicant to make timely payments shallbe adequate reason to deny the application. 

(b) 	
The selection of an outside consultant may be appealed to theOffice of the Mayor. Such appeals are limited to claims thatthe consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimumqualifications consist of either an educational degree in thefield at issue or a related field, or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The requiredtime limits for action upon an application by the PlanningBoard shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Office ofthe Mayor within one month following the filing of the appeal,the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand. 

1:482 


(6) 	
Any excess amount in review fees paid by the applicant, includingany accrued interest, at the completion of the project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest,and a final report on expenditures made from the fees shall bemade available. 


D. 	Submission of road to Town to consider acceptance as public way.Once the road(s) and associated public utilities are completed and thedeveloper desires to submit it for consideration for acceptance as a public way by the Town, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1) 	
The developer of a subdivision road shall submit a completedcertificate of completion (Form O) to the Planning Board for approval and release of the performance guarantee. 

(2) 	
The developer or petitioner shall file a written petition to the TownCouncil requesting that the road be laid out and accepted as a public way. The petition shall include: 

(a) 	
A legal description of the public way, easements, and any otherdocumentation to be considered. 

(b) 	
A list of names and addresses of abutters, utility companies,banks holding mortgages, and the developer/owner. 

(c) 	
A Mylar plan of the roadway layout and three paper copies. 



(3) 	
The plan shall be prepared to the following specifications: 

(a) 	
Scale of one inch equals 40 feet. 

(b) 	
Must be prepared in accordance with the Franklin County Registry of Deeds Plan Regulations. 

[1] 	No larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. 
[2] 	Three-Fourth-Inch Boundary. 
[3] 	Three-and-one-half-square-inch space reserved for Registry use. 

(c) 	
Only one proposed street to be shown per sheet. 

(d) 	
Match lines to be used if a street is to be shown on more than one sheet. 

(e) 	
Title block to be: 
Street Acceptance Plan of 
(name of street) 
Town of Greenfield, Mass. Franklin County 


(f) 
Date plan was prepared. 





1:483 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 


(g) 	
The plan should be stamped by a registered land surveyor. 

(h) 	
Reserved spaces for: 


[1] 	(name of street) is part of the (name) subdivision approvedby the Planning Board on (date) and recorded in theFranklin County Registry of Deeds book _____ page _____, (or) (name of street) is a way in existence which has beenrecommended by the Planning Board on (date) for acceptance as a public way. 
[2] 	Planning Board endorsement that Approval is Not Required. 
[3] 	Laid out by Town Council (date and signature). 
[4] 	Filed in Town Clerk's office (date and attest by Town Clerk). 
One copy of the petition and all required information shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Town Engineer at the timeof submittal to the Town Council. 
The Town Council votes its intention to consider laying out the road as a public way. The vote becomes a public record and the TownCouncil refers the petition to the Planning Board for a nonbindingrecommendation and report. 
The Planning Board shall have 45 days after it receives the referralto make a report and recommendation to the Town Council. Failureby the Planning Board to make a recommendation will be construed as no opposition to acceptance of the road as a public way. Thepetition shall also be referred to the Town Engineer for recommendation. 
After receipt of the Planning Board's recommendation or after 45days have lapsed with no recommendation, the Town Council shallhold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing and any viewings shall be published in a local newspaper and shall be sent bycertified mail to all abutters, utility companies, banks holdingmortgages, and the developer at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to thePlanning Board, Town Engineer, and Town Clerk. The notice shallinclude a description of the layout; the date, time and place of the hearing; and the location where the plans may be reviewed. 
After the close of the public hearing, the Town Council may vote toaccept the layout of the road as a public way. A majority vote of the Town Council is required for acceptance. 
The vote to accept the private road as a public way shall bepresented to the Mayor for approval. If the Mayor does not act within 10 days following the date it was presented, the vote is 
1:484 

approved. If the vote is disapproved by the Mayor, the Town Council shall consider the same measure within a time period from 10 days to 30 days after the veto is returned to the Council. A two-thirds vote of the Council is required to override the veto. 
(10)If approved, the Town Council shall submit a report to the Town Clerk specifying the manner in which the way was laid out and shallinclude a description of the location and bounds of such way. 
(11)The Town Clerk shall record the report in a book kept for that purpose within 10 days of receipt. 
(12)If approved, the Town Council shall acquire the necessary land forthe road layout by accepting a deed from the owner(s) of fee simple in the way and by a taking of the land by eminent domain the feesimple in the way. The taking must be done by a two-thirds vote ofthe Town Council. 
(13)The plan and legal description shall be recorded in the FranklinCounty Registry of Deeds by the Town Council once all other proceedings have been finalized. 
(14)Other conditions. 
(a) 	
The developer or petitioner shall be responsible for the costof preparing all plans, public hearing notices (mailings and legal advertisement), and recording of documents/plans at theRegistry of Deeds. 

(b) 	
The Planning Board and Town Engineer will not recommend acceptance unless the land and the road are transferred to theTown at no cost to the Town. 


E. 	Administrative forms. Attached, as part of these regulations, are certain administrative forms, applications, and other documents associatedwith subdivisions. These forms may be changed from time to timeby majority vote of the Board, without notice, to reflect changes in procedures or laws. 
1:485 

ARTICLE VI 
Zone Changes
[Adopted as Ch. 896 of the 2002 Bylaws] 

§ 550-47. Petition to be made on official form.118 
Every petition for a zone change requested by a landowner shall be made on the official form, which shall be filed with the Town Clerk, with a copyto the Planning Board and the Town Council, showing the date and time thefiling was received by the Town Clerk. 
§ 550-48. Submissions with petition. 
A. 	Every petition shall include the following: 
(1) 	
Filing fee of $100. 

(2) 	
A copy of the Greenfield Property Map showing the lots to beincluded in the zone change. 

(3) 	
If the request for a zone change is to permit a new use of the property, seven copies of a site plans shall be submitted showing: 

(a) 	
The existing and proposed zoning boundaries and district names. 

(b) 	
The location of existing and proposed lot lines within theproposed zone. 

(c) 	
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking areas and any other accessory uses. 



(4) 	
The Planning Board or the Town Council may require the submission of additional information to justify the zone change. 


B. 	All other costs and reasonable expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the review and processing of a zone change requestshall be borne by the applicant. Such costs may include but are not limited to staff time, consultant and attorney's fees, research, datacollection, tests, boring, and information meetings. The Town shall notify the applicant of the estimated costs and request payment. Such review costs shall be paid by the applicant within 10 days of receiptof the payment request. The Town may from time to time requestadditional payment as costs are incurred. Failure to make timely payments shall be adequate reason to deny the request. 
C. 	One copy of the site plan shall be submitted to the Town Clerk andto the Town Council. Five copies shall be submitted to the Planning Board, which shall forward copies to the Inspector of Buildings, theDepartment of Public Works, and the Town Counsel.119 

118.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:487 
§ 550-49. Costs to be borne by petitioner. 
The petitioner shall be responsible for the cost of advertising both the Planning Board and the Town Council public hearings. 
§ 550-50. Adoption procedure. 
The process for adopting a zone change shall be in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 5, the Zoning Act, and with the Town Charter. 
§ 550-51. Waiver of fee. 
The application fee may be waived if deemed appropriate. 

119.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:488 
Chapter 555 
POLICE COMMISSIONERS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Public assemblies — See Ch. 217. 	Streets, sidewalks and public places — See Ch. 385. 
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 322. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 408. 
1:489 

ARTICLE I 
Traffic Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 485 of the 2002 Bylaws] 

§ 555-1. Definitions. 
For the purpose of these rules and orders, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings, except in those instances wherethe context indicates a different meaning: 
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or alighting from and the parking of buses. 
CHANNELIZED ISLAND — A traffic island located to guide a traffic streamalong certain definite paths and to prevent the promiscuous movement of vehicles in what would otherwise be a widely extended roadway area.120 
COMMON — Town-owned land not designated for use by motor vehicles. 
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections,or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing bylines on the road surface or by other markings or signs. 
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (Fire Patrol),police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state andmunicipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department. 
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such accompanying the remains of a human body. 
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient widthto accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles. 
OFFICER — Any officer, any constable or special officer, provided he has his badge of office displayed over his left breast and upon his outer garment. 
OFFICIAL CURB MARKING — That portion of a curbing the painting ofwhich has been authorized by the Mayor and which has the written approval of the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.121 
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend marking or marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purportsto direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Mayorand which has written approval of the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.122 
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS — All signals, conforming to the standardsas prescribed by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth 
120.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 121.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 122.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:491 of Massachusetts, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, placed orerected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing or warning traffic.123 
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other thansignals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, which conform to the standards prescribed by the Department of Transportation of theCommonwealth of Massachusetts and which are placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having such jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.124 
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwisethan temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, orwhile making emergency repairs, or disabled, while arrangements are beingmade to move such vehicle. 
PARKING METER — Any mechanical device, not inconsistent with theprovisions of these rules and orders, placed or erected on any public wayor municipal off-street parking area within the Town of Greenfield for the regulation of parking. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by properlegend the legal parking time established by these rules and orders, andwhen operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time permitted and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal orovertime parking. 
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent to a parking meter which is duly designated for the parking of asingle vehicle by lines painted on the surface of the street or municipal off-street parking area adjacent to or adjoining such parking meter. 
PARKING METER ZONE — Includes any street or portion thereof or municipal off-street parking area upon which parking meters are installedand in operation and upon which parking of vehicles is permitted for a limited time, subject to compliance with the further provisions of these rulesand orders. 
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by human power, except bicycles or tricycles. 
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways within a railroad right­of-way. 
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between regularly established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved andintended to be used for vehicular traffic. 
ROTARY TRAFFIC — The counter-clockwise operation of a vehicle around an object or structure. 
123.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 124.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:492 SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodationof commercial and transient vehicular traffic. 
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestriantravel. 
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every way open to use for purposes of travel. 
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs arerequired to park while waiting to be engaged. 
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars or other conveyances, either single or together while using any street orhighway for the purpose of travel. 
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternatelydirected to stop and to proceed.125 
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside, within a roadway, which is not intended for use by vehicular traffic. 
TREE BELT — That area of the street between the edge of the roadway andthe property line or between the roadway and the sidewalk if such has been constructed. 
U-TURN — The turning of a vehicle by means of a continuous left turnwhereby the direction of such vehicle is reversed. 
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property isor may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devicesmoved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
§ 555-2. Authority and duties of police; temporary and experimentalregulations; exemptions; records and reports. 
A. 	Duties of police officers. 
(1) 	
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police toenforce the provisions of these rules and orders. 

(2) 	
Such officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signals in conformancewith the provisions of these rules and orders, provided that, in theevent of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may directtraffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions ofthese rules and orders. 


B. Temporary street closures or restrictions. 


125.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:493 
C. 
D. 
E. 
(1) 	
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close temporarily anystreet or highway in an impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided there isreasonable justification for the closing of such street. 

(2) 	
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending orexisting emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, outdoor games,meets, events, public gathering, demonstration or procession, provided there is reasonable justification for such prohibition. 

(3) 	
Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarilymay be moved by or under the direction of an officer. 


Exemptions. The provisions of these rules and orders shall not apply tooperators actually engaged in work upon a street or highway closed totravel or under construction or repair or to officers when engaged in the performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any ofthese necessitates a departure from any part of these rules and orders.These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
Records and reports. 
(1) 	
The Chief of Police shall make an annual report concerning the accident situation in the Town, accompanied by his recommendations. 

(2) 	
The police shall keep a record of all operators involved in accidents within the municipality. 

(3) 	
The Chief of Police shall report to the Registrar of Motor Vehiclessuch operators as are found to be constant violators of these regulations. 

(4) 	
The Chief of Police shall include in his report to the Mayor:126 

(a) 	
The number of operators reported to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles. 

(b) 	
Other pertinent data on safety, accompanied by his recommendations. 

(c) 	
The plans and recommendations for future traffic safetyactivities. 




Experimental rules. 
(1) 	For purposes of trial, the Mayor may make temporary rules regulating traffic, or test under actual conditions traffic signs,markings or other devices.127 

126.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:494 
(2) 	No such experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in effectfor a period of time longer than 30 days. 
§ 555-3. Traffic signs, signals, markings and zones. 
A. 	The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to erect those signsand signals required hereunder, and it shall be his duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs,signals, markings and safety zones.128 
B. 	All signs, signals, markings and safety zones shall conform to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Transportation of theCommonwealth of Massachusetts.129 
C. 	Section 555-2B and § 555-5B through E, inclusive, relating to parking, and §§ 555-23 and 555-32 concerning turning shall be effective onlyduring such time as a sufficient number of official signs is erected andmaintained in each block designating the provisions of such sections and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers. 
D. 	Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during suchtime as a sufficient number of official signs is erected and maintained at each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at least one sign willbe clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to drivers approachingsuch an exit. 
E. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to displayupon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, marking ordevice which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign, signal, marking or device or which attempts to direct themovement of traffic or which hides from view an official sign or signal. 
F. 	The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be removed,without notice. 
G. 	Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes with any official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liableto a penalty not exceeding $20 for each and every offense. 
H. 	No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instruction of any official traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend, unless otherwisedirected by a police officer. 
I. 	The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be specified by the Mayor; and in the case of taxicab stands, the Mayorshall designate who may use them as such.130 
127.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 128.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 129.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 130.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:495 
§ 555-4. Zones of Quiet. 
A. 	All of the territory within 200 feet of the premises of any hospital in this Town is hereby created and established as a "Zone of Quiet." 
B. 	The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to erect and maintain in aconspicuous manner within this area such signs and markings as are necessary to designate it as a Zone of Quiet. 
C. 	The Chief of Police may temporarily establish a Zone of Quiet uponany street where a person is seriously ill, if requested to do so by the written statement of at least two registered physicians certifying to itsnecessity. 
(1) 	
Said temporary Zone of Quiet shall embrace all territory within a radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by the person named onthe request of said physicians. 

(2) 	
Said temporary Zone of Quiet shall be designated by the police by placing at a conspicuous place in the street a sign or markerbearing the words "Zone of Quiet." 


D. 	No person operating a motor vehicle within any designated and signed Zone of Quiet shall sound the horn or other warning device of saidvehicle except in an emergency. 
§ 555-5. School zones. 
A. 	No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a school zone betweenthe hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day school is in session. 
B. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declared on a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department ofPublic Works. 
§ 555-6. Bus stops. 
A. 	No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop. 
B. 	No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district atany place other than a bus stop, when a nearby bus stop is available for use. 
C. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works. 
§ 555-7. Taxicab stands. 
A. 	No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street within a business district in any taxicab stand. 
1:496 

B. 	No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business districtat any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated for the use of his taxicab or taxicabs. 
C. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works. 
§ 555-8. Service zones. 
A. 	No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any service zone for a period of time longer than 15 minutes, except while actually engagedin loading or unloading, provided that such loading and unloading doesnot exceed a period of time longer than 1/2 hour. 
B. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and Department of PublicWorks. 
§ 555-9. Parking time limited in designated places. [Amended9-17-2003] 
A. 	No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day in the described streetsor parts thereof on a list maintained by the Police Department and theDepartment of Public Works. 
B. 	No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours betweenthe hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,Thursday, and Saturday and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 
p.m. on Friday (except on legal holidays and Sundays) in the describedstreets or parts thereof on a list maintained by the Police Departmentand the Department of Public Works. 
C. 	No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours at any time on the streets or parts thereof on a list maintained by the PoliceDepartment and the Department of Public Works. 
D. 	No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes at any timebetween the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. in the described streetsor parts thereof on a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works. 
E. 	No person shall park a vehicle except while actually engaged in loadingor unloading between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily (except Sundays and legal holidays) in the described streets or parts thereofon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department ofPublic Works. 
F. 	No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour in the describedstreets or parts thereof on a list maintained by the Police Departmentand the Department of Public Works. 
1:497 

G. 	There shall be a fifteen-minute parking zone at Court Square and infront of the United States Post Office on Main Street, which would have a fine of $25 for violations. 
§ 555-10. Angle parking. 
A. 	The Mayor shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to bemarked or signed, as on a list maintained by the Police Department andthe Department of Public Works.131 
B. 	Upon the streets or parts of streets which have been marked or signedfor angle parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within sixinches of the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks, so that all four wheels of the vehicle shall be placed wholly within thepainted lines provided. 
§ 555-11. Parking vehicles for sale prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway anyvehicle displayed for sale. 
§ 555-12. All-night parking prohibited. 
A. 	No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in hisname, other than one acting in an emergency, to be parked on anystreet for a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 
1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
B. 	No person shall allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in hisname, other than one acting in an emergency, to be parked on any public parking lot owned or maintained by the Town of Greenfield,between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
§ 555-13. Parking meters. [Amended 2-19-2002] 
Nothing contained in Subsections A to N, inclusive, of this section of theserules and orders shall be construed to prohibit the Mayor from makingprovisions for bus stops, taxicab stands, service zones and loading zones, as authorized by other sections of these rules and orders, on any streetor portion of street which has been or may hereafter be designated as aparking meter zone.132 
A. 	No person shall park a vehicle in any metered space for a period of timethat is longer than the maximum time allowed for in the parking meterzone in which the metered space is located. (The Board of Public Works shall maintain a list of all parking meter zones with the maximum timeallowed limits and the charge rates per hour.) This restriction shall not 
131.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 132.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:498 apply on Sundays or during the hours of legal holidays during whichbusiness establishments are required by law to remain closed. 
B. 	Meters shall be so constructed as to display a signal showing legalparking upon deposit therein of the proper coin or coins of the UnitedStates as indicated by instruction on said meters and for such period of time as he is or shall be permitted by these rules and orders. 
C. 	Said signal shall remain in evidence until expiration of the parkingperiod designated, at which time a dropping of a signal automatically or some other mechanical operation shall indicate expiration of saidparking meter. 
D. 	The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to establish parking meter spaces in such parking meterzones and to indicate the same by white markings upon the surface ofthe street and to maintain said meters in good, workable condition.133 
E. 	Whenever any vehicle shall be parked adjacent to a parking meter, theowner or operator of said vehicle shall park within the space designatedby street marking line and upon entering such space shall immediately deposit in said meter the required coin of the United States for themaximum legal parking period or proportionate period thereof, both asshown on the meter, and, if so required, set the mechanism in motion. 
F. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be depositedin a parking meter any coin for the purpose of permitting any vehicle toremain in a parking space beyond the maximum period of time allowed in a particular zone. 
G. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within a publicparking space unless such vehicle is wholly within the painted lines adjacent thereto. 
H. 	It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, break,injure or destroy any parking meter or to deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter any slugs, device or metallic substance or anyother substitute for the coins required. 
I. 	Operators of commercial vehicles may park in a metered space without depositing a coin for a period not to exceed 30 minutes for purposes ofloading or unloading. 
J. 	Parking in excess of this time limit shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of these rules and orders. 
K. 	The Director of Public Works is hereby designated as the personauthorized to collect monies deposited in parking meters or to cause the same to be collected.134 
133.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 134.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:499 
L. 	Such monies shall be delivered forthwith to the Town Treasurer, who shall deposit them in a separate account to be known as the "Greenfield Parking Meter Account." 
M. 	All fees received by said Town of Greenfield from the operation anduse of parking meters shall be used as authorized by Chapter 40 of the General Laws, as amended. 
N. 	No driver, while operating any vehicle owned and bearing the indicia ofownership of the Town of Greenfield, state or federal government, shall be required to deposit any fee in a parking meter as provided in thissection. 
§ 555-14. Tow-away zones; fees. 
A. 	In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, as amended,the Mayor of the Town of Greenfield, Massachusetts, hereby enact thefollowing regulations authorizing the removal to a convenient place of vehicles parked or standing in such manner or in such areas as arehereinafter described on any way under the control of the Town ofGreenfield.135 
B. 	Vehicles specifically exempt by Chapter 322 of the Acts of 1961 (MGL
c. 40, § 22D) shall not, however, be subject to such removal. 
C. 	The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this section shall be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police or such otherofficers of the rank of Sergeant or higher as he may from time to timedesignate. 
D. 	The Mayor hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved ortowed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this section, thefollowing fees:136 
(1) 	
Removal or towing fee: not to exceed $12. 

(2) 	
Storage fees: 

(a) 	
Not to exceed $2 for any twenty-four-hour period. 

(b) 	
Not to exceed $1.50 for any period less than 24 hours. 




E. 	The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising outof negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and storage. 
F. 	Standing and parking prohibitions. 
(1) 	Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, exceptthose specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction of an officer of the Police Department, 
135.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 136.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:500 and the owner of the vehicle so removed, or towed away, shall beliable to the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in Subsection D of this section. 
(2) 	
The owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under theprovisions of this section shall also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A. 

(3) 	
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicleregistered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places: 

(a) 	
Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal orplowing of snow or ice, except vehicles parked in accordance with the approved regulations governing all-night parking. 

(b) 	
Upon any sidewalk. 

(c) 	
Upon any crosswalk. 

(d) 	
Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way, exceptalleys. 

(e) 	
Upon a way within 10 feet of a fire hydrant. 

(f) 	
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at theedge or curb of the way. 

(g) 	
In front of a public or private driveway. 

(h) 	
Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave aclear and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passingtraffic. 

(i) 	
Upon any tree belt or common or other Town-owned land notdesignated for parking. 

(j) 	
Upon any street or highway on the south side and east side between December 1 and April 1 with the following exceptions:Federal Street, Bank Row, Main Street or any metered areaunless signs are posted. 




G. 	No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicleregistered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or partsof ways and during the periods of time set forth on the designated places declared on a list maintained by the Police Department and theDepartment of Public Works. 
(1) 	Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this subsection, except those specifically exempted by law, shall be removed to aconvenient place under the direction of an officer of the PoliceDepartment, and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal and storage, if any,as set forth in Subsection D of this section. 
1:501 

(2) 	The owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under theprovisions of this subsection shall also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A. 
H. 	The provisions of Subsection F shall be effective only during such timesas a sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "Tow-Away Zone" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as tobe visible to approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above orincorporated into the legend of parking prohibition signs. 
I. 	Records. 
(1) 	
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed orremoved under the provisions of this section. 

(2) 	
Such record shall be retained for one year and shall contain thefollowing information: 

(a) 	
The registration of the vehicle. 

(b) 	
The location from which it was towed, and the time and date of the tow order. 

(c) 	
The location to which it was moved. 

(d) 	
The fee charged for towing. 

(e) 	
The name of the towing contractor, if any. 

(f) 	
The name and rank of the officer who authorized towing. 




§ 555-15. One-way streets. 
Vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the streetsor parts of streets declared on a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works.. 
§ 555-16. Obstructing traffic. 
A. 	No person shall drive, stop or stand a vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily the normal movement of traffic upon any streetor highway. 
B. 	Officers are hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until suchtraffic as has been delayed has passed. 
C. 	No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate thevehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
1:502 

§ 555-17. Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto thesidewalk area extending across the alleyway or driveway. 
§ 555-18. Obedience to traffic control signals. 
A. 	Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have thecommands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings,and every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by alawful traffic regulating sign (other than a "stop" sign), signal or device,except as provided in Subsection B of this section. 
B. 	In no case shall a driver enter or proceed through an intersectionwithout due regard to the safety of other persons within the intersection, regardless of what indications may be given by traffic control signals. 
C. 	While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal mayproceed through the intersection, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersectionat the time such signal was exhibited. 
D. 	Drivers of vehicles making a right turn or left turn shall yield the right­of-way to pedestrians crossing with the flow of traffic. 
E. 	When a right green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal mayturn right. 
F. 	When a left green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal mayturn left. 
G. 	When a vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may go straight ahead. 
H. 	When a green arrow is exhibited together with a red or yellow lens,drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement permitted by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestriansproceeding from another direction on a green indication. 
I. 	While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not proceed and any driver approaching the intersection or a marked stop lineshall stop at such point unless so close to the intersection that a stopcannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection tomake the movement permitted by such arrow. 
J. 	While the red lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal shall stop outside of the intersection, or at such point as may be clearly markedby a sign or line; provided, however, that if a green arrow is illuminated 
1:503 

at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to make themovement permitted by such arrow. 
K. 	While the red and yellow lens are illuminated together, drivers shall notenter the intersection, and during such time the intersection shall bereserved for the exclusive use of the pedestrians. 
L. 	When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control signal by rapidintermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized bythe Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, drivers shall stop before entering the nearer line or crosswalk of thestreet intersection, or at a stop line when marked, and the right toproceed shall then be governed by the provisions of MGL c. 89, § 8.137 
M. 	A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a hazard anddrivers may proceed only with caution. 
N. 	A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or crossing traffic. 
O. 	Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to complywith a change in the signal to a red and yellow indication. 
§ 555-19. Obedience to isolated stop signs. 
A. 	Every driver of vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approachingan intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign bearing the word "STOP" or a flashing red signal indication, said signor signal having, apart from the rules and orders, the written approvalof the Department of Transportation, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding through theintersection, bring such vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to acomplete stop at such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line, or if a point is not so marked, then at the nearer line or crosswalk of theintersection.138 
B. 	In the case of a line of two or more vehicles approaching such "STOP" sign, or flashing red signal indication, the drivers of the second andthird vehicles in any group shall not be required to stop more than oncebefore proceeding through the intersection. 
C. 	This section shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by anofficer or by a lawful traffic-regulating sign, signal or device. 
D. 	In accordance with the foregoing, the erection and maintenance of an isolated stop sign, or signs or flashing red signals, as the case may be,are authorized as on a list maintained by the Police Department and theDepartment of Public Works. 
137.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 138.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:504 
§ 555-20. Roadway divisions. 
A. 	Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway, grass plot, reservation, viaduct or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep tothe right of such division, except when otherwise directed by an officer,signs, signals or markings. 
B. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department ofPublic Works. 
§ 555-21. Funeral processions. 
A. 	A funeral composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles shallbe identified as such by means of black pennants bearing a purple symbol attached to both the first and last vehicles. 
B. 	It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession tokeep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. 
C. 	At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the driverof the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop for a red and/or yellow indication. 
D. 	At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the firstvehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop before proceeding through the intersection. 
§ 555-22. Underpasses, overpasses and intersections with islands. 
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at anyintersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehiclesshall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings. 
§ 555-23. U-turns prohibited. 
A. 	No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in thedirection opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or on which it is traveling. 
B. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works. 
§ 555-24. Unlighted parking. 
No automobile need display any light or lights when parked within the limits of the streets as on a list maintained by the Police Department and theDepartment of Public Works. 
1:505 

§ 555-25. Overtaking other vehicles. 
A. 	The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, and shallnot cut in ahead of such other vehicle until safely clear of it. 
B. 	The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead onthe right side of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be completedwithout impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead or without causing the driver of any such vehicle to change his speed or alter hiscourse, except as provided in the following subsection. 
C. 	The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right whenpracticable in favor of the overtaking vehicle, on suitable visible signalbeing given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by theovertaking vehicle.139 
§ 555-26. Following too closely; slow-moving commercial vehicles. 
A. 	The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closelythan is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of suchvehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the highway. 
B. 	Upon roadways less than 27 feet wide and upon which vehicular trafficis permitted to operate in both directions, the driver of any slow-movingcommercial vehicle, when traveling outside of a business or residential district, shall not follow another slow-moving commercial vehicle within200 feet, but this shall not be construed to prevent such slow-movingcommercial vehicle from overtaking and passing another slow-moving commercial vehicle. 
C. 	This section shall not apply to funerals or other lawful processions. 
§ 555-27. Care in starting, turning or backing. 
A. 	The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from adirect line, or backing, shall first see that such movement can be madein safety. 
B. 	If such movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes undulywith the normal movement of other traffic, said driver shall wait for a more favorable opportunity to make such a movement. 
C. 	If the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping orturning movement, the driver of such vehicle shall be given a plainlyvisible signal, as required by MGL c. 90, § 14B. 

139.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:506 
§ 555-28. Driving on road surface under construction or repair. 
No operator shall enter upon the road surface of any highway or section thereof when, by reason of construction, surface treatment, maintenanceor the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such road surface isclosed to travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals have been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the highway is not to beused, or when so advised by an officer, watchman, member of a highwaycrew of the Department, either audibly or by signals. 
§ 555-29. Driving on sidewalks. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
§ 555-30. Driving or parking on channelized island. 
No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle upon any channelized island,as defined in these rules, unless directed so to do by a police officer. 
§ 555-31. Personnel and equipment in highway. 
Whenever traffic signs are erected or warning lights are displayed in oradjacent to a highway to notify of the presence of personnel and equipment in such highway, every motorist shall regulate the speed of his vehicle in amanner and to a degree consistent with the particular condition. 
§ 555-32. Left turns prohibited. 
Vehicular traffic shall not turn to the left while moving in the directionindicated on a list of streets or parts of streets maintained by the PoliceDepartment and the Department of Public Works. 
§ 555-33. Yield intersections. 
A. 	Every driver of a vehicle or other conveyance approaching an intersection of ways, where there exists facing him an official sign bearing the words "YIELD," said sign having been erected in accordance with the written approval of the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and such approval being in effect, shall surrender to oncoming traffic his right toenter the intersection until such time as he has brought his vehicle orother conveyance to a complete stop at a point between said "YIELD" sign and the nearer line of the street intersection; provided, however,that this requirement to stop before entering the intersection shallnot apply when a driver approaching a "YIELD" sign can enter the intersection in safety without causing interference to approachingtraffic.140 

140.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:507 
B. 	For purposes of this section, the designated places are hereby declaredon a list maintained by the Police Department and the Department of Public Works. 
§ 555-34. Drivers to report accidents. 
A. 	The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury or death of any person or property damage, to an apparent total extentof $200 or more, shall within 24 hours make a full and complete reportin writing of such accident to the police headquarters in this Town. 
B. 	A driver who has been incapacitated as a result of such accident, andto such extent as to make reporting impossible or unfavorable to hisrecovery, shall not be required to report such accident until he has recovered sufficiently to be able to do so. 
C. 	The report shall be made on a form furnished by the Police Department,copies of which shall be available at the Police Station. 
D. 	Compliance with this section, however, shall not relieve such driverfrom additional responsibility of reporting to the Registrar of MotorVehicles any accident in which a person is killed or injured. 
§ 555-35. Owner prima facie responsible for violations. 
If any vehicle is found upon the street or highway in violation of anyprovisions of these rules and orders and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle isregistered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations. 
§ 555-36. Violations and penalties; construal of provisions. 
A. 	Any person convicted of a violation of any rule, regulation or ordermade hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be punished by afine not exceeding $20 for each offense. 
B. 	These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall haveforce and effect separately and independently of every other exceptinsofar as by express reference or necessary implication any rule or any part of a rule is made dependent upon another rule or part thereof. 
C. 	The provisions of these rules, so far as they are the same in effectas those of existing valid rules and orders or regulations heretofore made by the Mayor of Greenfield relative to or in connection withofficial signs, lights, markings, signals, systems or devices, shall beconstrued as a continuation thereof, but all other existing rules, orders and regulations as made for the regulation of vehicles are herebyexpressly repealed.141 

141.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:508 
D. 	This repeal, however, shall not affect any punishment or penaltyimposed or any complaint or prosecution pending at the time of the passage hereof for an offense committed under any of the valid rules,orders or regulations hereby repealed. 
§ 555-37. Pedestrians crossing ways or roadways. 
A. 	Pedestrians shall obey the directions of police officers directing traffic;and whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a marked crosswalk, or a traffic control sign within 300 feet of a pedestrian, no such pedestrian shall cross a way or roadway except within the limits of amarked crosswalk and as hereinafter provided in these regulations. 
B. 	For the purpose of these regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed to be that area of a roadway reserved for pedestrian crossinglocated between two solid white reflectorized twelve-inch pavementmarkings in rural areas or marking not less than six inches wide in urban areas, said markings or lines being no less than six feet apart. 
C. 	At a traffic control signal location where pedestrian indications areprovided but which are shown only upon actuation by means of a pedestrian push button, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless oruntil the pedestrian control signal push button has been actuated andthen cross only on the proper pedestrian signal indication. 
D. 	At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian indication isprovided, pedestrians shall cross only on the green indication. 
E. 	If necessary, the green indication shall be actuated by the pedestrian by means of a push button. 
F. 	At a traffic control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the right­of-way to vehicles of a funeral or other procession or authorized emergency vehicle while in performance of emergency duties regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attemptto cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed, at which time pedestrians shall then cross the roadway only as providedin these regulations. 
G. 	Obedience to traffic control signals. Traffic control signal color indications and legends shall have the commands ascribed to them inthis section and no other meanings, and every pedestrian shall complytherewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer. 
(1) 	
Whenever the red and yellow lenses are illuminated together orthe single word "WALK" is illuminated, pedestrians facing suchindication may proceed across the roadway in the direction of such signal only. 

(2) 	
Whenever the words "DON'T WALK" or any indication other thanred and yellow shown together are illuminated in a traffic control signal where pedestrian indications are provided, pedestrians 


1:509 

H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
approaching or facing such indication shall wait on the sidewalk,edge of roadway, or in the pedestrian refuge area of a traffic island and shall not enter upon or cross a roadway until the properindication is illuminated in the traffic control signal; but anypedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk indication shall proceed or return to the nearest sidewalk or safetyisland on the yellow indication, the red indication, or when thewords "DON'T WALK" are illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes. 
(3) 	
At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian indicationis given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may proceedacross the roadway within any marked crosswalk in the direction of the green indication. 

(4) 	
Pedestrians approaching or facing a yellow, red, or flashing "DON'TWALK" illuminated indication shall not start to cross a roadway. 

(5) 	
At any traffic control signal location where a flashing red, flashingyellow, or flashing green indication is being given facing a crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where provided, the pedestrian signal indication and cross the roadway only on a red-yellow or "WALK" indication when such indication is in operation. 

(6) 	
If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall cross within a crosswalk with due care. 

(7) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian controlsignal unless crossing of the roadway is intended. 


The provisions of these regulations shall in no way abrogate theprovisions of MGL c. 90, §§ 14 and 14A, which provide "precautionsfor safety of other travelers" and for the "protection of blind persons crossing ways." 
Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations,every operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon the roadway and shall exercise properprecautions which may become necessary for safe operation. 
These pedestrian control regulations shall be enforced by all officers of the Town of Greenfield on and after February 17, 1970. 
The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the use ofways by pedestrians shall not apply to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a roadway closed to travel or under construction or repair,to municipal, state, federal, or public service corporation employeeswhile in the performance of their duties, to officers engaged in the performance of their public duties or to pedestrians acting in an emergency when such emergency necessitates departure from any partof these rules and regulations. 
1:510 

L. 	Any person who violates the provisions of this section which deal withthe proper use of ways by pedestrians shall be punished as provided in MGL c. 90, § 18A. 
1:511 

Chapter 565 
TOWN COUNCIL 

§ 565-1. Rule 1: Organization. [Amended 12-16-2015 by Order No.FY 16-100] 
A. 	Organizational meeting. The Town Council shall meet for organization on the first business day in January following the regular Town elections. This organizational meeting shall be held before the regularTown Council meeting. [Charter 8-8(a)] 
B. 	Oath of office. The new members of the Town Council shall severallytake the oath before the Mayor, Town Clerk, Judge, or Justice of thePeace to perform faithfully the duties of their respective offices. [Charter 8-8(b)] 
C. 	Election of officers. The Town Council shall, by majority vote of all themembers present, elect a President, a Vice-President, Treasurer and any other officers deemed necessary. [Charter 8-8(c)] 
D. 	Appointment of Town Clerk and Town Auditor. The Town Council shallelect the Town Clerk and may appoint a Town Auditor to serve for a term of three years and until a successor is chosen and qualified. TheTown Clerk shall also serve as Clerk to the Town Council. [Charter2-8(a), (b) and (c)] 
E. 	Removal of the Town Clerk and Town Auditor. The Town Clerk or Town Auditor may be removed or suspended by the Town Council by amajority vote. Such vote, unless for cause, shall be no sooner than 180 days after the last Town election. 
§ 565-2. Rule 2: Meetings. 
A. 	Regular meetings. 
(1) 	
Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at the GCTV-15Studio, 393 Main Street or, if agreed by a majority of the committeechairpersons, at any other suitable public building within the Town of Greenfield, at 7:00 p.m. in the evening on the third Wednesdayof each month. [Charter 2-6(c)1] 

(2) 	
In the event of elections and holidays, meetings will be held on the following business day. 


B. 	Special meetings. Special meetings of the Town Council shall be heldat the call of the Council President, the Mayor, or on the call of five or more members by written notice delivered in hand or to the placeof residence of each member and which contains a listing of the itemsto be acted upon. Except in the case of an emergency, of which the Council President or Presiding Officer will be judge, such notice shallbe delivered at least 48 hours in advance of the time set for such 
1:512 

meeting. A copy of the notice shall be forthwith posted on the TownBulletin Board. [Charter 2-6(c)2] 
C. 	Meeting with Mayor and School Committee. The Mayor and representative of the School Committee will be encouraged to attendTown Council meetings. 
D. 	Quorum. The presence of seven members shall constitute a quorum forthe transaction of business. The affirmative vote of a majority vote ofthose present shall be required to adopt any ordinance or appropriation order unless otherwise provided by General Law or by Charter. 
E. 	Attendance. Any member missing 10 or more unexcused Council orcommittee meetings, or a combination thereof, within a fiscal year shall be subject to disclosure by the Town Council President at a regularCouncil meeting. 
F. 	Open meeting. All sessions of the Town Council and of every committee or subcommittee thereof shall at all times be open to the public, unlessanother provision is made by law. [Charter 2-6(c)3] 
§ 565-3. Rule 3: Presiding officer. 
A. 	Presiding officer. The President of the Town Council, if present, shallpreside at all meetings of the full Town Council. In the absence of thePresident, the Vice-President of the Town Council shall preside, and, in the absence of both, a temporary chairperson shall serve who issenior in length of service, or if more than one have so served then themember senior both in age and length of service shall serve during the absence of both the President and the Vice-President. 
B. 	Duties of presiding officer. 
(1) 	
The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and order; may speak to points of order in preference to other members; shall decide allquestions of order, subject to an appeal to the Town Council. 

(2) 	
The presiding officer shall be allowed to vote on any question to appeal. 

(3) 	
The presiding officer shall declare all votes and, if the result is indoubt, may require a roll call vote. 

(4) 	
When the presiding officer desires to relinquish the chair she/he may call any Councilor to it; but such substitution shall notcontinue beyond the will of the presiding officer so relinquishing the chair or beyond an adjournment. 

(5) 	
The presiding officer may state facts and give opinions uponquestions of order without relinquishing the chair. 

(6) 	
The presiding officer shall be ex-officio member of all committees.In the absence of a quorum of any standing subcommittee of the 


1:513 

Council, the Town Council President and/or the Vice-President maybecome a voting member of the subcommittee. 
C. 	Admissions within the rail. No person shall be admitted within the railof the Town Council, except upon permission of the presiding officer. 
§ 565-4. Rule 4: Voting. 
A. 	Roll call. On any matter requiring a vote, a roll call may be requestedby any Councilor and shall be accepted by the President. 
B. 	Vote. Every Councilor present when the question is put shall vote yes, no, or abstain. 
C. 	Change. Prior to the announcement by the Chair of result of a roll callvote, any Councilor may ask to have her/his name called again in order to record herself/himself differently. 
D. 	Conflict of interest. Members shall not vote on any question or serve onany Committee in a manner inconsistent with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 268A (MGL c. 268A). 
§ 565-5. Rule 5: Debate. 
A. 	Question. 
(1) 	
Every Councilor when about to speak shall respectfully addressthe Chair and wait to be recognized before he/she speaks. He/She has no right to interrupt anyone who is speaking. He/She shall confine himself/herself to the question under debate and shallavoid personalities. 

(2) 	
Civility and respect for each board member goes a long way in ensuring that Town Council meetings are orderly and productive. 


B. 	Limits. 
(1) 	
No member shall speak more than twice to the same question without leave from the Chair, nor more than once until all other members desiring to speak have spoken. 

(2) 	
No member shall have or hold the floor for more than five consecutive minutes of debate, unless extended by a majority voteof the Council. 


C. 	Withdrawing question. After a motion is stated or read by the Chair it shall be deemed to be in possession of the Council, and shall bedisposed of by vote or other action, but the mover may withdraw it atany time before a decision or amendment. 
D. 	Questions from Town Councilors. Questions from Town Councilors to non-Councilors should be directed to the Town Council President. This 
1:514 

rule may be waved by the Council President or presiding officer at anytime at his or her discretion, without objection. 
§ 565-6. Rule 6: Order of motions. 
A. 	Exceptions. When a question is under debate, the Chair shall receive nomotion except the following: 
(1) 	
To adjourn. 

(2) 	
To take a recess. 

(3) 	
To lay on the table. 

(4) 	
To close debate and move the question. 

(5) 	
To limit or extend limits of debate. 

(6) 	
To postpone to certain date. 

(7) 	
To refer. 

(8) 	
To amend. 

(9) 	
To postpone indefinitely; motions (1) through (8) above shall have precedence over this motion. 


B. 	Reconsideration. Unless otherwise provided by the Charter, after a votehas been taken, it shall be in order for any member voting with the prevailing side to move reconsideration thereof at the same meeting atwhich the vote was taken; or to file with the Clerk of the Council written notice of a motion to reconsider such vote not later than 3:00 p.m. of the second business day following such meeting. 
(1) 	
After receiving such written notice of reconsideration, the Clerkshall place it on the agenda for the next regular meeting. 

(2) 	
Whenever a written notice of a motion to reconsider has been filed as aforesaid, the Clerk shall notify all of the members of the TownCouncil. 

(3) 	
Not more than one motion for reconsideration for any vote shall beentertained, and no vote upon either of the following motions shallbe reconsidered: to refer; to adjourn; to lay on the table; to take from the table; and move the question. 


§ 565-7. Rule 7: Duties of Clerk of Council. 
A. 	Documents; records. The Clerk of the Council or his/her designee shall: 
(1) 	
Maintain records of all Town Council business. 

(2) 	
Accept, distribute and file items to be placed on the Council agendaor in the agenda packet, including: 

1:515 


(a) 	
Reports and communications from the Town Council committees, Mayor, Town officers, Town boards and Town committees. 

(b) 	
Ordinances, motions, orders, proclamations, resolutions, or other forms of business to be presented to the Town Council for action at meetings. 


This shall not mean that an individual Councilor cannot contact other Councilors directly. 
(3) 	Process requests for action and proposals using the followingguidelines: 
(a) 	
All requests and proposals shall be submitted in a format determined by the Town Council President; forms and guidelines shall be available at the Town Clerk's/Town Counciloffice. 

(b) 	
Failure to comply with this rule may cause the Town CouncilPresident to return the item to the author(s) without Councilconsideration. 

(c) 	
Failure by an author or his/her representative to attend theCouncil meeting and be prepared to present any explanationmay cause the item not to be considered at that time. 

(d) 	
The presiding officer of the Town Council shall be informed ofall items brought to the Clerk of the Council; the Clerk shallthen act at the direction of the presiding officer. 

(e) 	
The President, any Councilor, or other Town official (with theconsent of the presiding officer) may bring items to the Councilfor consideration; other requests for action by citizens may be presented to the Council by a sponsoring Councilor or asotherwise allowed by Charter. 

(f) 	
Any items for action requiring public hearings shall be referred to the appropriate committee chair. Public hearings may be held by any standing special or regular subcommittee on behalf of the full Council, unless scheduling or statute requires otherwise. This subsection in no way prevents the full Councilfrom holding any public hearings. 


B. 	Hearing authorization. The Clerk of the Council is authorized by these rules to order and publish notice of hearings on petitions presented tohim/her requiring public hearings before the Council or its committees. 
C. 	Listing of matters. The Council agenda packet, complete with copies of all items for consideration and documentation, shall be available for pick-up by Councilors, and distributed to the Mayor, Town Accountantand other officials as appropriate, no later than 5:00 p.m. on Friday preceding the regular Council meetings. (If mailed to Town Councilors, 
1:516 

posting shall be no later than the Thursday 2:00 p.m. pick up at theGreenfield Post Office.) 
D. 	Communications to the Town Council. All communications addressed to the Town Council as a body or to the Town Council Clerk, Administrative Assistant/Secretary or President of the Council on matters of interest to the entire Council, and which would not in the normal course of Council business be referred to the Town Council for action, will be copied and distributed to each individual Town Councilor. 
E. 	Attendance within rail. The Clerk of the Council shall note in the official minutes of all meetings of the Town Council the names of governmentrepresentatives, department heads, representatives of the news media, invited guests and Town officials who are seated within the rail of theCouncil meeting place. 
F. 	Filing of papers. Any order or resolution or other form of business to be presented to the Town Council at its regular meeting for its action shallbe submitted to the Clerk of the Council no later than 12:00 noon of the Wednesday preceding the regular Council meetings. 
G. 	Filing for committee documents. All documentation for Town Councilcommittees shall be submitted one week in advance of committee meetings; except for public hearing notices, which should be submitted 12 days before the hearing date. 
§ 565-8. Rule 8: Order and disposition of business. 
A. 	Agenda. [Amended 12-16-2015 by Order No. FY 16-100] 
(1) 	At every regular meeting of the Town Council the order of businessshall be as follows: 
I. 	Call to Order 
II. 	Roll Call 
III. 	Approval of Minutes from Previous Meeting 
IV. 	
Public Comment 

V. 	
Public Hearings 


VI. 	Communications from Mayor, Town Officers and Employees 
VII. 	Communications from Superintendent of Schools and School Committee 
VIII. 	Motions, Orders, and Resolutions 
IX. 	
Presentation of Petitions and Similar Papers 

X. 	
Reports of Committees 


XI. 	Unfinished Business 
XII. 	Old Business 
XIII. 	New Business 
1:517 

B. 
C. 
D. 
XIV. Motions for Reconsideration 
XV. Adjournment 
(2) 	The above shall not be departed from except by vote of the majorityof members present. Posted Council agendas shall state this orderof business. 
Endorsement. Every ordinance, motion, order, proclamation, resolution or other measure presented for Town Council action shall be accompanied by the approximate cost involved if possible. 
Disposition of agenda items. 
(1) 	
All items of business appearing upon the Town Council agendashall be taken up in the order of their appearance and be fully and openly debated and disposed of by vote or other action of the TownCouncil, previous to consideration of any other item of business. 

(2) 	
No item of business shall be referred to committee except for the following reason: 

(a) 	
For study and report at a subsequent meeting. 

(b) 	
For the purpose of drafting an ordinance. 



(3) 	
All Town Council committees shall report on current matters atregular Town Council meetings. 

Items referred for administrative action. 

(1) 	
All items of business appearing upon the Town Council agendashall be taken up in the order of their appearance and be fully andopenly debated and disposed of by vote or other action of the Town Council, previous to consideration of any other item of business. 

(2) 	
Town Council items referred for administrative action shall be processed in the following manner: 

(a) 	
The Clerk of the Council will send the documents to the official or board (hereafter referred to as the "responsible party") towhom it was referred by the Town Council. 

(b) 	
The responsible party shall provide a written reply to the TownCouncil regarding the final disposition of the matter within twoweeks of the Town Council action to refer the matter. 

(c) 	
The presiding officer and Councilors requesting such shallreceive copies of the reply. 

(d) 	
If final disposition cannot be effected within two weeks, the party involved shall notify the Town Council as to the earliestdate for action on the matter. This notification shall be made within 10 days of the Town Council action to refer the matter. 


1:518 

(e) 	The Clerk of the Council will keep a list of pending matterswhich will be furnished to the Councilors monthly. 

E. 	
Measures once rejected. When any ordinance, motion, order, proclamation, resolution or other measure has been rejected by theTown Council, no item embodying substantially the same subject shall be presented to the Town Council within nine months of rejection of themeasure, unless otherwise provided by the Charter. 


§ 565-9. Rule 9: Committees. 
A. 	Appointments. After the organization of the Town Council, the President shall seek Councilor requests for committee appointmentsand then appoint members, the first named being chairperson, to the following standing committees: 
(1) 	
Ways and Means Committee: to consist of five members of theCouncil to deal with all matters pertaining to expenditures and matters pertaining to budget. The Ways and Means Committeeshall hold all public hearings on the above matters, unless otherwise provided for. 

(2) 	
Appointments and Ordinance Committee: to consist of five members of the Council to consider the advisability and merit ofany ordinance and/or ordinance changes referred to it as well as the form and legality thereof and to consider all legal mattersalong with the Town Attorney. The Appointment and OrdinanceCommittee will review mayoral appointments to multiple-member boards and make recommendations to the full Council for action within 30 days. The Appointment and Ordinance Committee shallhold all public hearings on the above matters, unless otherwise provided for. 

(3) 	
Economic Development Committee: to consist of five members ofthe Council to deal with all matters pertaining to planning, redevelopment, housing, sale of Town-owned land, commerce, taxincentives and the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Economic Development Committee shall hold all public hearings on the above matters, unless otherwise provided for. 

(4) 	
Community Relations Committee: to consist of five members ofthe Council to deal with all matters pertaining to the Council on Aging, Greenfield Senior Center, Veteran Services, Library, and areas under the control and/or supervision of the Greenfield Recreation Commission, the Youth Commission, the Animal Shelter, the Animal Inspector, and the Board of Health. The CommunityRelations Committee shall hold all public hearings on the abovematters, unless otherwise provided for. 


1:519 

B. 	No language above shall prevent the Council President or presidingofficer from assigning any matter to a special or standing subcommittee of his or her choosing. 
C. 	Records. All committees shall keep minutes and records of theirmeetings. All minutes shall be submitted to the Council Clerk. 
D. 	Approval. No documents shall be submitted to the Town Council onbehalf of the Committee unless approved by the Committee. 
E. 	Support. Appropriate clerical and administrative support will be provided by the Clerk at the request of the Committee Chair to thepresiding officer. 
§ 565-10. Rule 10: Amendment or suspension of rules. 
A. 	Vote. Insofar as these rules are not of statutory source or origin, thesame may be amended, repealed or suspended at any meeting by a two-thirds vote of Councilors present. 
B. 	Concurrence. If any action is taken inconsistent with these rules, thesame shall be construed to have been taken in the suspension of therules thereof, provided that the Town Council concurs in such action. 
§ 565-11. Rule 11: Parliamentary procedure. 
A. 	Roberts Rules. In all matters of parliamentary procedure not providedfor in these rules, the Town Council shall be governed by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, Scott Foresman. 
B. 	Minutes. The minutes of the Town Council meetings shall include theCouncilor who makes a motion and also the Councilor who seconds same. 
§ 565-12. Rule 12: Public participation. 
A. 	Conduct. Any member of the public desiring to address the Town Council shall be recognized by the Chairman or presiding officer, shallstate his/her name and address in an audible tone for the record, andshall limit his/her remarks to matters of Town business. 
(1) 	
Any citizen or petitioner shall be limited to five minutes or anotheramount of time at the discretion of the presiding officer. 

(2) 	
Upon the request of the presiding officer, all persons shall be silent. 

(3) 	
Public members may be recognized to speak to the Council atthe pleasure of the presiding officer or a majority of the Council present. 


B. 	Nonresidents. Members of the public who are not residents of Greenfield may speak when all residents who wish to do so have spoken. 
1:520 

§ 565-13. Rule 13: Seating of Town Council. 
Councilors At Large will be seated together. The Precinct Councilors will be arranged around the table clockwise in descending order. 
§ 565-14. Rule 14: Request by Councilors for legal opinions/material. 
A. 	Definition. A "request by Councilors for legal opinions" is defined as anyrequest by a Councilor for a legal opinion/material from any person thatwould incur an expense for the Town of Greenfield. 
B. 	Action required by Councilors. Any Councilor wishing to receive anopinion or material that would incur an expense must submit in writingto the Town Council President the reasons for the request. The Council President will present this request to the Council chairs within 30 days. 
C. 	Action by chairs. Once presented to the chairs, it shall be handled in alike matter as all material referred to the same. 
Chapter 590 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
1:521 

ARTICLE I 
Organization 
§ 590-1. Members and officers.142 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular and two alternate members appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Town Council.The regular members of the Board shall elect all officers of the ZoningBoard. 
§ 590-2. Powers and duties of Chairperson. 
A. 	The Chairperson shall vote and be recorded on all matters comingbefore the Board. Subject to these rules, he/she shall decide all points of order, unless overruled by a majority of the Board in session at thetime. He/She shall appoint such committees as may be found necessaryor desirable. 
B. 	In addition to the powers granted by the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Zoning Ordinance of theTown of Greenfield and subject to these rules and further instructions of the Board, the Chairperson shall transact the official business of theBoard, supervise the work of the Clerk, request necessary help, directthe general work of the Board, and exercise general supervisory power. He/She shall at each meeting report the official transactions that havenot otherwise come to the attention of the Board. 
§ 590-3. Powers and duties of Vice Chairperson. 
In the event that the Chairperson is absent, disabled or otherwise unable toperform his/her duties, the Board may elect by majority a regular memberto serve as Acting Chairperson. 
§ 590-4. Powers and duties of Clerk. 
The Clerk shall be the Permits Manager, and shall, subject to review by theBoard and its Chairperson, supervise all of the clerical work of the Board, including all correspondence of the Board, sending of all notices requiredby law, preparation of rules and orders of the Board, receive and scrutinizeall applications for compliance with the rules of the Board, keep dockets and minutes of the Board's proceedings, compile all required records, maintainnecessary files and indices, and record the roll at all Board meetings. If theClerk is absent, the Chairperson shall appoint an Acting Clerk. 
§ 590-5. Alternate members. 
Alternate members shall sit on the Board in case of the absence, inability toact or apparent conflict of interest on the part of any Board member, or as part of a regularly scheduled rotation among the regular members. 

142.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:523 
§ 590-6. Quorum. 
Four members shall constitute a quorum. 
§ 590-7. Regular meetings. 
A. 	Regular meetings of the Board of Appeals are normally held on thesecond Thursday of each month at the Police Department Meeting Room, 321 High Street. If a regular meeting day falls on a holiday orany day of a national, state, or municipal election or caucus or primaryor is in conflict with a session of a Town Meeting, the meeting may be held on the succeeding Thursday. Regular meetings shall be open to thepublic in accordance with MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25. Except in anemergency, a notice of each Board meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk, and a notice or a copy thereof shall be publicly posted in theoffice of said Clerk or on the principal or official bulletin board in theTown Hall at least 48 hours, including Saturdays but not Sundays and legal holidays, prior to such meetings. 
B. 	Business at regular meetings shall include site and other planexaminations and all other matters in the province of the Zoning Board, including petitions for special permits and variances and appeals fromthe decision of the Building Inspector. Hearings on petitions andappeals before the Board may be held prior to or following the regular meeting, as designated by the Chairperson. Regular meetings, whileopen to the public, are not public hearings. The Board will seekinformation or testimony as it deems necessary. Unsolicited comments from the public may, at the discretion of the Chairperson, be ruled outof order. 
C. 	Site plans which come to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be sent to the Planning Board for an advisory opinion and to the ZoningEnforcement Officer as required by the ordinance. Site plans need notbe approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals until those boards have had opportunity for review, as specified by the Zoning Ordinance. 
§ 590-8. Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or at the request of three members. Written notice thereof shall be given to each member andalternate member at least 48 hours before the time set, except that anannouncement of a special meeting at any meeting attended by all members shall be sufficient notice of such meetings. Notices shall be posted publiclyas provided in § 590-7. 
1:524 

ARTICLE II 
Applications to Board 
§ 590-9. Application form. 
Every application for action by the Board, including appeals from decisions of the Inspector of Buildings and petitions for variances and special permits,shall be made on the official form of the Zoning Board of Appeals, whichshall be furnished by the Town Clerk or the Permits Manager upon request. Any communication purporting to be an application shall be treated asmerely advisory, and no notice shall be deemed to have been given untilsuch time as it is made on the official application form and filed with the Town Clerk and the Permits Manager. Information called for by the formshall be furnished by the applicant in the manner therein prescribed at thetime of application. The application forms shall be considered part of these rules and regulations. 
§ 590-10. Filing. 
Every application shall be filed with both the Town Clerk and the Permits Manager. The Permits Manager shall forthwith transit a copy of the application, certified by the Town Clerk, to the Board of Appeals. ThePermits Manager, who acts as agent for the Board of Appeals, shall indicate the date on which the application was received and transmit a copy ofthe dated application to the applicant. The date of receipt as indicatedby the Permits Manager shall be considered to be the date on which the application has been filed with the Board of Appeals. It shall be theresponsibility of the applicant to furnish all supporting documentation withthe application, and the dated copy received from the Permits Manager does not absolve the applicant from this responsibility, and lack of requiredinformation may result in denial of application. 
A. 	Filing and submittal requirements. 
(1) 	
The completed application form, certified by the Town Clerk, shallbe accompanied by seven copies of a site plan. All site plans shallbe prepared to scale and shall, at a minimum, accurately show the following information if applicable. NOTE: Large projects must beof a scale determined by the Planning Department and Inspector ofBuildings. 

(a) 	
A locus map. 

(b) 	
Plans shall be submitted on 8 1/2 by 11 inch or 11 inch by 17inch paper, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet. 

(c) 	
The locations and boundaries of the lot, adjacent streets orways, with names, and the location and owner's names of all abutting properties, with North point, zoning district(s), graphic scale, date of plan, and name of applicant, designerand surveyor. 


1:525 


(d) 	
Existing and proposed topography, including contours, thelocation of wetlands, streams, water bodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique natural land features. 

(e) 	
Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions; existing structures in black and proposed structures in another color. 

(f) 	
The location of parking and loading areas, driveways,walkways, access and egress points and distance to the nearest driveways and intersections. 

(g) 	
The location and description of all proposed septic systems,water supply, storm drainage systems, utilities, lighting, and refuse and other waste disposal methods. 

(h) 	
Proposed landscape features, including the location and a description of screening, fencing and plantings. 

(i) 	
The locations, dimensions, height and characteristics of proposed signs. 

(j) 	
The location and a description of proposed open space or recreation areas. 


(2) 	
The applicant shall also submit the following information: 

(a) 	
Measures to prevent pollution of surface water and groundwater, increased runoff, changes in groundwater levels,and flooding. 

(b) 	
Design features which will integrate the proposed development into the existing landscape, maintain neighborhood character, enhance aesthetic assets and screenobjectionable features from neighbors and roadways. 

(c) 	
Control measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation duringand after construction and the sequence of grading and construction activities, location of temporary control measures, and final stabilization of the site. 

(d) 	
Estimated average daily and peak-hour vehicle trips to begenerated by the site and traffic flow patterns for both vehicles and pedestrians, showing adequate access to and from the siteand adequate circulation within the site. 



(3) 	
Failure to comply with these requirements may result in a dismissal of an application as incomplete. The Zoning Board of Appeals mayrequire further information to be shown on the plan if deemednecessary for a complete review of the proposed project. In addition, an application for a special permit shall contain all otherinformation required by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. TheZoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to alter or waive 


1:526 

these requirements as it deems necessary or appropriate in particular cases. 
B. 	Fees. All applications for a special permit shall be accompanied by cashor certified check, payable to the Town of Greenfield, in an amount asset by the fee schedule approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The applicant shall also be responsible for the cost of advertising and noticeof the public hearing.143 
C. 	Fees for outside consultants. In addition to the fees payable pursuant to Subsection B, the applicant shall pay the reasonable fees for theemployment of outside consultants who, in the discretion of the ZoningBoard of Appeals, are necessary to provide guidance on a specific project. The appointment of such an outside consultant shall be subjectto the right of appeal by an applicant pursuant to the provisions ofMGL c. 44, § 53G. The funds received for outside consultants shall be deposited in a special account and shall be expended by a majority voteof the Zoning Board of Appeals without further appropriation and shallbe subject to such other provisions contained in said MGL c. 44, § 53G. The payment of fees for such outside consultants shall be made by theapplicant prior to the vote by the Zoning Board of Appeals to approveor disapprove a project. 
D. 	Abutters list. Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a list of all names and addresses of landowners within300 feet of the property line of the subject property, and landowners directly opposite on any public or private street, as well as abuttingtowns. Names and addresses shall be in label format and shall be listed as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list.144 
§ 590-11. Hearings. 
A. 	A public hearing on an application for a special permit shall be heldwithin 65 days of filing the application with the Town Clerk. A public hearing for a variance shall be held within 75 days of the applicationdate, with a decision filed with the Town Clerk within 14 days of decision. 
B. 	Hearings to be public. All hearings shall be open to the public. Noperson shall be excluded unless considered by the Chairperson to be a"serious hindrance" to the workings of the Board. 
C. 	Representation and absence. An applicant may appear in his/her behalf, or be represented by an agent or attorney. In the absence of anyappearance without due cause on behalf of an applicant, the Board may decide on the matter using the information it has otherwise received. 
D. 	Order of business: 
143.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 144.Editor's Note: Amended during codification. 
1:527 
(1) 	
Reading of petition and legal notices, if any. 

(2) 	
Applicant's presentation, together with presentation of exhibits. 

(3) 	
Questioning by Board. 

(4) 	
Opponent's presentation, if any, and questions by those seekinginformation. 

(5) 	
Applicant's rebuttal, restricted to matters raised by opponent'spresentation and/or Board's questions. 


E. 	Members of the Board may direct questions at any point during the public hearing. 
§ 590-12. Actions by Board. 
A. 	Decisions. A decision on a special permit shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 90 days after the initial public hearing. The required timelimits for a public hearing and decision may be extended by writtenagreement between the petitioner and the Zoning Board of Appeals. Failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to take action within 90 days orextended time shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit. 
B. 	Voting requirements and records. A special permit or variance decision shall require a concurring vote of four members of the five-memberZoning Board, and each member who is sitting must record either "yes"or "no." The record shall also show if a member is absent. The Board shall also clearly set forth the reasons for its decision. The detailedrecord of the proceedings, including the decision, the vote on the decision, and the reasons for the decision shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 14 days of the decision. A notice of such decision shallbe mailed forthwith to the petitioner, to all parties to whom notice ofthe hearings was mailed, and to every person present at the hearing who requested a notice to be sent and stated the address to which suchnotice was to be sent, the Planning Board, and, where applicable, to theBoard of Health, the Conservation Commission, and other Town boards or departments. Each notice shall specify that appeals, if any, shall bepursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, and shall be filed within 20 days after thedate of filing such notice with the Town Clerk. 
§ 590-13. Withdrawal of application for special permit. 
Any application for a special permit may be withdrawn without prejudiceby notice in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals, with a copy to the Town Clerk, prior to the publication of the public hearing notice by theBoard. Requests to withdraw without prejudice after publication of thepublic hearing notice may be granted by a majority vote of the Board upon written request from the applicant. 
1:528 

§ 590-14. Reconsideration. 
Once a decision has been voted upon and the meeting adjourned there shall be no reconsideration of a decision by the Board, unless remanded by the court. 
§ 590-15. Expiration of variances and special permits; extension. 
Variances must be exercised within one year of decision if the Zoning Boardof Appeals has not, upon request, extended the variance for six months.Special permits shall expire within two years of approval, if a substantial use thereof or if construction has not commenced. An extension may begranted by the Board for the time period required to pursue or wait for thedetermination of an appeal under MGL c. 40A, § 17, or for other good cause. 
§ 590-16. Reapplication. 
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably and finallyacted upon by the Zoning Board shall be acted favorably upon within two years after the date of final unfavorable action unless the Board finds, bya vote of four members of the five-member Board, specific and materialchanges in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the record of its proceedings, andunless all but one of the members of the Planning Board consents theretoand after notice is given to parties of interest of the time and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent will be considered. Theapplicant shall be responsible for the cost of such notice. 
1:529 

ARTICLE III 
Administration 
§ 590-17. Opinions and advice. 
Any advice, opinion, or information given by any Board member or any other official or employee of the Town shall not be binding on the Board. 
§ 590-18. Amendments. 
These rules may be amended by a majority vote of the members of the Board, provided that such amendment shall be presented in writing at aregular meeting and action taken thereon at a subsequent regular meeting.The amendment of the General Laws or Zoning Ordinance with respect to any matter covered by these rules and regulations will constitute automaticamendment. 
1:531 

§ 590-18 GREENFIELD CODE § A600-1 

§ A600-1. Table of Special Acts and acceptances. 

Chapter A600 
GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES AND SPECIAL ACTS 


KEY:  
L  =  Legislature  
S  =  Selectmen  
TM  =  Town Meeting  
STM  =  Special Town Meeting  
TE  =  Town Election  
TC  =  Town Council Passage  
E  =  Effective Date  
General  
Laws,  Added, Amended by  Result of  
Citation  Chapter/Acts of  Date/Form of Action  Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 154  1882  TM  4-5-1898  Accept  Authorize Town to lay out  
public parks  
c. 374  1895  TE  4-4-1898  Accept  Place administration of  
highways under a single  
surveyor  
c. 455  1894  TE  4-3-1899  Accept  Re: plumbers  
c. 364  1896  TM  Agreement with Deerfield  
re: annexation of Cheapside  
c. 74  1890  TM  4-2-1900  Accept  Privy vaults  
c. 11, § 11  TE  4-7-1902  Accept  Town Clerk to be chosen  
for a term of 3 years  
c. 106, § 20  TM  4-7-1902  Accept  Establishing laborer 8 hour  
day  
c. 104, § 1-13  TE  5-12-1903  Accept  Inspection of Buildings  
c. 454  1903  STE  11-3-1903  Passed  Joint caucuses and  
primaries  
c. 191  1907  STM  7-23-1907  Accept  Establish Board of Survey  
c. 25, § 17  TM  3-2-1908  Accept  Forest fire prevention  
c. 50, § 1-9  STM  8-24-1908  Accept  Assessment of betterment  
of ways  
c. 209  1908  TM  3-1-1909  Accept  Protection forest fires or  
sprout land  
c. 25, § 22  STM  6-23-1909  Accept  Water lines on public street  

1:532 

§ A600-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS  § A600-1  
General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  

c. 102, § 122-27  c. 187  1908  TM  3-7-1910  Accept  Smoke nuisance as amended  
c. 49, § 1-36  TM  3-6-1911  Accept  Sewer lines and cost payment  
c. 101, § 1-5  TM  3-6-1911  Accept  Common nuisance regulation  
c. 503  1912  TE  11-4-1912  Accept  Granting pensions to laborers  
TE  3-2-1914  Passed  Liquor license granting locally  
c. 807  1913  TE  3-2-1914  Accept  Worker's compensation to Town employees  
c. 320  1912  TM  3-2-1914  Accept  Use of school rooms for other than school purposes  
c. 41, § 111  c. 217  1914  TE  11-3-1914  Accept  Vacations for laborers of Town  
c. 688  1914  TE  11-3-1914  Accept  Saturday holiday half-pay laborers  
c. 790  1914  TE  11-03-1914  Accept  Enrollment members, political parties and limit membership ward and Town committees  
c. 19, § 37  TM  3-5-1917  Accept  Police under civil service  
c. 468  1911  TM  3-5-1917  Accept  Police Chief in civil service  
c. 293  1916  TM  3-5-1917  Accept  Authorize licensing of cabs  
c. 103  TM  3-4-1918  Accept  Plumbing supervision  
c. 23  1917  STM  6-20-1917  Accept  Licensing of coffee/tea houses  
c. 240  1920  STM  7-17-1920  Accept  Regulate Sunday sports and games  
c. 166  1920  TE  11-2-1920  Accept  Police 1 day off in 8  
c. 14  1921  TM  3-12-1920  Accept  Establish Assistant Assessor job  
c. 82, § 37  STM  8-3-1921  Accept  Building lines  
c. 148, § 6  TM  3-25-1922  Accept  Penalty for fire officials non-duties  
c. 48, § 42-44  TM  3-25-1922  Accept  Establish regular Fire Department  

1:533 

General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 41, § 103  TM  3-17-1923  Accept  Establish Purchasing Department  
c. 452  1922  TM  3-17-1923  Accept  Compensation for Harry Schneider  
c. 82  1922  TM  3-17-1923  Accept  Town payment of public band concerts  
c. 391  1923  TM  3-15-1924  Accept  Water rate collection  
c. 45, § 14  TM  3-14-1925  Passed  Establish Recreation and Playground Commission  
c. 41, § 4A  TM  3-16-1929  Accept  Appointments and Town officers  
c. 406  1928  TM  3-16-1929  Accept  Permit Sunday sports and games  
c. 147, § 13A  TM  3-18-1933  Accept  Establish a reserve police force  
c. 136, § 7, 8  TM  3-17-1934  Accept  Regulating Sunday sales  
c. 147, § 32-47  TM  3-17-1934  Accept  Licensing of boxing matches  
c. 31, § 48  TM  3-14-1936  Accept  Fire Department to civil service  
c. 42  1938  TE  3-719-1938  Passed Accept  Fire Chief to civil service  
c. 435, § 69  1939  STM  10-10-1939  Workers' compensation DPW, except fire and police  
c. 143, § 3, 6-13  TM  3-14-1942  Accept  Establish Building Inspector  
c. 435  1939  TM  3-13-1943  Accept  Worker's Compensation for all employees except police and fire  
c. 147, § 16B  c. 426  1938  STM  11-27-1944  Accept  Police 1 day off in 6  
c. 32, § 56-59  BOS  12-21-1945  Accept  Retirement of certain veterans  
c. 723  1945  TM  3-16-1946  Accept  Establish Town Veterans Departments  
c. 48, § 58A  TM  3-16-1946  Accept  Firefighter hours not to exceed 70  
c. 559  1946  STM  10-22-1946  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 41, § 111B  c. 156  1945  TM  3-15-1947  Accept  Allow sick leave Town laborers, etc.  

1:534 

General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 44  c. 635, § 3 1945  TM  3-15-1947  Accept  Allow vacation pay advances  
c. 136, § 4B  c. 207, § 3 1946  TM  3-15-1947  Accept  Allow Sunday bowling  
c. 85, § 2A  c. 710  1941  TM  3-13-1948  Accept  Bicycle registration  
c. 615  1947  TM  3-13-1948  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 1  1949  TE  3-7-1949  Passed  Establish 56 hour week for Fire Department  
c. 40, § 6B  TM  3-19-1949  Accept  Allow Fire/Police uniform appropriation  
c. 41, § 105  TM  3-19-1949  Accept  Establish Trustees of Soldiers' Memorial  
c. 515  1948  TM  3-19-1949  Accept  Pensioning of foremen, mechanics, inspectors, etc.  
c. 588  1948  TM  3-19-1949  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 33, § 54  TM  3-17-1951  Accept  Military pay  
c. 54, § 103A  TM  3-17-1951  Accept  Allow absentee voting for Town elections  
c. 783  1950  TM  3-17-1951  Accept  Increase retirement allowances  
c. 140, § 132-136  TM  3-17-1951  Accept  Smoke nuisance  
c. 820  1950  TM  3-17-1951  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 147, § 16C  c. 346  1951  TM  3-15-1952  Accept  Police 5 day week  
c. 781  1951  TM  3-15-1952  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 265  1947  TM  3-14-1953  Accept  Saturday closing of Town offices  
c. 624  1952  TM  3-14-1953  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  
c. 40, § 8A  c. 297  1954  STM  1-5-1955  Accept  Establish Development and Industrial Commission  
c. 45, § 5  c. 511  1954  
c. 234, § 1  STM  1-5-1955  Accept  Excuse fire from jury duty  
c. 32B  TE  3-5-1956  Accept  Provide group employee insurance  
c. 147, § 17A  c. 268  1952  TM  3-17-1956  Accept  Police officer holiday pay  
c. 48, § 57A  c. 640  1953  TM  3-17-1956  Accept  Fire holiday pay  
c. 670  1955  TM  3-17-1956  Accept  Increase retiree pensions  

1:535 

General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 427  1957  TM  3-15-1958  Accept  Pension increase fire and police  
c. 41, § 100A  TM  3-14-1959  Accept  Town employee vehicle indemnification  
c. 40, § 7  TM  3-14-1959  Accept  Sidewalk snow removal  
c. 401  1956  TM  3-14-1959  Accept  Civil defense vehicle indemnification  
c. 359  1959  STM  6-29-1959  Accept  Authorizing payment of unpaid bills  
c. 647  1960  STM  3-18-1961  Accept  Increase pension benefits  
c. 32, § 1  c. 490  1961  BOS  6-23-1961  Accept  Veterans and retirement benefits credit for 25 years  
c. 322  1961  STM  1-15-1962  Accept  Authorize towing of illegal parked vehicles  
c. 71, § 14-161  TM  3-17-1962  Passed  Create Regional Vocational School District Planning Committee  
c. 40, § 13A  TM  3-17-1962  Passed  Establish Workmen Compensation Fund  
c. 40, § 5B  TM  3-17-1962  Passed  Establish Stabilization Fund  
c. 32B  TE  3-4-1963  Passed  Insurance for retirees and employees  
c. 41, § 69C-69F  TE  3-4-1963  Passed  Establish Board of Public Works  
c. 430  1963  L  5-27-1963  Approval  Notice of classification of risks and premiums for motor vehicle insurance to be advertised in paper  
E  8-27-1963  
c. 478  1963  TM  3-14-1964  Accept  Increase pension and retirement amounts  
c. 41  TE  3-2-1966  Ballot Q  Selectmen serve as public works  
c. 40, § 8C  TM  3-14-1964  Accept  Establish Conservation Commission  
c. 517  1962  TM  3-14-1964  Accept  Firemen holiday pay  
c. 478  1963  TM  3-14-1964  Accept  Increase pensions for retirees  

1:536 

General  
Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
TE  3-2-1964  Consolidation of various  
Town departments to form DPW  
c. 71, § 16-16I  STE  10-26-1964  Ballot Q  Establish and construct Regional School District  
STM  4-26-1965  Accept  
c. 486  1964  TM  3-1-1965  Accept  Increase pensions for retirees  
c. 667  1954  TM  3-19-1966  Passed  Greenfield Housing Authority to build elderly housing project  
c. 138, § 17  TM  3-19-1966  Passed  Selectmen to grant winter seasonal liquor licenses  
c. 180, § 17B  c. 489  1956  TM  3-19-1966  Accept  Authorize United Fund payroll deduction  
c. 41, § 99A  c. 411  1965  TM  3-19-1966  Accept  Allow police officer nonresidency  
c. 41, § 81A  TM  3-19-1966  Passed  Re-establish Planning Board  
c. 786  1966  TM  3-19-1966  Accept  Police Chief to receive additional compensation for work on certain holidays  
c. 40, § 6J  STM  10-2-1967  Accept  Authorize Town to buy stormy weather clothes for employees  
c. 152, § 69  c. 401  1966  STM  10-2-1967  Accept  Workers compensation for elected officials  
STM  10-2-1967  Establish  New Town Seal  
TE  3-4-1968  Ballot  Town pay half insurance premium for spouse of employee-retiree  
c. 48, § 58B  TE  3-4-1968  Ballot  48 hour week for Fire Department  
c. 40, § 42G-I  TM  3-16-1968  Accept  Fixed uniform rate based on cost of distribution of  
water  
c. 772  1967  TM  3-21-1968  Passed  Establish Industrial  
Development Financing Authority  

1:537 

General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 632  1966  TM  6-5-1968  Enabling  Town accepts skating rink from the state  
c. 90, § 18A  TM  3-17-1969  Accept  Relative to use of ways by pedestrians  
c. 31, § 19C  c. 263  1968  TM  3-25-1969  Accept  Relative to appointment of firemen  
c. 41, § 197A  TM  3-25-1969  Accept  Powers and duties of Police Chief  
c. 32B, § 7A  TE  3-2-1970  Ballot  Increase Town contribution for insurance to 75%  
c. 40C, § 8C  TM  3-14-1970  Accept  Establish Conservation Fund  
c. 121B, § 4  TM  3-14-1970  Accept  Establish Urban Redevelopment Authority  
c. 41, § 100E  c. 413  1969  BOS  8-14-1970  Accept  Indemnify School Committee, Superintendent and COA Director  
c. 41 § 108L  c. 835  1970  TM  3-13-1971  Accept  Career incentive police pay  
c. 32B, § 9E, 11B  TE  3-6-1972  Ballot  Retirees cost of insurance (3-4)  
c. 147, § 52  c. 486  1971  TE  3-6-1972  Ballot  Ballot question re: allowing Beano  
TE  4-7-1975  Ballot  Same as 3-6-1972  
c. 48, § 59A  BOS  7-24-1972  Accept  Mutual Aid Call - Fire Department  
c. 40D, § 8D  TM  3-17-1973  Passed  Establish a Historical Commission  
c. 499  1973  L  7-2-1973  Approval  Day off schedule for police officers  
TE  10-1-1973  Accept  
c. 48, § 58D  c. 245  1968  STM  6-3-1973  Passed  Fire Department 42 hours (1968 48 hrs.)  
c. 180, § 17A  BOS  1-21-1974  Passed  Police union dues deduction  
c. 272, § 73A  STM  10-22-1974  Accept  Rules and regulations re: gravestones  
c. 1141  1973  STM  10-22-1974  Accept  Establish Regional Transportation Authority  

1:538 

General  
Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 32B, § 9F  TE  4-7-1975  Ballot  Increase retired employee group life and ADD insurance  
c. 40D  STM  11-8-1976  Rescind  3-19-1968 vote creating Industrial Development Financing Authority  
c. 121C  STM  11-8-1976  Accept  Create Economic Development and Industrial Corporation  
c. 40D  STM  12-12-1977  Accept  Creating Industrial Development Financing Authority  
c. 90, § 20A, § 29A 1/2, § 20C-§ 20E  STM  9-16-1981  Accept  Parking fees  
c. 258, § 13  TE  4-6-1981  Ballot  Indemnification of Town officials  
c. 44, § 53D  TM  5-21-1981  Accept  Create Recreation Revolving Fund  
c. 468  1911  TM  11-17-1982  Repeal  Acceptance of Police Chief Civil Service of 3-5-1917  
TM  
c. 138, § 17A  STM  3-30-1983  Accept  Remove limit on alcohol licenses  
c. 71, § 71F  TM  6-11-1983  Accept  Establish separate accounts for nonresident  
tuition  
c. 40, § 4G  TM  6-11-1983  Accept  Requires advertising for bids in excess of $4,000  
c. 138, § 17A  TC  11-16-1983  Defeat  Remove limit on alcohol licenses  
c. 83, § 16A-16F  TC  11-16-1983  Accept  Establish liens for sewer charges RDD 11-23-1993  
c. 59, § 5; c. 41B  c. 653  1982  TC  1-18-1984  Accept  Real estate tax exemptions spouse, elder, minor  
c. 59, § 5; c. 37A  c. 258  1982  TC  1-18-1984  Accept  Real estate tax exemptions blind  
c. 60A, § 1  c. 597  1982  TC  1-18-1984  Accept  Excise exemption for POWs  
c. 59, § 5; c. 17C  c. 653  1982  TC  1-18-1984  Accept  Relief from revaluation impact blind, elder, etc.  

1:539 

§ A600-1  GREENFIELD CODE  § A600-1  
General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of  Date/Form of Action  Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 41, § 41B  TC  9-19-1984  Accept  Allow direct payroll deposits  
c. 712  1985  L  7-17-1985  Approval  Payment of accidental death benefits widow of James S. Cook  
TC  2-19-1986  Passed  
E  3-30-1986  
c. 32B, § 516  c. 188  1985  BOS  4-11-1985  Accept Enabling  Authorize contract for HMOs  
§ 13  TC  11-20-1985  Statute  Accept professional development grant for teacher compensation  
c. 40, § 5D  TC  1-15-1986  Accept  Monies credited pension reserve  
c. 71, § 40  STE  11-4-1986  Passed  Charter Commission to study  
TC  5-14-1986  Accept  Franklin County Government minimum teacher salary - 20k  
c. 600  1986  STM  12-20-1977  Passed  Convey Town land to Patricia Doane  
L  12-16-1986  
E  12-16-1986  
c. 59, § 5; c. 17D, § 41  TC  1-21-1987  Accept  Real estate exemptions  
c. 482  1987  TC  7-15-1987  Passed Approval  Act to pay widow retirement benefits to Elaine Carmody  
L  11-10-1987  
E  2-10-1988  
c. 40, § 44A  TC  7-15-1987  Enabling Statute  Create regional refuse disposal planning committee - 3 members  
c. 199  1987  TC  10-21-1987  Enabling Statute  Grant money for construction or improvement of public ways  
c. 59, § 57B  c. 402  1987  TC  5-25-1988  Accept  Real estate tax < $50 on one bill  

1:540 

General Laws, Added, Amended by Result of Citation Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Action(s) Subject Matter 
c.
 40, § 21E 	TC 12-14-1988 Accept Establishment of tax due dates and set 14% rate 

c.
 64G, § 3A 	TC 3-15-1989 Accept Local lodging excise tax of 4% 

c.
 59, § 21C 	c. 42 1989 TE 4-4-1989 Ballot Q Proposition 2 1/2 override for-existing schools Land


L 4-27-1989 Approval 
taken by Leyden by
E 7-27-1989 Domain 
eminent 
c. 40, TC 6-1-1989 Accept 	Establish regional refuse 
§ 44A-44L 	disposal planning committee 
c. 697, 1987 TC 8-22-1989 Accept 	Authorize cafeteria health/ 
§ 132 	life insurance plan IRS Code § 105 
c.
 59, § 21 	TE 6-5-1990 Ballot Q Proposition 2 1/2 funding for Council on Aging, Education, Fire, Library, Police, Public Works and Recreation 

c.
 40, § 8G 	TC 6-20-1990 Accept Police mutual aid contracts and programs 

c.
 71, § 71E 	TC 8-15-1990 Accept Revolving fund school property rentals 

c.
 33, § 59 TC 9-26-1990 Rescind Method of military pay for (formerly c. reservists 33, § 54) 

c.
 32, § 22D 	TC 12-19-1990 Accept Amortization funding schedule for unfunded retirement liability 

c.
 32, § 22D 	TC 2-20-1991 Amend Amortization funding schedule for unfunded retirement liability 

c.
 32, § 90G 3/ c. 245 1990 TC 5-15-1991 Accept Allow employment beyond 4 70 


TC 8-21-1991 Amend 	Franklin County Solid Waste Management District agreement 
c. 291 1990 TC 11-20-1991 Accept 	E911 
c. 140, § 147A 	TC 11-20-1991 Accept Revoke county dog license participation - fees kept by Town 
1:541 

§ A600-1  GREENFIELD CODE  § A600-1  
General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of  Date/Form of Action  Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 40, § 22F  TC  2-19-1992  Accept  Allow department to set certain fees on limited basis  
c. 29, § 64D  BOS  5-12-1992  Accept  Deferred compensation for temporary, seasonal, P-T employees  
c. 40, § 57  TC  2-17-1993  Accept  Revoke licenses for nonpayment of taxes  
c. 399  1992  TC  6-16-1993  Accept  Early retirement incentive  
TC  6-23-1993  Accept  Franklin County Tech School agreement as amended for apportionment  
c. 71  1993  TC  3-16-1994  Accept  Early teacher retirement § 83  
c. 44, § 53F 1/ 2  TC  4-20-1994  Accept  Establish enterprise fund for sewer  
c. 40, § 8J  TC  6-22-1994  Accept  Establish Disability Commission  
c. 66  1995  TC  1-18-1995  Passed Approval  Green River Cafe liquor license  
L  7-14-1995  
E  10-1-1995  
c. 67  1995  TC  2-15-1995  Passed Approval  Goodies Restaurant liquor license  
L  7-14-1995  
E  10-1-1995  
c. 84  1995  TC  4-19-1995  Passed Approval  People's Pint liquor license  
L  7-27-1995  
E  10-27-1995  
c. 59, § 21  TE  6-13-1995  Ballot Q  Proposition 2 1/2 override for Middle School  
c. 32, § 20 (6A), (4H)  TC  10-18-1995  Accept  Establish compensation for Retirement Board/ Treasurer  
c. 40, § 13C  TC  11-15-1995  Accept  Worker's compensation reserves  

1:542 

General  
Laws,  Added, Amended by  Result of  
Citation  Chapter/Acts of  Date/Form of Action Action(s)  Subject Matter  
TC  4-19-1995  Passed  Lease for Teen Center  
property and Leyden  
Wildlife Management Area  
c. 55  1996  L  3-29-1996  Approval  
E  3-29-1996  
c. 40, § 8E  TC  4-17-1996  Accept  Establish Youth  
Commission  
c. 44, § 53F 1/  TC  6-26-1996  Accept  Establish Landfill  
2  Enterprise Fund  

c. 32,  c. 71, § 2,  1996  TC  9-18-1996  Accept  Armed Forces Retirement  
§ 4(h)(1)  3  Credit  
c. 151,  1996  TC  4-27-1997  Accept  Enabling Statute  
§ 567, as  establishing Charter for  
amended  Franklin Regional Council  
of Governments  
c. 138, § 12  c. 402  1998  TC  3-18-1998  Passed  Special beer/wine license  
Approval  for Bickford's Family  
Restaurant  
L  12-9-1998  
E  3-9-1999  
c. 32, § 9  c. 253  1998  TC  4-15-1998  Passed  Retirement benefit to  
Approval  surviving spouse of  
firefighter Kenneth Creigle  
L  8-7-1998  
E  1-30-1998  
c. 60, § 3C  TC  4-15-1998  Accept  Allow Town scholarship  
fund check off on excise tax  
bills  
c. 32, § 103  c. 17, § 8  1997  TC  5-20-1998  Accept  COLA adjustments for  
retirees  
c. 138, § 12  c. 408  1998  TC  8-19-1998  Passed  Special alcohol license to  
Approval  The Mist  
L  12-16-1998  
E  3-16-1999  
c. 32, § 12  c. 194,  1998  TC  10-21-1998  Accept  Option (C) popup  
§ 288(2)  retirement  
c. 59, § 57C  TC  6-16-1999  Accept  Quarterly tax bills  
c. 32, § 102  c. 456  1998  TC  8-18-1999  Accept  Cost of living non­ 
contributory retirees  

1:543 

General  
Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c. 32, § 103  c. 127  1999  TC  12-15-1999  Accept  To allow retirement system to provide annual 3% COLA  
c. 41, § 69B  BOS  1-18-2000  Accept  Establish water fund to commence 7-1-2000  
c. 73, § 4  1998  TC  5-16-2001  Accept  Tax relief for military called to active duty  
c. 138, § 12  TC  6-20-2001  Accept  Holder of common victualler license may sell liqueurs and cordials  
c. 59, § 21  TE  4-16-2002  Ballot Q  Proposition 2 1/2 override for Middle School  
c. 139  2004  L  6-24-2004  Approval  Alcohol license for Harper Package Store  
c. 48  2005  L  7-7-2005  Approval  Alcohol license for A. Ruggeri & Sons  
c. 60  2010  L  4-1-2010  Approval  Alcohol license for Asian Buffet  
c. 61  2010  L  4-1-2010  Approval  Alcohol license for Hole Pie, Inc.  
c. 76  2010  L  4-16-2010  Approval  Authorizing appointment of special police officers  
c. 290  2010  L  8-10-2010  Approval  Authorizing certain changes in the lease of a certain parcel of land (amending Acts 1996, c. 55)  
c. 42  2013  L  7-22-2013  Approval  Alcohol license for Greenfield Community College Foundation, Inc.  
c. 74  2013  L  9-3-2013  Approval  Alcohol license for Cuca, Inc.  
c. 41, §§ 19K, 108P  TC  6-17-2015  Accept  Additional compensation for City Clerk and/or Treasurer-Collector  
completing courses of study and training  
c. 41, § 19F  TC  6-17-2015  Accept  Additional compensation of City Clerk serving as Clerk of the City Council  

1:544 

§ A600-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS  § DT-1  
General Laws, Citation  Added, Amended by Chapter/Acts of Date/Form of Action Result of Action(s)  Subject Matter  
c.
 34 	2015 L 6-22-2015 Approval Alcohol license for Hangar Pub and Grille 



Chapter DT 


DERIVATION TABLE 

§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2002 Bylaws to 2017 Code. 
In order to assist Code users in the transition to the new Code's organization, this Derivation Table indicates where chapters and articles ofthe 2002 Bylaws have been included in the 2017 Code, or the reason for exclusion. 
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I. NI = Not included 
Chapter/Title FromLocation in 2017 Prior Historical 2002 Bylaws Code Information145 
TOWN BYLAWS 

Ch. 1, General Provisions 
Art. I, Acceptance of7-17-1985, AG approval
Compiled Bylaws;9-19-1985 
Enforcement 

§§ 1-1, 1-2, 1-4, 1-7, 1-8 See Ch. 1, Art. I 
§ 1-3 	Ch. 1, Art. III 
§§ 1-5, 1-6 	Ch. 1, Art. II 
§ 1-9 	Ch. 1, Art. III, 
§ 1-17 

Art. II, Recovery by TownCh. 1, Art. III, 7-17-1985, AG approval
for Expenses of § 1-18 9-19-1985 
Achieving Compliance 

Art. III, Acceptance of NI; see Ch. 1, Art. I 4-17-2002, AG approval 
Codified General Bylaws 8-15-2002 

Art. IV, Acceptance ofNI 4-17-2002, AG approval
Codified Zoning Bylaw 10-4-2002 

Art. V, Acceptance ofNI 4-17-2002 
Codified Town Council 
Rules of Procedure 

145.Editor's Note: Historical information not listed here is included within the chapter orarticle noted. 
1:545 

Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws  Location in 2017 Code  Prior Historical Information  
Ch. 9, Alarms  Ch. 205  8-17-1994, AG approval11-1-1994  
Ch. 13, Alcoholic  
Beverages  
Art. I, Public  Ch. 209, Art. I  4-25-1984; 6-17-1987, AG  
Consumption  approval 9-16-1987; 4-17-2002, AG approval6-28-2002  
Ch. 17, Animals  Ch. 213  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 6-21-2000, AG  
approval 9-18-2000  
Ch. 21, Assemblies, Mass  Ch. 217  
Public  
Art. I, Public Demonstrations  7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985; 11-20-1991  
Art. II, Parades  7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985  
Ch. 25, Awnings  Ch. 385, Art. I  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 5-15-1996, AG  
approval 8-6-1996  
Ch. 28, Banning single-use expandablepolystyrene foampackaging  Ch. 274, Art. I  
Ch. 30, Board of Selectmen  Ch. 56, Art. VI  7-17-1985, AG approval 9-19-1985  
Ch. 34, Boards,  
Committees and  
Commissions  
Art. I, Finance Committee  Ch. 193  8-1-1984, AG approval3-5-1985; 4-21-1999, AG  
approval 7-27-1999  
Art. II, Meetings; Continuation of  Ch. 49, Art. II  7-17-1985, AG approval 9-19-1985  
Membership  
Art. III, School Committee  Ch. 182  7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985  
Art. IV, Zoning Board ofAppeals  REP  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986  
Art. V, Recreation Commission  Ch. 173  10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986  

1:546 


Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws  Location in 2017 Code  Prior Historical Information  
Art. VI, Historical Commission  Ch. 132  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986  
Art. VII, Planning Board  Ch. 164  3-2-1914; 10-21-1987, AG approval 1-4-1988  
Art. VIII, Human RightsCommission  Ch. 136  12-18-1996, AG approval4-14-1997  
Art. IX, Capital Improvement PlanningCommittee  Ch. 110  
Art. X, CemeteryCommission  Ch. 114  
Art. XI, Parking andTraffic Commission  Ch. 160  
Art. XII, AgriculturalCommission  Ch. 103  
Art. XIII, Sustainable  Ch. 186  
Greenfield  
ImplementationCommittee  
Ch. 39, BuildingConstruction  
Art. I, Building Permits  Ch. 224, Art. I  3-6-1905; 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986;5-15-1996, AG approval8-6-1996  
Ch. 45, Civil Defense  Ch. 13  3-17-1951, AG approval4-17-1951; 10-16-1985,  
AG approval 2-20-1986  
Ch. 46, Civil RightsOfficer  Ch. 56, Art. VIII  
Ch. 47, Classification and Compensation  Repealed by OrderNo. FY 12-100  6-1-1989; 1-17-1996; 4-21-1999  
Ch. 49, Council on Aging  Ch. 118  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 5-17-2000, AG  
approval 6-22-2000  
Ch. 53, Curfew  Ch. 235  10-19-1994, AG approval 2-19-1995  
Ch. 58, Demolition Delayfor Structures of  Ch. 241  
Historical or Architectural  
Significance Ordinance  

1:547 


Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws  Location in 2017 Code  Prior Historical Information  
Ch. 59, DesignerSelection Ordinance  Ch. 60, Art. I  
Ch. 59, DepartmentalRevolving Funds  Ch. 27, Art. III  
Ch. 61, Drainage  Ch. 248  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986; 5-15-1996  
Ch. 64, Excavation  Ch. 259  1-21-2009  
Ch. 65, Electrical Standards; Wire Inspector Ch. 254  3-17-1956, AG approval 4-25-1956  
Ch. 66, Eminent Domain  Ch. 22  5-10-2006  
Ch. 67, Financial  Ch. 27, Art. II  
Ordinance  
Ch. 69, Firearms  Ch. 270  7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985; 2-19-1992, AG  
approval 6-15-1992  
Ch. 76, Handbills  Ch. 385, Art. II  
Ch. 80, Intersections, Visual Obstructions at  Ch. 385, Art. III  7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985  
Ch. 83, Junk Dealers  Ch. 282  3-4-1907; 2-17-1993, AG  
approval 5-19-1993; 5-15-1996; 8-15-2007  
Ch. 86, Key Lock Box  Ch. 224, Art. II  8-15-2007  
Ch. 90, Licensing  
Art. I, Revocation of Licenses for Nonpaymentof Taxes Ch. 288, Art. I  3-16-1994, AG approval 6-9-1994  
Ch. 94, Littering  Ch. 293  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 3-20-1996;  
6-21-2006  
Ch. 98, Lobbyist Ordinance  Ch. 49, Art. I  
Ch. 99, Maintenance Department  Ch. 45  9-20-2000, AG approval 1-25-2001  
Ch. 102, MercuryThermometers  Ch 300  5-16-2001, AG approval8-14-2001  
Ch. 104, Naming ofMunicipal Buildings,Facilities and Public  Ch. 71, Art. II  
Places  

1:548 


Prior Historical Information 
4-1-1986 
3-14-1936, AG approval 5-20-1936 
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986 
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986 
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986 
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986 
7-25-1916; 4-21-1993, AG approval 7-19-1993;5-15-1996, AG approval8-6-1996 
7-17-1985, AG approval 9-19-1985 
3-14-1907; 3-19-1949, AG approval 6-22-1949;10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
11-18-1987; 8-24-1988, AG approval 1-13-1989 
3-17-1951, AG approval4-17-1951 
3-21-1984 
7-17-1985, AG approval 9-19-1985 
Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws 

Ch. 105, Native American Burial Ground 
Ch. 106, Nuclear-Free Zone 

Ch. 107, Excessive Noise Ordinance 
Ch. 112, Officers and Employees 
Art. I, Treasurer-
Collector 
Art. II, Gas Inspector 
Art. III, Plumbing
Inspector 
Art. IV, Building
Inspector 
Art. V, Town Clerk 
Ch. 116, Parking Permit/ City Council 
Ch. 117, Pawnbrokers 

Ch. 121, Peace and Good Order 
Art. I, Disorderly 
Behavior 
Ch. 124, Peddling andSoliciting 

Ch. 128, Pesticide Control REP 
Ch. 132, Police Mutual Ch. 18, Art. I Aid Ch. 136, Public Lands Ch. 346 
Ch. 138, Public Safety Art. I, Disturbing of Ch. 385, Art. IV Equipment 
Location in 2017 Code 
Ch. 307 Ch. 315 Ch. 311 
Ch. 56, Art. I Ch. 56, Art. II Ch. 56, Art. III Ch. 56, Art. IV Ch. 56, Art. V Ch. 68 Ch. 328 
Ch. 333, Art. I Ch. 337 
1:549 


Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws  Location in 2017 Code  Prior Historical Information  
Ch. 141, RedevelopmentAuthority  Ch. 177  
Art. I, Establishment  3-14-1970; 10-16-1985,  
AG approval 2-20-1986  
Art. II, Membership  10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986  
Ch. 142, Right to Farm Ordinance  Ch. 265  12-15-2010 by Order No. FY 11-039  
Ch. 149, Signs  Ch. 359  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986  
Ch. 151, Smoking inPublic Buildings or on Public Lands  Ch. 364, Art. I  
Ch. 154, Soil Removal  Ch. 368  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889;  
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986  
Ch. 158, Stipend forSchool Board Members  Ch. 56, Art. VII  11-20-2013 by Order No.FY 14-079  
and Town Councilors  
Ch. 159, Streets and  
Sidewalks  
Art. I, Street Names  Ch. 385, Art. V  
Art. II, Street Numbering Ch. 385, Art. VI  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889  
Art. III, Obstruction of  Ch. 385, Art. VII  
Sidewalks  
Art. IV, Placing Buildings in Streets  REP  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889  
Art. V, PlacingObstructions in Streets  Ch. 385, Art. VIII  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889  
Art. VI, Private  Ch. 385, Art. IX  3-4-1889; 4-1-1889  
Maintenance of  
Structures in Street or  
Sidewalk  
Art. VII, Use of  Ch. 385, Art. X  
Sidewalks  
Art. VIII, Damage toStreets  Ch. 385, Art. XI  
Art. IX, Damage toBorders  Ch. 385, Art. XII  

1:550 


Chapter/Title FromLocation in 2017 2002 Bylaws Code 
Art. X, Snow and Ice Ch. 385, Art. XIII 
Removal 

Ch. 160, Surveillance and Ch. 389 Trespassing Ordinance 
Ch. 163, Tag Sales Ch. 394 
Ch. 164, Thirty DayCh. 27, Art. I 
Contract Review Ch. 168, Town Real and Ch. 71, Art. I Personal Property Ch. 172, Trees Ch. 400 
Art. I, Damage to Trees 
Art. II, Attachment of 
Wires and Fixtures 
Art. III, Removal and 
Planting of Trees 

Ch. 176, UndergroundCh. 377 Storage Tanks 
Ch. 178, Ordinance Ch. 431 Relative to Vacant and Foreclosing Properties 
Ch. 180, Vehicles and Ch. 408, Art. I Traffic 
Ch. 182, Veterans Mall Ch. 364, Art. II Smoking 
Ch. 187, Water Tampering Ch. 415, Part 1 
Ch. 191, Wells Ch. 419 
Ch. 195, Wetlands Ch. 423 Protection 
Prior Historical Information 
3-4-1889; 4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 3-18-1992, AG approval 8-3-1992;10-21-1992, AG approval2-3-1993; 4-17-1996, AG approval 7-16-1996 
1-19-2005 
2-19-1997, AG approval6-13-1997 
10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986 
7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985; 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-207 
3-4-1889; 4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-207 
5-20-2009; 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-207 
4-21-1993, AG approval7-19-1993 
10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985 
7-17-1985, AG approval9-19-1985 
8-15-2001, AG approval11-23-2001; 5-28-2014 by Order No. FY 14-136 
1:551 


Chapter/Title FromLocation in 2017 Prior Historical 2002 Bylaws Code Information 
ZONING BYLAWS 
Ch. 200, Zoning NI 
BOARD OF SELECTMEN REGULATIONS 
Ch. 348, Liquor Sales 
Art. I, Business Ch. 209, Art. II 
Regulations 

Art. II, Inactive Licenses Ch. 209, Art. III 
Ch. 370, Policy forCh. 385, Art. XIV Sidewalk Outdoor Seating 
Ch. 376, Taxicabs Ch. 538, Art. I 	3-14-1993; 1-16-1997; Board of License Commissioners 6-6-2006; 1-1-2007 
BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS REGULATIONS 
Ch. 485, Traffic Ch. 555, Art. I Regulations 
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS REGULATIONS 
Ch. 615, Insurance Ch. 230, Art. I 
Ch. 643, Parking Meter Ch. 408, Art. II 2-19-2002 Zones Ch. 650, Sewer Use Ch. 355 Ch. 657, Solid Waste Ch. 372 
Art. I, Curbside Trash 	5-16-1989 
Collection 
Art. II, Leaf and Yard 6-24-1989 
Waste 

Art. III, Recyclables5-16-1989 Collection Art. IV, Transfer Station Ch. 662, Street Openings Ch. 385, Art. XV 
Ch. 689, Water Use Ch. 415, Part 2 8-3-1999; 2-2-2002 Ch. 695, Stormwater Ch. 381 System 
BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS 
Ch. 707, Body ArtCh. 507, Art. IV Establishments 
1:552 


Prior Historical Information 
2002 
6-13-1991 
9-16-1994; 10-4-1994; 10-4-1995; 11-12-1996; 4-30-1997 
Reference page only 6-17-1991; 3-20-2003 
6-17-1991 
11-15-2001 
11-6-1989; 6-17-1991 11-6-1989; 6-17-1991 3-19-1966; 5-14-1984; 
5-29-1984 
6-8-1992; 8-13-2001 
6-11-2002; 1-28-2004 
Reserved chapters only 
Chapter/Title From2002 Bylaws 
Ch. 730, Hazardous Materials Regulation 
Ch. 764, Smoking andYouth Access to Tobacco 

Ch. 785, Tobacco Use on School Property 
Art. I, Employees and 
Visitors 

Art. II, Use or Possession by Students 
PLANNING BOARD REGULATIONS 

Location in 2017 Code 
Ch. 507, Art. V Ch. 507, Art. II 
Ch. 507, Art. I Ch. 507, Art. III 

Ch. 808, Corridor Design 
Ch. 842, MajorDevelopment Review Ch. 856, Recommendation 
for Membership 
Ch. 860, Rules and Regulations Ch. 865, Site Plans Ch. 870, Special Permits Ch. 880, Subdivision of 
Land Ch. 896, Zone Changes 
NI Ch. 244 Ch. 550, Art. III 
Ch. 550, Art. IV Ch. 550, Art. I Ch. 550, Art. II Ch. 550, Art. V 
Ch. 550, Art. VI 

CONSERVATION COMMISSION REGULATIONS 
Ch. 967, Public Use of Ch. 322, Art. I Greenfield Conservation Land 
Ch. 974, Rules and Ch. 515, Art. I Regulations 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS REGULATIONS 
Ch. 1057, Rules and Ch. 590 Regulations 
SCHOOL BOARD NI REGULATIONS 
TOWN COUNCIL REGULATIONS 
1:553 


Chapter/Title FromLocation in 2017 
2002 Bylaws 	Code 
Ch. 1261, Rules of Ch. 565 
Procedure 
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY OTHER 
BOARDS 
Ch. 1301, Council on Aging Bylaws 
Ch. 1302, Recreation Facility Use 
APPENDIX 
Ch. A2001, LegislativeHistory of GreenfieldGovernment 
Ch. A2002, Guide to Development Permits 
Ch. A2003, Inventory of Permits, Licenses and Approvals 
Ch. A2004, Table of Acceptances: General and Special Acts Ch. 520 
Ch. 322, Art. II 
NI 
NI NI 
Ch. A600 § DT-2 
Prior Historical Information 
11-16-1983; 2-19-1986; 12-18-1991; 3-18-1992; 11-15-1995; 5-20-1998; 7-7-2004; 12-1-2004; 6-1-2005; 7-6-2005; 7-5-2006; 7-12-2006 
3-9-1982; 3-9-1993; 4-13-1993; 4-1-1996; 5-14-1996; 3-9-1999; 10-23-2008 
Reference page only 
§ DT-2. Information on 1985 Bylaws. 

For information purposes, this Derivation Table indicates where sections of
the 1985 Bylaws have been included in the 2017 Code, or the reason for 

exclusion. 
Section 	Subject Matter 
Acceptance ofCompiled Bylaws 

1.2, 1.3 	Meetings;Continuation of Membership 
Historical Information 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985 

Location in 2017 Code 
See Ch. 1, Arts. II and III 
Ch. 49, Art. II 
1:554 


§ DT-2 	GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section Subject Matter 	Historical Information 
2.1 Board of 	Adopted 7-17-1985, AG
Selectmen 	approval 9-19-1985;§ 56-16A originally adopted 3-4-1889 and4-1-1889 
2.2 	Treasurer-Adopted 7-17-1985, AGCollector approval 9-19-1985 
2.3 	School Committee Adopted 7-17-1985, AG
approval 9-19-1985 
Adopted 3-14-1970; amended 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 3-2-1914;amended 10-21-1987, AG approval 1-4-1988 
Adopted 8-1-1984, AG approval 3-5-1985;amended 4-21-1999, AG approval 7-27-1999 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986; amended 5-17-2000, AG approval 6-22-2000 
Adopted 8-1-1984; amended 3-21-1990; rescinded 1-17-1996 
Deleted 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 3-17-1956, AGapproval 4-25-1956 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
2.12 Building Inspector Adopted 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 § DT-2 
Location in 2017 Code 
Ch. 56, Art. VI 
Ch. 56, Art. I Ch. 182 Ch. 177, Art. I 
Ch. 164 
Ch. 193 
Ch. 118 
Ch. 254 
Ch. 56, Art. II Ch. 56, Art. III Ch. 56, Art. IV 
2.4 2.5  Establishment of RedevelopmentAuthority Planning Board  
2.6  Finance Committee  
2.7  Council on Aging  
2.8  Personnel Board Bylaw  
2.9 2.9 2.10  Industrial DevelopmentFinancing Authority Bylaw Electrical Standards; Wire Inspector Gas Inspector  
2.11  Plumbing Inspector  

1:555 


Section 	Subject Matter 
2.13 	Zoning Board ofAppeals 
2.14 	Recreation Commission 
2.15 	Historical Commission 
2.16 	Membership of RedevelopmentAuthority 
2.17 	Town Clerk 
2.18 	Human RightsCommission 
2.19 	
Conservation Commission Bylaw 

3.1 	
Building permits 


3.2 	Peddling and Soliciting 
3.3 	Drainage 
3.4 	Attachment of Wire and Fixtures to Trees 
3.5 	Awnings 
Historical Information 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval2-20-1986; amended 6-15-2011 by OrderNo. FY 11-106 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 12-18-1996,AG approval 4-14-1997 
Deleted 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 3-6-1905; 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986;amended 5-15-1996, AG approval 8-6-1996 
Adopted 3-14-1907; 3-19-1949, AG approval 6-22-1949;amended 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986 
Adopted 3-4-1889;4-1-1889; amended 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986;6-20-2012 by OrderNo. FY 12-207 
Adopted 3-4-1889; 4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval2-20-1986; amended 5-15-1996, AG approval 8-6-1996 

Location in 2017 Code 
Repealed at time ofadoption of Code(see Ch. 1, Art. I) 
Ch. 173 Ch. 132 Ch. 177, Art. II 
Ch. 56, Art. V Ch. 136 
Ch. 224, Art. I 
Ch. 337 
Ch. 248 Ch. 400 
Ch. 385, Art. I 
1:556 


Section  Subject Matter  Historical Information  Location in 2017 Code  
3.6  Soil Removal  Adopted 3-4-1889;4-1-1889; 10-16-1985,  Ch. 368  
AG approval 2-20-1986  
3.7  Electrical Permits  Reference statement  Not included  
only  
3.7.2  Drainage of Rainwater Permit  Repealed 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986  
3.8  Signs  Adopted 3-4-1889;4-1-1889; 10-16-1985,  Ch. 359  
AG approval 2-20-1986  
3.8.1  Drainage  Rescinded 5-15-1996  
3.9  Junk Dealers and Junk Collectors  Adopted 2-17-1993, AGapproval 5-19-1993; amended 5-15-1996;  Ch. 282  
8-15-2007  
3.10  Public Demonstrations  Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985;amended 11-20-1991  Ch. 217  
3.10.1  Incinerator  Rescinded 5-15-1996  
Permits  
3.11  Parades  Adopted 7-17-1985, AG approval 9-19-1985  Ch. 217  
3.12  Pawnbrokers  Adopted 7-25-1916;amended 4-21-1993,  Ch. 328  
AG approval 7-19-1993; 5-15-1996,  
AG approval 8-6-1996  
3.13  Revocation of Licenses for Nonpayment of Taxes  Adopted 3-16-1994, AGapproval 6-9-1994  Ch. 288, Art. I  
3.14  Tag Sales  Adopted 2-19-1997, AGapproval 6-13-1997  Ch. 394  
4.1  Littering  Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval2-20-1986; 3-20-1996;  Ch. 293  
6-21-2006  
4.2  Town Real and Personal Property  Adopted 10-16-1985,AG approval 2-20-1986  Ch. 71  
4.3  Street Names  Adopted 3-4-1889 and4-1-1889  Ch. 385, Art. V  

1:557 


Section 	Subject Matter 
Snow and Ice Removal 

4.5 	Police Mutual Aid 
4.6 	Obstruction of Sidewalks 
4.7 	Dog Control 
4.8 	Handbills 
4.9 
4.19 	Damage to Trees 
4.10 	Damage toBorders 
4.11 	Wells 
4.12 	Firearms 
4.13 	DisorderlyBehavior 
4.14 	Public Lands 
4.15 	Public consumption of alcoholic beverages 
4.16 	Fire Department False Alarms 
Historical Information 
Adopted 3-4-1889;4-1-1889; 10-16-1985, AG approval 2-20-1986; amended 3-18-1992, AG approval 8-3-1992; 10-21-1992, AG approval 2-3-1993;4-17-1996, AG approval 7-16-1996 
Adopted 3-17-1951, AGapproval 4-17-1951 
Adopted 3-4-1889;4-1-1889; 3-21-1984 
Adopted 3-4-1889 and4-1-1889 
Replaced by Sec. 4.19 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985;amended 6-20-2012 by Order No. FY 12-207 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985 
Adopted 7-17-1985, AGapproval 9-19-1985; amended 2-19-1992, AG approval 6-15-1992 
Adopted 7-15-1916;4-21-1993, AG approval 7-19-1993 
Adopted 3-21-1984 
Adopted 4-25-1984;amended 6-17-1987, AG approval9-16-1987; 4-17-2002, AG approval 6-28-2002 
Adopted 8-17-1994, AG approval 11-1-1994 

Location in 2017 Code 
Ch. 385, Art. XIII 
Ch. 18, Art. I Ch. 385, Art. VII See Ch. 213 
Ch. 385, Art. II 
Ch. 400 
Ch. 385, Art. XII Ch. 419 Ch. 270 
Ch. 333, Art. I 
Ch. 346 Ch. 209, Art. I 
Ch. 205 
1:558 


Section Subject Matter 	Historical Location in 2017 Information Code 
4.17 	Curfew Adopted 10-19-1994,Ch. 235 AG approval 2-19-1995 
4.19 	
Animals Adopted 10-16-1985,Ch. 213 AG approval 2-20-1986; amended 6-21-2000, AG approval 9-18-2000 

5.1 
Classification and 	Adopted 6-1-1989;Not included 

Compensation 	amended 1-17-1996; 
4-21-1999 


6.1 	
Nuclear-Free Adopted 4-1-1986 Ch. 315 Zone 


6.2 	Pesticide Control Adopted 11-18-1987;Repealed at time ofamended 8-24-1988, adoption of CodeAG approval 1-13-1989 (see Ch. 1, Art. I) 
6.3 Underground Adopted 4-21-1993, AG Ch. 377 
Storage Tanks approval 7-19-1993 

6.4 	Mercury Adopted 5-16-2001, AG Ch. 300 Thermometers approval 8-14-2001 
§ DT-3. Information on Police Regulations. 
For information purposes, this Derivation Table indicates where sections of the former Police Regulations have been included in the 2017 Code, or thereason for exclusion. 
Section  Subject Matter  Location in 2017 Code  
2.1 through 2.4  Traffic Regulations  Ch. 555  
2.5  Parking, stopping andstanding restrictions  Ch. 408, Art. I  
2.6 through 2.38  Traffic Regulations  Ch. 555  
2.39  Disturbing of equipment  Ch. 385, Art. IV  
2.40  Visual obstructions at  Ch. 385, Art. III  

intersections 
2.41 	Placing buildings in streets Repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,Art. I) 
2.42 	Placing obstructions in Ch. 385, Art. VIII streets 
1:559 


2.43  Private maintenance of  Ch. 385, Art. IX  
structures in street or  
sidewalk  
2.44  Use of sidewalks  Ch. 385, Art. X  
2.45  Recovery by Town forexpenses of achieving compliance  Ch. 1, Art. III, § 1-18  
2.46  Damage to streets  Ch. 385, Art. XI  
Chapter DL  


DISPOSITION LIST 
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation. 
AdoptionOrder No. Date Subject Disposition 
9-18-2002 	General and Special Acts Ch. A600 amendment 
10-16-2002 	Zoning amendment NI 
3-19-2003 	General and Special Acts Ch. A600 amendment 
3-20-2003 	Major development review Ch. 244 Stormwater system Ch. 381 
4-1-2003 	Sidewalk outdoor seating Ch. 385, Art. XIV 
4-16-2003 	General and Special ActsCh. A600 amendment 
6-17-2003 	Placing obstructions in Ch. 385, Art. VIII streets amendment 
FY 10-072 4-21-2010 	Naming of municipal Ch. 71, Art. II building, facilities andpublic places 
FY 10-098 6-16-2010 Procurement: designerCh. 60, Art. I selection process FY 11-039 12-15-2010 Right to farm Ch. 265 FY 11-053 1-19-2011 Smoking: public buildingsCh. 364, Art. I and lands FY 11-083 5-18-2011 Right to farm amendment Ch. 265 FY 11-084 5-18-2011 Finances: contract review Ch. 27, Art. I FY 11-101 6-15-2011 Electrical standards Ch. 254 amendment 
1:560 

§ DL-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS  § DL-1  
Order No.  AdoptionDate  Subject  Disposition  
FY 11-102  6-15-2011  Definitions and  Ch. 1, Art. II  
interpretation amendment  
FY 11-103  6-15-2011  Alarms amendment  Ch. 205  
FY 11-104  6-15-2011  Animals amendment  Ch. 213  
FY 11-105  6-15-2011  Mayor amendment  Superseded byOrder No. FY  
12-204  
FY 11-106  6-15-2011  Ways and MeansCommittee amendment  Ch. 49, Art. II; Ch. 132; Ch. 136; Ch.  
164; Ch. 182; Ch.  
193; Ch. 199  
FY 11-107  6-15-2011  Nuclear-free zone  Ch. 315  
amendment  
FY 11-108  6-15-2011  Redevelopment authority:establishment amendment  Ch. 177, Art. I  
FY 11-109  6-15-2011  Soil removal amendment  Ch. 368  
FY 11-111  6-15-2011  Planning Board:recommendation for  Ch. 550, Art. III  
membership amendment  
FY 11-112  6-15-2011  Planning Board: rules andregulations amendment  Ch. 550, Art. IV  
FY 11-113  6-15-2011  Building permitsamendment  Ch. 224, Art. I  
FY 11-114  6-15-2011  Treasurer-Collector  Ch. 56, Arts. II  
amendment  through V  
FY 11-115  6-15-2011  Civil defense amendment  Ch. 13  
FY 12-001  8-17-2011  Pawnbrokers amendment  Ch. 328  
FY 12-002  8-17-2011  Peddling and solicitingamendment  Ch. 337  
FY 12-003  8-17-2011  Streets, sidewalks and  Ch. 385, Art. IV  
public places: disturbing protective equipmentamendment  
FY 12-004  8-17-2011  Tag sales amendment  Ch. 394  
FY 12-005  8-17-2011  Underground storage tanksamendment  Ch. 377  
FY 12-006  8-17-2011  Smoking: Veterans Mall  Ch. 364, Art. II  
FY 12-064  1-18-2012  Alcoholic beverages: publicconsumption amendment  Superseded by FY13-067  

1:561 

§ DL-1  GREENFIELD CODE  § DL-1  
Order No.  AdoptionDate  Subject  Disposition  
FY 12-065  1-18-2012  Streets, sidewalks and  Ch. 385, Art. I  
public places: awningsamendment  
FY 12-066  1-18-2012  Curfew amendment  Ch. 235  
FY 12-067  1-18-2012  Excavations amendment  Ch. 259  
FY 12-068  1-18-2012  Finances: departmentaltransfers and supplemental appropriations  Ch. 27, Art. II  
FY 12-069  1-18-2012  Vehicles-for-hire  Repealed by Order No. FY 12-085  
FY 12-071  1-18-2012  Sewer use amendment  Ch. 355  
FY 12-073  1-18-2012  Parks and recreation  Ch. 322, Art. I  
facilities: use of Greenfield  
Conservation Land  
amendment  
FY 12-085  2-15-2012  Repeal of Order No. 12-069 (re: vehicles for hire)  Repealer only; Ch. 538  
FY 12-099  3-21-2012  Building permits amendment  Ch. 224, Art. I  
FY 12-100  3-21-2012  Classification and compensation repealer  Repealer only  
FY 12-101  3-21-2012  Eminent domain  Ch. 22  
amendment  
FY 12-102  3-21-2012  Junk dealers and collectors  Ch. 282  
amendment  
FY 12-103  3-21-2012  Building construction: keylock boxes amendment  Ch. 224, Art. II  
FY 12-104  3-21-2012  Licensing : denial or revocation for nonpaymentof taxes amendment  Ch. 288, Art. I  
FY 12-105  3-21-2012  Littering amendment  Ch. 293  
FY 12-106  3-21-2012  Maintenance Department  Ch. 45  
FY 12-107  3-21-2012  Mercury thermometers amendment  Ch. 300  
FY 12-108  3-21-2012  Peace and good orderamendment  Ch. 333  
FY 12-109  2-21-2012  Police Department mutualaid amendment  Ch. 18, Art. I  
FY 12-110  3-21-2012  Signs amendment  Ch. 359  

1:562 

§ DL-1 
Order No. 
FY 12-111 
FY 12-112 
FY 12-114 
FY 12-115 
FY 12-116 FY 12-121 
FY 12-140 FY 12-141 
FY 12-142 FY 12-143 
FY 12-144 
FY 12-145 FY 12-146 
FY 12-147 FY 12-148 FY 12-204 FY 12-205 
FY 12-206 FY 12-207 
FY 12-208 
FY 13-067 
GENERAL PROVISIONS  § DL-1  
AdoptionDate  Subject  Disposition  
3-21-2012  Surveillance and  Ch. 389  
trespassing amendment  
3-21-2012  Town property: personalproperty amendment  Ch. 71, Art. I  
3-21-2012  Parking restrictionsamendment  Ch. 408, Art. I  
3-21-2012  Tampering with water system amendment  Ch. 415, Part 1  
3-21-2012  Wells amendment  Ch. 419  
3-21-2012  Sustainable Greenfield Implementation Committeeamendment  Superseded by Order No. FY 14-159  
5-16-2012  Firearms amendment  Ch. 270  
5-16-2012  Streets, sidewalks and  Ch. 385, Art. III  
public places: visualobstructions at  
intersections amendment  
5-16-2012  Public lands amendment  Ch. 346  
5-16-2012  Contractors: insurance  Ch. 230, Art. I  
requirements  
5-16-2012  Parking meter zones amendment  Ch. 408, Art. II  
5-16-2012  Solid waste amendment  Ch. 372  
5-16-2012  Street openings amendment  Ch. 384, Art. I  
5-16-2012  Water use amendment  Ch. 415, Part 2  
5-16-2012  Stormwater management  Ch. 381  
6-20-2012  Mayor amendment  Ch. 56, Art. VI  
6-20-2012  Council on Agingamendment  Ch. 118  
6-20-2012  Drainage amendment  Ch. 248  
6-20-2012  Trees amendment  Superseded byOrder No. FY  
16-160  
6-20-2012  Parks and recreation  Ch. 322, Art. II  
facilities: facility use formsamendment  
12-19-2012  Alcoholic beverages: publicconsumption amendment  Ch. 209, Art. I  

1:563 

§ DL-1  GREENFIELD CODE  § DL-1  
Order No.  AdoptionDate  Subject  Disposition  
FY 13-076  2-20-2013  Animals amendment  Ch. 213  
FY 14-079  11-20-2013  Officers and employees:stipend for school boardmembers and town  Ch. 56, Art. VII  
councilors  
FY 14-081  5-21-2014  Native American burial  Ch. 307  
ground  
FY 14-136  5-28-2014  Wetlands protection  Superseded byOrder No. FY  
17-023  
FY 14-159  5-21-2014  Sustainable Greenfield  Ch. 186  
Implementation Committee  
FY 14-160  6-18-2014  Noise  Vetoed 7-22-2014  
FY 15-004  7-16-2014  Mayor's Task Force againstDomestic Violence repealer  Repealer only  
FY 15-005  7-16-2014  Cemetery Commission  Ch. 114  
FY 15-036  9-17-2014  Stipend for School Boardmembers and Town  Ch. 56, Art. VII  
Councilors amendment  
FY 15-037  9-17-2014  City Council parkingpermits amendment  Ch. 9  
FY 15-075  12-17-2014  Vacant and foreclosingproperties  Ch. 431  
FY 15-140  5-20-2015  Sustainable Greenfield  Ch. 186  
Implementation Committee  
FY 15-134  6-17-2015  General Law Acceptancesand Special Acts amendment  Ch. A600  
FY 15-135  6-17-2015  General Law Acceptancesand Special Actsamendment  Ch. A600  
FY 16-015  7-15-2015  Streets, sidewalks and  Ch. 385, Art. XIV  
public places: snow and ice removal amendment  
FY 16-099  12-29-2015  Public assemblies  Ch. 217  
amendment  
FY 16-100  12-16-2015  Town Council amendment  Ch. 565  
FY 16-105  12-29-2015  Public assemblies  Ch. 217  
amendment  
FY 16-160  5-18-2016  Trees  Ch. 400  

1:564 

AdoptionOrder No. Date Subject Disposition 
FY 16-170 6-15-2016 	Food establishments: Ch. 274, Art. I single-use expandablepolystyrene foam packaging 
FY 17-009 7-13-2016 	Sustainable Greenfield Ch. 186 Implementation Committeeamendment 
Board of Health: hazardous materials amendment 
FY 17-023 8-17-2016 	Wetlands protection Ch. 423 
FY 17-052 10-19-2016 	Junk dealers and collectors Ch. 282 amendment 
FY 17-069 12-21-2016 	General Law Acceptances Ch. A600 and Special Actsamendment 
Acts of 1-5-2017 Charter amendment Sec. 2-4; Sec. 6-11 2016, Ch. 361 
Acts of 1-11-2017 Charter amendment Sec. 7-7 2016, Ch. 405 
Acts of 1-11-2017 Charter amendment Sec. 7-12 2016, Ch. 408 
Acts of 1-11-2017 Charter amendment Sec. 7-8 2016, Ch. 410 
FY 17-077 1-18-2017 Solid waste amendment 	Codification pending effectivedate of 12-31-2017 
FY 17-117 4-19-2017 	Finances: departmental Ch. 27, Art. III revolving funds 
FY 17-129 5-17-2017 	Civil Rights Officer Ch. 56, Art. VIII 
1:565 


CITY OF GREENFIELD 


CITY OF GREENFIELD 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

CODE OF THE CITY OF GREENFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 
As Amended through March 20, 2019 
Chapter 200 
ZONING 

Page ARTICLE I -Purpose and Authority 2 
§ 200-1.1. Purpose 2 § 200-1.2. Authority 2 

ARTICLE II – Definitions 2 
§ 200-2.1. Terms and Words 2 

ARTICLE III -Establishment of Districts 16 
§ 200-3.1. Districts 16 § 200-3.2. Zoning Map 16 § 200-3.3. Interpretation of District Boundaries 16 § 200-3.4. Lot Divided by a District Boundary 17 

ARTICLE IV -Use Regulations 17 
§ 200-4.1. Application of Use Regulations 17 § 200-4.2. Rural Residential District (RC) 18 § 200-4.3. Suburban Residential District (RB) 20 § 200-4.4. Urban Residential District (RA) 21 § 200-4.5. Semi-Residential District (SR) 22 § 200-4.6. Health Service District (H) 24 § 200-4.7. Central Commercial District (CC) 25 § 200-4.8. Limited Commercial District (LC) 27 § 200-4.9. General Commercial District (GC) 30 § 200-4.10. Office District (O) 33 § 200-4.11. General Industry District (GI) 34 § 200-4.12. Planned Industry District (P1) 37 § 200-4.13. Floodplain District (F) 39 § 200-4.14. Water Supply Protection District (WP) 43 § 200-4.15. (Reserved) 47 § 200-4.16. Corridor Overlay District (CO) 47 § 200-4.17. Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD) 49 

ARTICLE V -Dimensional Regulations 53 
§ 200-5.1. Application 53 § 200-5.2. Table of Dimensional Requirements 53 § 200-5.3. Additional Dimensional Provisions 53 

ARTICLE VI -General Regulations 54 
§ 200-6.1. Nonconforming Uses 54 § 200-6.2. Accessory Uses and Structures 55 § 200-6.3. Home Occupations 57 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 
Page § 200-6.4. (Reserved) 58 § 200-6.5. Parking Requirements 58 § 200-6.6. Loading Requirements 64 § 200-6.7. Sign Regulations 64 § 200-6.8. Performance Standards 71 § 200-6.9. Screening and Landscaping 74 § 200-6.10. Unregistered Motor Vehicles 75 § 200-6.11. Driveways and Entrances 75 

ARTICLE VII -Special Regulations 78 
§ 200-7.1. Open Space/Cluster Developments 78 § 200-7.2. Multifamily Dwellings 84 § 200-7.3. (Reserved) 85 § 200-7.4. Earth Removal 85 § 200-7.5. Bed-and-Breakfast/Tourist Home 85 § 200-7.6. Congregate Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped 86 § 200-7.7. (Reserved) 86 § 200-7.8. Flag Lots 86 § 200-7.9. Commercial Camping 88 § 200-7.10. Mixed Residential/Business Uses 88 § 200-7.11. Mobile Homes and Campers 89 § 200-7.12. Major Development Review 89 § 200-7.13. Adult Entertainment Uses 91 § 200-7.14. Wireless Communications Facilities 95 § 200-7.15. Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations 101 § 200-7.16. Non-Commercial Scale Solar Energy Installations 106 § 200-7.17. Marijuana Establishments 107 § 200-7.18. Accessory Dwelling Units 110 § 200-7.19. Biomass and Wood Burning Energy Systems 113 

ARTICLE VIII – Administration 120 
§ 200-8.1. Enforcement 120 § 200-8.2. Permits 121 § 200-8.3. Special Permits 121 § 200-8.4. Site Plan Review and Approval 123 § 200-8.5. Zoning Board of Appeals 127 § 200-8.6. Appeals 127 § 200-8.7. Variances 127 

ARTICLE IX -Applicability and Amendment 128 
§ 200-9.1. Applicability 128 § 200-9.2. Validity 128 § 200-9.3. Amendment 128 
APPENDIX 129 
Table of Uses 129 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 
Table of Dimensional Requirements  140  
Adult Entertainment Overlay Map  141  
Wellhead Map 1  143  
Wellhead Map 2  144  
Planned Unit Development Overlay Map  145  

STATUTORY AUTHORITY 
M.G.L.c 40a 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Establishment of Zoning Board of Appeals See Ch. 34. Water use — See Ch. 689. 
Building construction — See Ch. 39. Corridor design -See Ch. 808. 
Demolition Delay Ordinance – See Ch. 58 Major development review -See Ch. 842. 
Drainage -See Ch. 61. Site plans -See Ch. 865. 
Visual obstructions at intersections — See Ch. 80. Special permits — See Ch. 870. 
Signs -See Ch. 149. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 880. 
Soil removal -See Ch. 154. Zone changes -See Ch. 896. 
Wells -See Ch. 191. Zoning Board of Appeals regulations — See Ch. 1057. 
Sewer use — See Ch. 650. 

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 
ZONING ARTICLE I 

Purpose and Authority 
~ 200-1.1.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance shall be to achieve the objectives of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, as amended, which includes but is not limited to the following: to lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water supply, drainage, sewerage, school, parks, open space and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, including consideration of recommendations of the Master Plan, and the strategic planning goals and policies adopted by the Planning Board and the comprehensive plan of the regional planning agency; and to preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives. 
~ 200-1.2.  Authority. 
This ordinance is adopted under the authority provided by, and in accordance with, the provisions of MGL c. 40A, as amended. 
ARTICLE II 

Definitions 
~ 200-2.1.  Terms and words. 
A. 	In this ordinance the following terms, unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings: 
(1) 
Words used in the present tense include the future, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "structure" includes the word "building"; the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 

(2) 	
The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual. 


B. 	Other definitions shall be as follows: 
ABANDONMENT --The cessation of a nonconforming use or structure as indicated by the visible or otherwise indicated intention to discontinue a nonconforming use of a structure or lot, or the cessation of a nonconforming use or structure by its replacement with a conforming use or structure. Abandonment shall also include nonconforming businesses closed for business for a period of two (2) years or more. The nonconforming use shall not be re­established if the nonconforming use has either been abandoned or discontinued for a period of two (2) years or more. [Definition Amended by Town Council on October 20, 2010] 
ACCESSORY BUILDING --A subordinate building located on the same lot with the principal building or use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -2­
ZONING 

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, WITHIN – An Accessory Dwelling Unit that is within a single-family home is a self-contained housing unit incorporated within the single-family home that is clearly a subordinate part of the single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. [Definition Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED --An attached Accessory Dwelling Unit is a self-contained housing unit added as an addition to a single-family home that is clearly a subordinate part of the single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted. [Definition Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED --A detached Accessory Dwelling Unit is a self-contained housing unit that is located on the same lot as the structure of a single-family home and may be incorporated within a garage or carriage house or other accessory structure or as a stand-alone structure that is clearly subordinate to the primary use as a single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted. [Definition Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
ACCESSORY USE --A use customarily incidental to that of the principal building or use of the land, and located on the same lot as such principal building or use. 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES --Refer to definitions in ~ 200-7.13B of this ordinance. 
AGRICULTURE, FLORICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, VITICULTURE --"See "farm." 
ALTERATIONS --As applied to a building or structure; a change, rearrangement or reconstruction of the structural parts, or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one (1) location or position to another. 
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY --The following shall be considered alternative energy: 
. Combined heat and power 
. Electric and hydrogen powered vehicles and associated technologies including advanced batteries and 
recharging stations 
Notwithstanding the above, “renewable/alternative energy R&D facility” or “renewable/alternative energy manufacturing facility” as used in this Zoning Ordinance shall not mean or include uses for the generation of 

electricity, heat and/or the production of fuels. [Definition Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 
ANIMAL KENNEL OR HOSPITAL --A structure used for the harboring and/or care of more than three (3) dogs that are more than six (6) months old, whether commercially operated or not, except for farm dogs used for herding or protection of livestock from predators. 
ANTIQUE SHOP --An establishment for the sale of antiques, secondhand articles, or collectible items, including a permanent or on-going tag, yard, garage, or barn sale. 
BANK --The portion of the land surface which normally abuts and confines a water body. The upper boundary of a bank is the first observable break in slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is lower and as further defined in 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 10.54 (2), Wetlands Protection Act. 
BILLBOARD --A sign greater than nine (9) square feet in area and ten (10) feet in height which advertises products or services not sold or provided on the premises on which the sign is located. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -3­
ZONING 

BUILDING --An enclosed structure, either a principal building or shed, garage, stable, greenhouse, or other accessory building. 
BUILDING, DETACHED --A building completely surrounded by open space. 
BUILDING HEIGHT --The vertical distance from the mean finished grade of the ground adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof for flat or shed roofs, to the deckline for mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Not included are spires, cupolas, TV antennae, or other parts of structures which do not enclose potentially habitable floor space. 
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM --A solar energy system shall be considered to be building integrated if it is designed to be permanently mounted on a building or other structure. This definition applies to solar energy systems of any capacity that are designed to be operated in direct contact with a building. 

[Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
BUILDING LINE --The line of the face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL --A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located. 
BULK STORAGE --Exposed outside storage of large quantities of sand, lumber, coal or other materials, and storage of large quantities of liquids and gases in tanks except underground as an accessory use. 
CAMPER --A portable dwelling, eligible to be registered and insured for highway use, designed to be used for travel, recreational and vacation uses but not for permanent residence. Includes devices commonly called travel trailers, pickup campers, motorized campers, and tent trailers. 
CAMP GROUND --Premises used for campers, and/or tenting, where a fee is charged. Facilities operated on a seasonal basis for a continuing supervised recreational, and/or athletic program. 
CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA --All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, not excepted in 935 CMR 500.002: Cannabis or Marijuana (a) through (c) and whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant; clones of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin including tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in M.G.L. c. 94G, § 1; provided that cannabis shall not include: 
a) the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, 
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil, or 
cake made from the seeds of the plant or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination; 
b) hemp; or 
c) the weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis or marijuana to prepare topical or oral 

administrations, food, drink or other products. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
CLUB --Premises or building of a membership organization exclusively servicing members and their guests but not including any vending stands, merchandising, or commercial activities except as required generally for the membership and purpose of such club. Does not include sports clubs as elsewhere defined, or clubs or organizations whose chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -4­
ZONING 


COMMISSION (CCC) – The Cannabis Control Commission. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
COMMON DRIVEWAY --Any drive, right-of-way or private way which provides access to two (2) or more lots but which does not qualify as a street for determining frontage under MGL c. 40A and c. 41. 
CONGREGATE HOUSING --A building or buildings consisting of independent and semi-independent dwelling units with some shared facilities and services occupied by not more than two (2) residents per dwelling unit, at least one (1) of whom is fifty-five (55) years of age or older, or physically handicapped or disabled. 
CONTRACTOR'S YARD --Premises used by a contractor or subcontractor for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, or parking of wheeled equipment. 
COOKING FACILITIES --Any facility including but not limited to a hot plate, microwave oven, or portable oven, which permits the occupant of a building to prepare or serve hot meals in the building. 
CRAFT MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE – A Marijuana Cultivator comprised of residents of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts organized as a limited liability company or limited liability partnership under the laws of the Commonwealth, or an appropriate business structure as determined by the Commission, and that is licensed to cultivate, obtain, manufacture, process, package, and brand marijuana and marijuana products to deliver marijuana to Marijuana Establishments but not to consumers. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
DEMONSTRATED PEAK ENERGY DEMAND --The highest electric load measured on any day during the 24­month time period prior to submission of Solar Energy System permit application. [Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
DORMITORY --A structure containing sleeping rooms, dining rooms, and accessory facilities constructed or converted by an educational institution for the exclusive use of students. 
DWELLING --A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one (1) or more families or individuals. 
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY-A structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units, irrespective of ownership or tenure including apartments, efficiency apartments, and townhouses. 
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY --A detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit and having no party wall, or walls, in common with an adjacent dwelling. Also referred to as a single-family dwelling. 
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY --A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units. Also referred to as a duplex. 
DWELLING UNIT --A single unit providing independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities independent of any other unit. 
ERECT --To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon, or conduct any physical development of the premises required for a building. To excavate, fill, drain and the like preparation for building shall also be considered to erect. 
FAMILY --Any number of individuals related by blood or marriage or not more than four (4) individuals not so related, living and cooking together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit. Each additional unrelated individual over four (4) shall constitute another family. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -5­
ZONING 

FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME --A private residence that, on a regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children up to and through age twelve (12) or children under sixteen (16) years of age if such children have special needs, and receives for temporary custody and care for a limited number of hours, children of school age in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Office of Child Care Services of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; provided however, that the number of children under the age of sixteen (16) must not exceed ten (10). A family child care home shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefore. 
FARM --Premises used for the principal purpose of raising agricultural, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture products including the sale of produce, wine and dairy products, the majority of which were produced on the premises, but not including the raising of livestock or poultry on parcels of five (5) acres or less. 
FARM, POULTRY --Premises used in the production of poultry and/or eggs, having more than ten (10) poultry. 
FRONTAGE --See "lot frontage." 
GROSS FLOOR AREA --The total square footage of all the floor area in a building measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL --A substance or material whether in gaseous, liquid or solid form, or a combination thereof in a quantity or form that poses a substantial threat to human health or poses an unreasonable risk to health, safety, property or the environment when improperly managed, including all materials listed as hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency, under the Toxic Substance Control Act, Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or similar authority, the Department of Energy or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts pursuant to applicable General Laws. 
HEIGHT --See "building height." 
HEMP --The plant of the genus Cannabis or any part of the plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9­tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed 0.3% on a dry weight basis of any part of the plant of the genus Cannabis, or per volume or weight of cannabis or marijuana product, or the combined percent of delta-9­tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid in any part of the plant of the genus Cannabis regardless of moisture content. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
HOME OCCUPATION --An endeavor involving the production or provision of goods or services from a dwelling, which is conducted in a residence and does not change the residential character of the residence. 
HOST COMMUNITY – A municipality in which a Marijuana Establishment is located or in which an applicant has proposed locating an establishment. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
HOST COMMUNITY AGREEMENT – An agreement, pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 94G, Section 3(d), between a Marijuana Establishment and a municipality setting forth additional conditions for the operation of a Marijuana Establishment, including stipulations of responsibility between the parties and up to three (3) percent host agreement revenue sharing. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
HOTEL --A building or group of buildings providing accommodations on a transient basis for compensation, including an inn, motel, and motor lodge. Accommodations having individual cooking facilities shall be considered dwelling units. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -6­
ZONING 

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE --An impervious surface shall be considered one with a runoff coefficient of greater than ninety percent (90%). All structures, driveways, parking areas and paved surfaces exceeding a ninety-percent runoff coefficient shall be considered as impervious surfaces. 
JUNK --Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out, cast off or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Unregistered inoperative motor vehicles stored outdoors for more than six (6) months shall be considered junk. 
JUNK/SALVAGE YARD --The use of any area of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, for the storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk, scrap, or discarded materials, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobile(s) or other vehicle(s) or machinery or parts thereof. 
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION --A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC. [Definition Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 
LIGHTS, DECORATIVE --Lighting used as an advertising device as part of a sign or part of any structure or building. This shall not include commonly used seasonal lighting for holidays. 
LODGING/BOARDING HOUSE --A building containing more than two (2) rooms for semi-permanent residence [longer than one (1) week] not having cooking facilities in the rooms (microwave ovens excepted), not shared as a single housekeeping unit, and the occupants thereof not being within the second degree of kindred to the proprietor. Included in this definition are fraternity houses, sorority houses, and dormitories of educational institutions. It does not include dormitories of charitable or philanthropic institutions, convalescent or nursing homes, group residences licensed or regulated by agencies of the Commonwealth under § 71 of chapter 111, or rest homes so licensed. This also does not include apartments, motels, hotels, tourist homes, inns, bed & breakfasts, or congregate housing. 

[Amended – deleted definition and replaced in its entirety by Town Council February 15, 2006] 
LOT --A parcel of land. 
LOT AREA --The area of the lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area shall not have a slope of fifteen percent (15%) or more or contain wetlands as delineated in the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, ~ 40, and as defined in 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 10.00. 
LOT, BUILDING --A parcel of land in one (1) ownership meeting the dimensional requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such land is situated, and if occupied by a building or buildings, meeting the minimum yard requirements of that district, and defined on a plan or deed recorded in the Registry of Deeds. 
LOT, CORNER --A lot which has an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. (Also see ~ 200-5.3D.) (See Diagram 1) 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -7­
ZONING 


LOT FRONTAGE --That portion of a lot fronting upon a street to be measured continuously along one (1) street line between its side lines and their intersection with the street line. The required frontage dimension shall extend from the street line to the building line. Frontage shall provide both rights of access and potential vehicular access across that lot line to a potential building site. The portion of a lot fronting on a discontinued or unconstructed road does not constitute frontage. 
LOT LINES --The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR – An entity licensed to cultivate, process, and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.  A Craft Marijuana Cooperative is a type of Marijuana Cultivator. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT --A Marijuana Cultivator, Craft Marijuana Cooperative, Marijuana Product Manufacturer, Marijuana Retailer, Independent Testing Laboratory, Marijuana Research Facility, Marijuana Transporter, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, including a medical marijuana treatment center. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY – A laboratory that is licensed by the Commission and is: 
a) 	Accredited to the most current International Organization for Standardization 17025 by a third-party accrediting body that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is otherwise approved by the Commission; 
b) Independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment center or any licensee or Marijuana Establishment for which it conducts a test; and c) Qualified to test marijuana in compliance with regulations promulgated by the Commission pursuant to this chapter. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA MICRO-BUSINESS – A co-located Marijuana Establishment that can be either a Tier 1 Marijuana Cultivator or Product Manufacturer or both, in compliance with the operating procedures for each license. A Micro-
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -8­
ZONING 

business that is a Marijuana Product Manufacturer may purchase no more than 2,000 pounds of marijuana per year from other Marijuana Establishments. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA RESEARCH FACILITY --An entity licensed to engage in research projects by the Commission. A marijuana research facility may not sell marijuana it has cultivated. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA RETAILER – An entity licensed to purchase and transport cannabis or marijuana product from Marijuana Establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer this product to Marijuana Establishments and to consumers. Retailers are prohibited from delivering cannabis or marijuana products to consumers; and from offering cannabis or marijuana products for the purposes of on-site social consumption on the premises of a Marijuana Establishment. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER – An entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process, and package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments, and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA STANDARDS TESTING LABORATORY --An entity that would otherwise qualify to be an independent testing laboratory but instead performs blind tests to verify the results of an independent testing laboratory at the request of the Commission. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MARIJUANA TRANSPORTER --An entity, not otherwise licensed by the Commission, that is licensed to purchase, obtain, and possess cannabis or marijuana product solely for the purpose of transporting, temporary storage, sale and distribution to Marijuana Establishments, but not to consumers. Marijuana Transporters may be an Existing Licensee Transporter or Third Party Transporter. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MEDICAL CENTER/CLINIC --Office and/or examination rooms for providing diagnostic and outpatient medical or dental treatment and care for human patients and employing physicians, dentists, nurses and other medical support staff. May include laboratory and outpatient surgical facilities but shall not include overnight inpatient medical, dental or surgical care facilities. 
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY – A Medical Marijuana Treatment Center as defined in 105 CMR 

725.004 and regulated in 105 CMR 725.100. [Definition Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
MOBILE HOME --A dwelling unit built on a chassis, containing complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities, and designed to be installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for either temporary or permanent living quarters. 
MOBILE HOME PARK --Premises which have been planned and improved for the placement and residential occupancy (but not sale) of two (2) or more mobile homes. 
MOTEL --"See hotel." 
MULTIFAMILY --See "dwelling, multifamily." 
MUNICIPAL USE --Land or structure used for any operation by the City government, except as elsewhere more specifically defined. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -9­
ZONING 

NON-COMMERCIAL SCALE SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATIONS --Non-Commercial Scale Solar Energy Installations shall mean any Building-Integrated Solar Energy System or Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND OR STRUCTURES --Any structure or use of land lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or subsequent amendment which does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of this ordinance. 
NURSERY or GREENHOUSE --Premises used for the gainful purpose of propagation of trees, shrubs, vines, flowers, or other plants for transplanting, stock for grafting, or for cut flowers. 
NURSING, CONVALESCENT OR REST HOME --Any dwelling or building where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire. 
OCCUPANCY PERMIT --A permit authorizing the occupancy and the use of land and/or structures and buildings. 
ON-SITE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM --A solar energy system that is sized primarily to produce electricity to be consumed at that site of generation, up to 1.5 times the demonstrated peak energy demand. On-Site Solar Energy Systems may or may not be connected to an electric power utility. [Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
OPEN SPACE --Ground space other than that occupied by structures, walkways, drives, parking or other impervious surface. Required yard setbacks may be included as open space if the area meets the above requirements. 
PERSONAL AND CONSUMER SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT --Barbershop, beauty parlor, pet grooming, laundromat, tailoring, shoe cleaning/repair, health club, and other similar places of business but not including medical and dental offices or veterinarians. 
PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION --An endowed or charitably supported nonprofit religious or nonsectarian activity maintained for public or semipublic use. 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT --A parcel of land consisting of one (1) or more contiguous lots to be considered as a whole for development purposes built in accordance with an approved site plan from the Planning Board which shall include provision for long-term maintenance of utilities, common driveways, landscaping and other site improvements by current and future owners. 
PRINTING --Premises used for newspaper, periodical and book printing; commercial printing, map printing, but not including photocopying. 
PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT SITES --Those properties designated as such by majority vote of the City Council and subsequent approval by the Interagency Permitting Board, established by G.L. c. 23A, Section 62, all pursuant 
to G.L. c. 43D, identified in the Assessor’s records as Map 26, Parcel 36A and Map 51, Parcels 10 through 18 and 

20 through 23. [Definition Added by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY --An area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, streets, bike paths, alleys, and walkways. A public right-of-way is a right-of-way that is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency. In no case shall a right-of-way be construed to mean an easement. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -10 ­
ZONING 

RADIO TRANSMISSION --Premises used for the commercial transmission of radio or television, not including studios. 
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY --The maximum rated output of electric power production of the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC). [Definition Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 
RECREATION, INDOOR --Bowling alley, pool or billiards hall, or other recreation carried on wholly in an enclosed building but not including arcades. 
RECREATION, OUTDOOR --Drive-in theater, golf course/golf driving range, bathing beach, sports club, horseback riding stables, boathouse, game preserve, marina or other commercial recreation carried on in whole or in part outdoors except those activities more specifically designated elsewhere in this ordinance. 
RENEWABLE ENERGY --The following shall be considered renewable energy: 
. Solar – photovoltaic (PV) and thermal 
. Wind 
. Biomass power conversion or thermal technologies, including R&D related to, or the manufacture of wood 
pellets 
. Ultra low emissions high efficiency wood pellet boilers and furnaces 
. Low Impact Hydro – electric and kinetic 
. Ocean thermal, wave or tidal 
. Geothermal 
. Landfill gas 
. Fuels cells that use renewable energy 
. Advanced biofuels 
Notwithstanding the above, “renewable/alternative energy R&D facility” or “renewable/alternative energy manufacturing facility” as used in this Zoning Ordinance shall not mean or include uses for the generation of electricity, heat and/or the production of fuels. [Definition Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 
RESTAURANT --Premises the principal use of which is the sale of food or drink ready for consumption without further preparation. 
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH --A restaurant where food or drinks are usually served to or consumed by patrons while they are seated in vehicles. 
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT --A restaurant where food or drinks are primarily served for consumption off the premises without a drive-in or drive-through service. 
RETAIL BUSINESS --Premises used for the retail sale of goods for personal or business use, and also premises used for personal, business or household services. Does not include retail businesses elsewhere defined or permanent or on-going tag, yard, garage, or barn sales. 
RIDGELINE --The line forming the upper edge or crest of a hill or mountain. 
ROADSIDE FARM STAND --A structure of a semipermanent or temporary type located in a district in which agricultural uses are allowed, from which raw produce is offered for sale to the public. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -11 ­
ZONING 

SCHOOL, PRIVATE --An educational facility not exempt from MGL c. 40A, ~ 3, including private primary and secondary schools, colleges, nursery school, kindergarten, or child day-care facility. 
SHARED HOUSING --A dwelling unit shared by more than four (4) but a maximum of six (6) residents, whether or not related to one another, each of whom is fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
SIGN: 
(1) 
Any device designed to direct, inform, advertise, announce or attract attention. Any exterior building surfaces which are internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights are considered signs, as are advertising devices attached to vehicles, trailers, or other movable objects if regularly located for display. 

(2) 
The following, however, shall not be considered "signs" within the context of this ordinance: 

(a) 
Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion; 

(b) 
Legal notices, or informational devices erected or required by public agencies; 

(c) 
Standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form the name, type, and price of gasoline; 

(d) 
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings. However, letters, registered trademarks, moving parts, and parts internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights shall be considered signs, even if an integral part of the building; 

(e) 
On-premise devices guiding and directing traffic, parking, and public services (i.e., rest rooms, telephones), not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, and bearing no advertising matter. 




SIGN, AREA OF: 
(1) 
The area of any sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed including the frame around the sign but not any supporting structure or brace. 

(2) 
For signs consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building wall or window, or for signs in which the letters, symbols, etc. extend beyond the frame, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols. 


SIGN, FREESTANDING --A self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer-type signs. 
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES --Any sign in which the subject matter does not relate exclusively to the products or services sold or provided on the premises. 
SIGN, WALL --Any sign which is painted on, incorporated into, or affixed parallel to the wall of a building. 
SMALL-SCALE, GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM --A solar energy system that has its solar panels structurally mounted on the ground and occupies a footprint of 2,500 square feet of area or less. [Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -12 ­
ZONING 

SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM --All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of light to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and access roads. [Definition Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
SPORTS CLUB --A club whose primary purposes are conservation, hunting, or fishing. 
STREET --A public way, a private way shown on a plan approved under the Subdivision Control Law,1 or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the abutting land or land to be served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. 
STREET LINE --The line between the lot and the street layout. 
STRUCTURE --Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something located on the ground except a boundary wall or fence, or a road and any fixtures appurtenant thereto. 
TATTOO PARLOR/BODY PIERCING STUDIO [Added 3-21-2001, approved by AG 5-23-2001] --An establishment whose principal or accessory business activity is the practice of one or more of the following: 
(1) 
Placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substance that results in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin; 

(2) 
Creation of an opening in the body of a person other than the ear lobe, for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration; 

(3) 
Altering the skin of a person through scarification or branding. 


TOXIC MATERIAL or TOXIC WASTE --A substance or material, whether in gaseous, liquid or solid form, or a combination thereof in a quantity or form that significantly contributes to serious illness or death, or that poses a substantial threat to human health, or poses an unreasonable risk to health when improperly managed, including all materials listed as toxic by the Environmental Protection Agency, under the Toxic Substance Control Act, Federal Resource Conservation Recovery Act or similar authority, or by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts pursuant to applicable General Laws. 
TRANSPORT TERMINAL --Premises for the parking and/or serving of three (3) or more vehicles with six (6) or more wheels or any number of vehicles of over two-ton load capacity, except agricultural vehicles, campers, contractors yards, and the parking or serving of the above-listed vehicles permitted as an accessory use to a principal use allowed by right or special permit. 
TRIANGLE OF CLEAR SIGHT --The area of a corner lot formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at a point which is twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection measured along said street lines. Also, the areas of a lot with a driveway serving five (5) or more vehicles formed by the street line, the edge of driveway surface, and a straight line joining said street line and edge of driveway surface at a point which is twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection measured along said street line and edge of driveway. All drives serving five (5) or more vehicles shall have two (2) triangles of clear sight. (See Diagram 2) 
Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, ~ 81K et seq. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -13 ­
ZONING 


USE --The specific purpose for which land or building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
WAREHOUSE --Indoor storage of goods for distribution, but not for sale on the premises. 
WHOLESALING --Sale of commodities in quantity for resale or further processing. 
WILDLIFE CORRIDOR --A wildlife corridor is a link of wildlife habitat, generally native vegetation, which joins two or more larger areas of similar wildlife habitat. Corridors are critical for the maintenance of ecological processes including allowing for the movement of animals and the continuation of viable populations. 
YARD --An open area on the same lot with a building or other structure located between the building and the lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground up except as may be allowed by specific provisions of this ordinance including ingress and egress as required by the Building Code. 
YARD, FRONT --The portion of a lot extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the required front setback line. 
YARD, REAR --The portion of a lot extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear minimum required rear setback line. 
YARD, SIDE --The portion of a lot situated between the side line of the lot and the minimum required side setback line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -14 ­
ZONING 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -15 ­
ZONING 
ARTICLE III 


Establishment of Districts 
~ 200-3.1.  Districts. 
The City of Greenfield is hereby divided into the following districts: 
Rural Residential District RC Suburban Residential District RB Urban Residential District RA Semi-Residential District SR Health Service District H Central Commercial District CC Limited Commercial District LC General Commercial District GC Office District O General Industry District GI Planned Industry District PI Floodplain District F Water Supply Protection District WP Corridor Overlay District CO 
~ 200-3.2.  Zoning Map. 
The location and boundaries of each of the districts are hereby established as shown on the map accompanying this ordinance and on file with the Clerk of the City of Greenfield, entitled "Zoning Map" dated October 18, 1989, as amended. This map and all explanatory materials thereon are hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
~ 200-3.3.  Interpretation of district boundaries. 
A. 	Where the boundary lines are shown on the maps listed in ~ 200-3.2 above as approximately following the street lines of public and private ways, railways or other rights-of-way, the center lines of such ways shall be the boundary lines. 
B. 	Where the boundary lines are shown approximately following the location of property lines by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines. 
C. 	Boundary lines located outside of street lines and shown approximately parallel thereto are parallel to such street lines, and dimensions shown in figures between boundary lines and street lines are the distance in feet of the boundary line from the street line such distances being measured at right angles or radial to such street lines unless otherwise indicated. 
D. 	In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this section, the location of boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines upon said map by the use of identifications as shown on the map, or by the scale of the map. 
E. 	Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a district boundary line, the location of such line shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings, provided, however, that any person aggrieved by his decision may appeal to the Board of Appeals, as provided in Section 200-8.6 of this Ordinance. [Subsection E added by Town Council July 15, 2009] 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -16 ­
ZONING 

~ 200-3.4.  Lot divided by a district boundary. 
When a district boundary divides a lot of record, the use of land and the requirements of the least restricted district may extend fifty (50) feet into the more restricted district. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
ARTICLE IV 

Use Regulations ~ 200-4.1.  Application of use regulations. 
A. Permitted use only. 
(1) 
No building or structure shall be erected or used and no premises shall be used except as set forth in Article IV and in all other sections of this ordinance. 

(2) 
Not more than one (1) principal building shall be erected on a lot unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 


B. Statutory exemptions. 
(1) 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit, regulate or restrict the use of land or structure in any district for religious purposes or for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a non­profit educational corporation, however, such land or structures may be subject to regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements in accordance with this ordinance. 

(2) 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit, unreasonably regulate or require a special permit for agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture, provided that such uses are located on parcels containing at least five (5) acres. 


C. Uses permitted in all districts. 
(1) 
Farms, forestry, conservation area. 

(2) 
Educational or religious uses exempt from the Zoning Act. 

(3) 
Municipal uses. 

(4) 
Public park, playground or other public recreational facility except in the Planned Industry (PI) District. 

(5) 
Home occupations in accordance with ~ 200-6.3 of this ordinance (some uses require a special permit). 


D. Uses permitted in all districts by special permit. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -17 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
Activities accessory to activities otherwise permitted within the district as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific activities permitted as a matter of right, subject to the provisions of ~ 200-8.3 for a special permit granted by the Board of Appeals. 

(2) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(3) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(4) 	
Uses not elsewhere classified. 


E. 	Uses prohibited in all districts. 
(1) 	
Privately owned residential wastewater treatment plants. 

(2) 	
Waste-to-energy systems. 

(3) 	
Industrial biomass energy systems. 

(4) 	
Stick wood boilers. 


F. 	Use Regulation Schedule. Where an activity might be classified under more than one (1) of the following uses the more restrictive classification shall determine permissibility. 
~ 200-4.2.  Rural Residential District (RC). 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Rural Residential District is to provide areas for low density residential development and for agricultural uses. 
B. 	Uses permitted. 
(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery, or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(5) 	
Open space/cluster development in accordance with ~ 200-7.1. 

(6) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(7) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 	Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by 
Town Council on July 15, 2009] City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -18 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have not been produced on the premises. 

(3) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(4) 	
Family day-care home. 

(5) 	
Dormitories. 

(6) 	
Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home in accordance with ~ 200-7.5. 

(7) 	
Cemetery or crematory. 

(8) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(9) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use including towers. 

(10) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(11) 	
Outdoor recreation. 

(12) 	
Commercial camping. 

(13) 	
Animal kennel or hospital. 

(14) 
Processing of earth authorized for removal in accordance with the City of Greenfield Soil Removal Ordinance.2 

(15) 	
Shared housing. 


(16) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(17) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(18) 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(19) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 

(20) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 


(21) 	
Marijuana cultivator limited to Tier 1 (5,000 square feet) pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(22) 	
Craft marijuana cooperative pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Soil Removal. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -19 ­
ZONING 

~ 200-4.3.  Suburban Residential District (RB). 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Suburban Residential District is to provide areas for medium-density residential development. 
B. 	Uses permitted. 
(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(5) 	
Open space/cluster development in accordance with ~ 200-7.1. 


(6) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(7) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 


C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have not been produced on the premises. 

(3) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(4) 	
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped in accordance with ~ 200-7.6. 

(5) 	
Dormitories. 

(6) 	
Shared housing. 

(7) 	
Nursing home, convalescent home, rest home. 

(8) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(9) 	
Family day-care home. 

(10) 	
Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home in accordance with ~ 200-7.5. 

(11) 	
Cemetery or crematory. 

(12) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -20 ­
ZONING 

(13) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use excluding towers. 

(14) 	
Hospital. 

(15) 	
Outdoor recreation. 

(16) 	
Animal kennel or hospital. 


(17) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(18) 	
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(19) 	
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(20) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
(21) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] ~ 200-4.4.  Urban Residential District (RA). 

A. 	
Purpose. The purpose of the Urban Residential District is to provide areas for high-density residential development. 

B. 	
Uses permitted. 

(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(5) 	
Open space/cluster development in accordance with ~ 200-7.1. 

(6) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(7) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 

C. 	
Uses permitted by special permit. 

(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have not been produced on the premises. 

(3) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -21 ­
ZONING 
(4) 	
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped in accordance with ~ 200-7.6. 

(5) 	
Nursing home, convalescent home, rest home. 

(6) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(7) 	
Family day-care home. 

(8) 	
Shared housing. 

(9) 	
Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home in accordance with ~ 200-7.5. 

(10) 	
Cemetery. 

(11) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(12) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use excluding towers. 

(13) 	
Funeral home. 

(14) 	
Hospital. 

(15) 	
Municipal parking lot or garage. 


(16) 	
Lodging/boarding house. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(17) 	
Animal kennel or hospital. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(18) 	
Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 


(19) 	Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
(20) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
(21) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] ~ 200-4.5.  Semi-Residential District (SR). 

A. 	
Purpose. The purpose of the Semi-Residential District is to provide a mixed use area as a transition between the Central Commercial District and the residential districts. 

B. 	
Uses permitted. 

(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -22 ­
ZONING 

(4) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(5) 	
Business and professional offices requiring ten (10) or fewer parking spaces. 

(6) 	
Family day-care home. 

(7) 	
Philanthropic or charitable institution. 

(8) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(9) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Private club or membership organization. 

(3) 
Greenhouse nursery or farm stand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have not been produced on the premises. 

(4) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(5) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(6) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use excluding towers. 

(7) 	
Funeral home. 

(8) 	
Crematory. 

(9) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(10) 	
Lodging/boarding/rooming house. 

(11) 	
Shared housing. 

(12) 	
Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home in accordance with ~ 200-7.5. 

(13) 	
Mixed residential/office uses in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 

(14) 	
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped in accordance with ~ 200-7.6. 


(15) 	
Animal kennel or hospital. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(16) 	
Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 


(17) 	Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -23 ­
ZONING 
(18) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
(19) Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] ~ 200-4.6.  Health Service District (H). 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Health Service District is to provide an area for medical and medical-related uses and for residences. 
B. 	Uses permitted. 
(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(5) 	
Hospital. 

(6) 	
Family day-care home. 

(7) 	
Nursing home, convalescent home, or rest home. 

(8) 	
Business and professional offices related to health services. 

(9) 	
Medical center/clinic including accessory research. 

(10) 	
Cafeterias for employees, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(11) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(12) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Funeral home. 

(3) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(4) 	
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped in accordance with ~ 200-7.6. 

(5) 	
Dormitories in conjunction with a medical training facility only. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -24 ­
ZONING 

(6) 	
Shared housing. 

(7) 	
Medical research and development. 

(8) 	
Crematory. 

(9) 	
Mixed residential/office use in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 

(10) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 


(11) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(12) 	
Registered Marijuana Dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(13) 	
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 

(14) 	
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(15) 	
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


(16) 
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] ~ 200-4.7.  Central Commercial District (CC). 

A. 	
Purpose. The purpose of the Central Commercial District is to provide a downtown area with the range of business sales and services which generally constitute a central business district. 

B. 	
Uses permitted. 

(1) 	
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand. 

(2) 	
Municipal or commercial parking lot or garage. 

(3) 	
Bus or railroad passenger terminal or taxi dispatch. 

(4) 	
Philanthropic or charitable institution. 

(5) 	
Private club or membership organization. 

(6) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(7) 	
Mixed residential/business use in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 

(8) 	
Photocopying and data processing. 

(9) 	
Retail establishment. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -25 ­
ZONING 

(10) 	
Business and professional offices. 

(11) 	
Personal and consumer service establishments. 

(12) 	
Service and repair shops for appliances, small equipment, business and consumer products. 

(13) 	
Restaurant, bar or lounge for serving food or drinks primarily within the building. 

(14) 	
Take-out food restaurant. 

(15) 	
Theatre. 

(16) 	
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(17) 	
Garden center. 

(18) 
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2., Subsections B (1,4-9). [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(19) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(20) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 	
Farms on parcels of less than five (5) acres with livestock or poultry. 

(2) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use excluding towers. 

(3) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(4) 	
Funeral home. 

(5) 	
Hotel, motel, inn. 

(6) 	
Indoor recreation. 

(7) 	
Medical center/clinic including accessory research. 

(8) 	
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(9) 	
Wholesale laundry or dry-cleaning plant. 

(10) 	
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(11) 	
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped in accordance with ~ 200-7.6. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -26 ­
ZONING 

(12) 
Lodging/boarding/rooming house only as a mixed residential/business use in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 

(13) 	
Shared housing. 

(14) 	
Research and development facilities. 

(15) 	
Conference center. 

(16) 	
Trade shop including carpenter, builder, electrician, plumber, landscaper or similar trade with indoor storage of tools, supplies, and equipment. 

(17) 	
Sale, leasing, repair, and servicing of new and used motor vehicles with a Class 1 Motor Vehicle license issued by the City of Greenfield. 


(18) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(19) 	
Registered Marijuana Dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(20) 	
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 

(21) 	
Marijuana retailer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(22) 	
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(23) 	
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


(24) 
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] ~ 200-4.8.  Limited Commercial District (LC). 

A. 	
Purpose. The purpose of the Limited Commercial District is to provide areas for retail business serving the nonpedestrian and for automotive sales and services. 

B. 	
Uses permitted. 

(1) 	
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand. 

(2) 	
Single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Two-family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Municipal or commercial parking lot or garage. 

(5) 	
Bus or railroad passenger terminal or taxi dispatch. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -27 ­
ZONING 

(6) 
Philanthropic or charitable institution. 

(7) 
Private club or membership organization. 

(8) 
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(9) 
Retail establishment. 

(10) 
Business and professional offices. 

(11) 
Personal and consumer service establishments. 

(12) 
Service and repair shops for appliances, small equipment, business and consumer products. 

(13) 
Restaurant, bar, or lounge for serving food or drinks primarily within the building. 

(14) 
Take-out restaurant. 

(15) 
Drive-in or drive-through restaurant. 

(16) 
Car wash (on public sewer only). 

(17) 
Hotel, motel or inn. 

(18) 
Funeral home. 

(19) 
Crematory. 

(20) 
Sale or leasing of motor vehicles, boats, farm implements, campers or other vehicles or heavy equipment. 

(21) 
Photocopying and data processing. 

(22) 
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(23) 
Construction supply establishment. 

(24) 
Theatre. 

(25) 
Conference center. 

(26) 
Self storage. 

(27) 
Trade shop including carpenter, builder, electrician, plumber, landscaper or similar trade with indoor storage of tools, supplies, and equipment. 

(28) 
Garden center. 

(29) 
Medical center/clinic including accessory research. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -28 ­
ZONING 

(30) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(31) 	
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


(32) 	Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(3) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use excluding towers. 

(4) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(5) 	
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(6) 	
Bed-and-breakfast or tourist home. 

(7) 	
Automotive repair and servicing shop. 

(8) 	
Gas station. 

(9) 	
Indoor recreation. 

(10) 	
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(11) 	
Wholesale laundry or dry-cleaning plant. 

(12) 	
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(13) 	
Research and development facilities. 

(14) 	
Mixed residential/business uses in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 


(15) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(16) 	
Registered Marijuana Dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(17) 
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 


(18) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 

(19) 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. [Added by Town Council on August 17, 2016] 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -29 ­
ZONING 
(20) 	
Marijuana retailer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(21) 	
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(22) 	
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(23) 	
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


(24) 
Marijuana product manufacturer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] ~ 200-4.9.  General Commercial District (GC). 

A. 	
Purpose. The purpose of the General Commercial District is to provide areas for mixed retail, commercial and industrial uses. 

B. 	
Uses permitted. 

(1) 	
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand. 

(2) 	
Municipal or commercial parking lot or garage. 

(3) 	
Bus or railroad passenger terminal or taxi dispatch. 

(4) 	
Philanthropic or charitable institution. 

(5) 	
Private club or membership organization. 

(6) 	
Home occupation in accordance with ~ 200-6.3. 

(7) 	
Retail establishment. 

(8) 	
Business and professional offices. 

(9) 	
Personal and consumer service establishments. 

(10) 	
Service and repair shops for appliances, small equipment, business and consumer products. 

(11) 	
Restaurant, bar, or lounge for serving food or drinks primarily within the building. 

(12) 	
Take-out restaurant. 

(13) 	
Drive-in or drive-through restaurant. 

(17) 	
Car wash (on public sewer only). 

(15) 	
Hotel, motel or inn. 

(16) 	
Funeral home. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -30 ­
ZONING 

(17) 
Crematory. 

(18) 
Sale or leasing of motor vehicles, boats, farm implements, campers or other vehicles or heavy equipment. 

(19) 
Construction supply establishment. 

(20) 
Theatre. 

(21) 
Photocopying and data processing. 

(22) 
Conference center. 

(23) 
Self storage. 

(24) 
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers, and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(25) 
Trade shop including carpenter, builder, electrician, plumber, landscaper or similar trade with indoor storage of tools, supplies, and equipment. 

(26) 
Garden center. 

(27) 
Medical center or clinic including accessory research. 

(28) 
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(29) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 


C. Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 
Public or private utility or substation. 

(3) 
Radio, television transmission or other communications use including towers. 

(4) 
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(5) 
Multifamily dwelling in accordance with ~ 200-7.2. 

(6) 
Single-family dwelling. 

(7) 
Two-family dwelling. 

(8) 
Lodging/boarding/rooming house. 

(9) 
Dormitories. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -31 ­
ZONING 

(10) 	
Bed-and-breakfast or tourist home. 

(11) 	
Mixed residential/business uses in accordance with ~ 200-7.10. 

(12) 	
Automotive repair and servicing shop. 

(13) 	
Gas station. 

(14) 	
Bulk storage and/or sale of fuel or other fluid other than waste. 

(15) 	
Indoor recreation. 

(16) 	
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(17) 	
Wholesale laundry or dry cleaning plant. 

(18) 	
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(19) 	
Waste hauling establishment. 

(20) 	
Warehouse or freight transport terminal. 

(21) 	
Assembly, bottling, packaging or finishing plant in an enclosed building. 

(22) 	
Research and development facilities. 

(23) 	
Contractor's yard or other open storage of raw materials, finished goods, or equipment. 

(24) 	
Animal kennel or hospital. 

(25) 	
Light industry, manufacturing or processing plant which will not be offensive, noxious, or hazardous. 


(26) 	Assisted living facility. [Added by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(27) 	
Renewable/alternative energy R&D facility. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 

(28) 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(29) 
Registered Marijuana Dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(30) 
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 

(31) 	
Marijuana cultivator (indoor) pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(32) 	
Craft marijuana cooperative pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -32 ­
ZONING 
(33) 
Marijuana retailer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(34) 
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(35) 
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(36) 
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


(37) 
Marijuana product manufacturer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] ~ 200-4.10.  Office District (O). 

A. 
Purpose. The purpose of the Office District is to provide areas for office use and office parks. 

B. 
Uses permitted. 

(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 
Home occupation. 

(3) 
Philanthropic institution. 

(4) 
Business or professional office. 

(5) 
Office park. 

(6) 
Photocopying and data processing. 

(7) 
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(8) 
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(9) 
Self storage. 

(10) 
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(11) 
Medical Center/Clinic including accessory research. [Amended by the Town Council on November 9, 2005] 

(12) 
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(13) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 



C. 
Uses permitted by special permit. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -33 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(3) 	
Radio, television transmission and other communications use excluding towers. 

(4) 	
Research and development facilities. 

(5) 	
Assembly, bottling, packaging, or finishing plant in an enclosed building. 

(6) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(7) 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(8) 
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 

(9) 	
Light industry, manufacturing, or processing plant. [Added by Town Council on May 18, 2016] 

(10) 	
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(11) 
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(12) 
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


D. 	Design requirements. 
(1) 
A landscaped buffer strip at least fifteen (15) feet wide, continuous except for approach driveways, shall be established adjacent to any public road to visually separate parking and other uses from the road. The buffer strip shall be planted with a combination of grass or other herbaceous plants, shrubs at least three (3) feet in height upon maturity, and shade trees (three-inch diameter) not farther apart than forty (40) feet on center. Plantings shall be set back from points of ingress and egress so as not to impair visibility. 

(2) 
Uses shall be screened from view from adjacent residential property by a continuous border of dense plantings or by berms or fences complemented by plantings and maintained to provide an effective visual screen in accordance with ~ 200-6.9B of this ordinance. 

(3) 
Any outdoor storage or utility area shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and streets in the manner as in Subsection D(2) above. Any nuisance or safety hazard shall be screened to prevent unauthorized access to the area. 


~ 200-4.11.  General Industry District (GI). 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the General Industry District is to provide areas for light industry and manufacturing which do not intrude on residential areas. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -34 ­
ZONING 

B. Uses permitted. 
(1) 
Greenhouse, nursery or farmstand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises. 

(2) 
Home occupation. 

(3) 
Philanthropic institution. 

(4) 
Photocopying and data processing. 

(5) 
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(6) 
Business and professional offices. 

(7) 
Office park. 

(8) 
Research and development facilities. 

(9) 
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(10) 
Assembly, bottling, packaging, or finishing plant in an enclosed building. 

(11) 
Warehouse or freight transport terminal. 

(12) 
Trucking firm (on public sewer only). 

(13) 
Construction supply establishment. 

(14) 
Contractor's yard or other open storage of raw materials, finished goods, or equipment. 

(15) 
Light industry, manufacturing or processing plant which will not be offensive, injurious, noxious, or hazardous. 

(16) 
Trade shop including carpenter, builder, electrician, plumber, landscaper or similar trade with indoor storage of tools, supplies, and equipment. 

(17) 
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(18) 
Self storage. 

(19) 
Medical center/clinic including accessory research. 

(20) 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 

(21) 
Renewable/alternative energy R&D facility. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 

(22) 
Renewable/alternative energy manufacturing facility. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -35 ­
ZONING 

(23) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(24) 	
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(25) 
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 


C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Radio, television transmission and other communications use including towers. 

(3) 	
Public or private utility or substation. 

(4) 	
Power plant. 

(5) 	
Automotive repair and servicing shop. 

(6) 	
Salvage/junkyard. 

(7) 
Processing of earth authorized for removal in accordance with the Town of Greenfield Soil Removal Ordinance.3 

(8) 	
Waste hauling establishment. 

(9) 	
Retail sales incidental to a permitted use or use allowed by special permit. 

(10) 	
Private school not exempt from zoning under ~ 200-4.1B(1). 

(11) 	
Wholesale laundry and dry-cleaning plant. 

(12) 	
Hotel, motel inn. 

(13) 	
Conference center. 

(14) 	
Bulk storage and/or sale of fuel or other fluid other than waste. 

(15) 	
Personal and consumer service establishment. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(16) 	
Registered Marijuana Dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on November 20, 2013] 

(17) 	
Private club or membership organization. [Added by Town Council on August 19, 2015] 

(18) 	
Marijuana cultivator (indoor) pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Soil Removal. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -36 ­
ZONING 

(19) 	
Craft marijuana cooperative pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(20) 	
Marijuana product manufacturer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


~ 200-4.12.  Planned Industry District (PI). 
[Section D (5) added by Town Council on October 16, 2002] 
[Section C (9) added by Town Council on March 21, 2007] 

A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Industry District is to promote the industrial development of the City by providing a zone for park-like development of industry which is protected from commercial and residential encroachment while minimizing potential adverse environmental impacts. 
B. 	Uses permitted. 
(1) 	
Home occupation. 

(2) 	
Business and professional offices. 

(3) 	
Office park. 

(4) 	
Photocopying and data processing. 

(5) 	
Newspaper, printing, publishing. 

(6) 	
Research and development facility. 

(7) 	
Wholesale trade and distribution. 

(8) 	
Trucking firm (on public sewer only). 

(9) 	
Warehouse or freight transport terminal. 

(10) 	
Assembly, bottling, packaging or finishing plant in an enclosed building. 

(11) 	
Light industry, manufacturing or processing plant. 

(12) 	
Retail sales which are incidental to a permitted use or use allowed by special permit. 

(13) 	
Private/public utility or substation in an enclosed building. 

(14) 	
Philanthropic or charitable institution. 

(15) 
Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use. 

(16) 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 

(17) 	
Renewable/alternative energy R&D facility. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -37 ­
ZONING 

(18) 	
Renewable/alternative energy manufacturing facility. [Added by Town Council on March 17, 2010] 

(19) 	
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(20) 
Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System. [Added by Town Council on December 19, 2012] 

(21) 
Commercial biomass energy system in accordance with ~ 200-7.19. [Added by Town Council on June 17, 2015] 


C. 	Uses permitted by special permit. 
(1) 
Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres. [Amended by Town Council on July 15, 2009] 

(2) 	
Private industrial or trade school. 

(3) 	
Municipal or commercial parking lot or garage. 

(4) 	
Radio, television transmission or other communications use including towers. 

(5) 	
Power plant. 

(6) 	
Service and repair shops for appliances, small equipment, business and consumer products. 

(7) 	
Wholesale laundry or dry-cleaning plant. 

(8) 	
Open storage of raw materials, finished goods, or equipment. 

(9) 	
Bulk storage and/or sale of fuel or other fluid other than waste. 

(10) 	
Marijuana cultivator (indoor) pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(11) 	
Craft marijuana cooperative pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(12) 	
Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(13) 	
Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(14) 	
Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 

(15) 	
Marijuana product manufacturer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17. [Added by Town Council on June 20, 2018] 


D. 	Design requirements. 
(1) A landscaped buffer strip at least fifteen (15) feet wide, continuous except for approved driveways, shall be established adjacent to any public road to visually separate parking and other uses from the road. The buffer strip shall be planted with a combination of grass or other herbaceous plants, shrubs at least 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -38 ­
ZONING 

three (3) feet in height upon maturity, and shade trees (three-inch diameter) forty (40) feet on center. Plantings shall be set back from points of ingress and egress so as not to impair visibility. 
(2) 
Uses shall be screened from view from adjacent residential property by a continuous border of dense plantings or by berms or fences complemented by plantings and maintained to provide an effective visual screen in accordance with ~ 200-6.9B of this ordinance. 

(3) 
Any outdoor storage or utility area shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and streets in the same manner as in Subsection D(2) above. Any nuisance or safety hazard shall be screened to prevent unauthorized access to the area. 

(4) 
All uses shall conform to the parking regulations, ~ 200-6.5, loading requirements, ~ 200-6.6, and performance standards, ~ 200-6.8, of this ordinance. 

(5) 	
More than one principle building/use is allowed on a lot. At least 50 feet of separation is required 


between buildings.” 
~ 200-4.13.  Floodplain District (F). 
A. 	Purpose. The purposes of the Floodplain District are to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, to protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic flooding, to reduce the public costs resulting from flood damage, to preserve the natural flood control characteristics and the flood storage capacity of the floodplain, and to preserve and maintain the ground water table and ground water recharge areas within the floodplain. 
B. 	District delineation. 
(1) 
The general boundaries of the Floodplain District are shown on the City of Greenfield Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated July 2, 1980, as Zones A, A 1-30 to indicate the 100-year floodplain. The exact boundaries of the district are defined by the 100-year water surface elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Flood Profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study, dated January 1980. The floodway boundaries are delineated on the City of Greenfield Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM), dated July 2, 1980, and further defined by the Floodway Data Tables contained in the Flood Insurance Study. These two (2) sets of maps as well as the accompanying Study are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the City Clerk, Planning Board, Conservation Commission, and Inspector of Buildings. 

(2) 
The boundaries as shown on the above referenced maps shall be presumed accurate. This presumption may be overcome only by credible evidence using drainage calculations which shall be: 

(a) 
Based upon a design storm of seven (7) inches of precipitation in twenty-four (24) hours (i.e., a Type II Rainfall, as defined by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service); 

(b) 
Based upon the standard methodologies set forth in U.S. Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and Section 4 of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, National Engineering Hydrology Handbook; and 

(c) 
Prepared by a registered professional engineer or other professional competent in such matters. Within Zone A, where the 100-year flood elevation is not provided on the FIRM, the boundary of the 100-year floodplain shall be the maximum lateral extent of floodwater which has 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -39 ­
ZONING 

been observed or recorded. The Zoning Board of Appeals may also require the applicant to 
determine the boundary using the above referenced drainage calculations. 
(3) Base Flood Elevation Data.  Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones. 
[Subsection 3 added by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
C. 	Notification of Watercourse Alteration. In a riverine situation, the Inspector of Buildings shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1) 	
Adjacent Communities 

(2) 	
Bordering States (optional) 

(3) 
NFIP State Coordinator 
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation 
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700 
Boston, MA  02114-2104 


(4) 
NFIP Program Specialist 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I 
99 High Street, 6th Floor 
Boston, MA  02110 [Subsection C added by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 



D. 	Use regulations. The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. The requirements of the underlying district shall govern subject to the provisions of this section. All development, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit shall be in compliance with the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, ~ 40, and with the requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to construction in the floodplains (Section 5323 of the 7th Edition of the MA State Building Code). 
E. 	Permitted uses. The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood flows shall be allowed in the 100-year floodplain provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials or equipment: 
(1) 	
Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc; 

(2) 	
Forestry and nursery uses; 

(3) 	
Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc; 

(4) 	
Conservation of water, plants, wildlife; 

(5) 	
Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and horse paths; 

(6) 
Temporary nonresidential structures used in connection with fishing, growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises; 

(7) 	
Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions; 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -40 ­
ZONING 

(8) 
Installation of utility, sewer or septic systems, water supplies and production, and water lines provided the Department of Public Works is satisfied that there is adequate protection against breaking, leaking, short-circuiting, grounding, igniting, or floating during flooding; 

(9) 
The portion of any lot within the Floodplain District may be used to meet the lot area or yard requirements for the district in which the remainder of the lot is located. 


F. 	Special permits. No encroachment shall be permitted within the 100-year floodplain as shown on the FIRM Maps unless a special permit is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Encroachment shall include: 
(1) 	
Structures or buildings erected, constructed, or otherwise created or moved; 

(2) 
Reconstruction or repair due to flood damage and improvement or expansion of any building or structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions; 

(3) 	
Storage, dumping, filling, excavation, disposal or transfer of earth or other material; 

(4) 
Installation of driveways or roads to serve areas outside the floodplain district where other access is not feasible. 


G. 	Special permit conditions. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit under this section if the application complies with the following conditions (subject to other applicable provisions of this ordinance): 
(1) 
The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying district and shall be, to the maximum extent feasible, consistent with the purposes of the Floodplain District; 

(2) 
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other developments are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer, hydrologist or other professional competent in such matters is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any decrease in flood storage capacity or increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood. The Board shall have the right to retain a registered professional civil engineer, hydrologist or other professional to verify this information. The applicant shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of such advice; 

(3) 
The Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions it finds necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the occupants of the proposed use, and of the Floodplain District; 

(4) 
The use complies with the State Building Code relative to construction in the floodplain and a determination has been made that the use will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws; 

(5) 
The applicant has established that the land is not unsuitable for the proposed use, based on hydrological/topographic data supplied by a registered professional civil engineer, hydrologist or other qualified professional; 

(6) 
A determination has been made by the Conservation Commission that the use complies with the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, ~ 40; 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -41 ­
ZONING 
(7) 	
Water supply systems shall not be subject to interruption or contamination during flooding; 

(8) 
Sewage disposal systems shall not be damaged when subject to inundation, or cause contamination during flooding; 

(9) 	
Utilities shall be located and constructed to prevent flood damage; 

(10) 
The use shall not substantially affect the water table or water quality or substantially change the natural flow of floodwaters and drainage patterns of the area. 


H. 	Special permit procedures. 
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals, five (5) copies of an application and site plan stamped by a registered land surveyor or a registered professional civil engineer showing the location, boundaries and dimensions of the lot or lots to be created; existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals (or other interval as approved by the Board); the location and dimensions of any exiting and proposed structures or uses; means of access; sewage disposal facilities; leach fields; parking areas; utilities; drainage systems and easements; watercourses; the boundary of the floodway; the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain; and the elevation of the basement and first floor of any proposed buildings or structures. Where the development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) requires a special permit hereunder, the aforesaid application and site plan shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by G.L. c. 43D. 

[Subsection H amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
(2) 
Within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, the Board shall transmit one (1) copy of the plan to the Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Board of Health, and Inspector of Buildings. Final action shall not be taken until reports have been received from the above Boards or until forty-five (45) days have elapsed from the date of application. 

(3) 
Special permit procedures for public notice, hearing, and decisions shall be in accordance with Section 9 of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A and with the special permit provisions of ~ 200-8.3 of this ordinance. 


I. 	Prohibited uses. No encroachment shall be permitted in the floodway as shown on the FBFM Maps, and the following uses are prohibited in the 100-year floodplain: 
(1) 	
Solid waste landfills, junkyards, dumps; 

(2) 	
The manufacture, storage, or disposal of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive wastes; 

(3) 
The temporary or permanent storage or disposal of materials used in snow and ice control including sand, salt or other deicing chemicals; 

(4) 
The outdoor storage or placement of storage tanks, above or below ground, for petroleum products or other hazardous material; 

(5) 
The storage, dumping, filling, dredging, excavation, disposal, transfer, or removal of earth or other material except as permitted by special permit under this provision. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -42 ­
ZONING 

J. 	Limit of authority. Nothing contained in this ordinance of the City of Greenfield shall otherwise limit the lawful authority of other agencies of government within the City of Greenfield. 
~ 200-4.14.  Water Supply Protection District (WP). 
[Amended 200-4.14 -deleted section and replaced in its entirety -March 3, 2004 by Town Council vote. Caisson Well 
added by Town Council vote on October 15, 2014.] 

A. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Water Supply Protection District is to protect, preserve and maintain existing and potential sources of groundwater supply, groundwater recharge and watershed areas within the City for the public, health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(1) 
The general boundaries of the Water Supply Protection district include Zones 1, 2, and 3 as shown on the Official Zoning Map dated July 28, 2014. The Water Supply Protection District includes the Mill Brook well field and the recharge and watershed areas as determined by the hydrologic study titled "Aquifer Land Acquisition Study" prepared for the City of Greenfield, Department of Public Works by Tighe & Bond, Inc. of Easthampton, MA, August 1988. The District also includes the Leary Well Site Zone 1 and the one-half-mile interim Zone 2 required by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). The District also includes the Caisson Well Site Zone 1 and Zone 2 recharge areas. The maps as well as the accompanying report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the City Clerk, Inspector of Buildings and Planning Board. 

(2) 	
Zones 1, 2, and 3 are defined as follows: 

(a) 
Zone 1 is the four-hundred-foot radius, or other designated area, surrounding a water supply well which must be in compliance with the DEP Drinking Water Regulations. 

(b) 
Zone 2 is that area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under the most severe recharge and pumping conditions that can be realistically anticipated. It is bounded by the groundwater divides which result from pumping the well and by the contact of the edge of the aquifer with less permeable materials such as till and bedrock. At some locations, streams and lakes may form recharge boundaries. 

(c) 
Zone 3 is that land area beyond the area of Zone 2 from which surface water and groundwater drain into Zone 2. The surface drainage area as determined by topography is commonly coincident with the groundwater drainage area and will be used to delineate Zone 3. In some locations, where surface and groundwater drainage are not coincident, Zone 3 shall consist of both the surface drainage and the groundwater drainage areas. 

(3) 
Where the bounds of the Water Supply Protection District as delineated are in doubt or dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where the bounds should be properly located. At the request of the owner(s), the City may engage a professional hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer or other competent professional to determine the accuracy of the location and extent of Zones 1, 2, and 3 and charge the owner(s) for the cost of the investigation. The investigation shall conform to the specifications for delineating Zones 1, 2, and 3 as described in 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 24.06. The Inspector of Buildings based on a recommendation from the Department of Public Works retains the authority to make a final determination on an exemption from the boundaries of the Water Supply Protection District. 


B. 	Use regulations. The Water Supply Protection District is established as an overlay district. Land in the Water Supply Protection District shall be subject to the requirements of this section as well as to all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance which apply to the underlying zoning districts. Uses that are not 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -43 ­
ZONING 

permitted in the underlying district shall not be permitted in the Water Supply Protection District. Where the requirements of the underlying district differ, the requirements of the Water Supply Protection District shall govern. 
C. 	Uses permitted in all Water Supply Protection District Zones. The following uses are permitted in all Water Supply Protection District Zones provided that all other provisions of this section and this ordinance are complied with: 
(1) 	
Conservation, parks, wildlife areas; 

(2) 
Outdoor recreation including nature study, boating, fishing, foot, bicycle and horse paths, boardwalks, and bridges; 

(3) 
Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash boards, and other water control, supply and conservation devices; 

(4) 
Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting and grazing provided that fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, and other leachable materials are stored within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate. 

(5) 
Customary accessory uses to a permitted use and maintenance and repair of existing structures provided that there is no increase in impervious surfaces in excess of fifteen percent 15% of lot area. 

(6) 	
Municipal facilities related to the provision of water supply. 


D. 	Uses permitted. in Zone 2 and 3. In addition to the uses listed in § 200-4.14C, the following uses are permitted in Zone 2 and 3 provided they are permitted in the underlying district and comply with all other provisions of this section and this ordinance: 
(1) 	
Detached single-family dwelling with a minimum lot size of sixty thousand (60,000) square feet; 

(2) 	
Detached two-family dwelling with a minimum lot size of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet; 

(3) 	
Municipal administration, fire, police, library buildings. 


E. 	Uses allowed by special permit in Zone 2 and 3. 
(1) 
Commercial and industrial uses permitted in the underlying district not otherwise restricted in § 200-4.14F. 

(2) 	
Public and private utilities and substations. 

(3) 	
Other municipal or governmental uses not listed in § 200-4.14D(3). 


F. 	Prohibited uses in all Water Supply Protection Zones. 
(1) 
Solid waste landfills, dumps, junk, salvage, brush and stump dumps, recycling yards and all other disposal of materials except normal agricultural practices. 

(2) 	
Sewage treatment facilities. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -44 ­
ZONING 

(3) 
Car and truck washes. 

(4) 
Motor vehicle sales or leasing establishments. 

(5) 
Trucking or bus terminals. 

(6) 
Dry-cleaning establishments. 

(7) 
Earth removal. 

(8) 
Golf courses. 

(9) 
Industrial or commercial uses which involve the disposal or storage of process wastewater from other than personal hygiene and food including any use which requires a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection under the Massachusetts Groundwater Discharge Regulations, 314 Code of Massachusetts Regulations, 5.00. 

(10) 
Any use which involves the manufacture, use, processing, storage, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials or wastes including but not limited to: 

(a) 
Metal plating or metal finishing; 

(b) 
Wood preserving and furniture stripping; 

(c) 
Motor vehicle service and repair shops; 

(d) 
Printing; 

(e) 
Electronic assembly; 

(f) 
Chemical and bacteriological laboratory. 



(11) 
The disposal of liquid or leachable wastes except sewage disposal systems and normal agricultural operations. 

(12) 
The storage of liquid hazardous materials and/or liquid petroleum products unless such storage is: 

(a) 
above ground level, and 

(b) 
on an impervious surface 

(c) 
and either: 

(i) 
in container(s) or above ground tank(s) within a building; or 

(ii) 
outdoors in covered container(s) or above ground tank(s) in an area that has a containment system designed and operated to hold either 10% of the total possible storage 






capacity ofall containers, or 110% of the largest container’s storage capacity, whichever is 
greater. [see 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 22.21(2)(b)(5)] 
(13) 
Outdoor storage of salt, deicing chemicals, pesticides, or herbicides. 

(14) 
The use of septic system cleaners which contain toxic chemicals. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -45 ­
ZONING 

(15) 
Dumping of snow which is brought in from outside the district. 

(16) 
Land uses that result in the rendering impervious any lot or parcel more than fifteen (15%) of lot area 

(17) 
Multifamily dwellings. 

(18) 
Open space/cluster developments. 

(19) 
The storage of sludge and septage; unless such storage is in compliance with 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 32.30 and 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 32.31. [see 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 22.21(2)(b)(1)] 

(20) 
The storage of chemical fertilizers; unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff and leachate.[see 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 22.21(2)(b)(3)] 

(21) 
The storage of animal manures, unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate. [see 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 22.21(2)(b)(4)] 


G. Special permits. 
(1) 
Special Permit Granting Authority. For purposes of the Water Supply Protection District, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority. 

(2) 
Procedures. Special permit procedures and submittal requirements shall be in accordance with § 200-8.3, Special permits, and § 200-8.4, Site plan review and approval. In addition, the applicant shall submit a complete list of chemicals, pesticides, fuels and other potentially hazardous materials to be used, generated, or stored on the premises and proposed structures and measures to prevent leaks and control of spills. 

(3) 
Special permit criteria. Special permits shall be granted only if: 

(a) 
The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying district, and will promote the purposes of the Water Supply Protection District; 

(b) 
The proposed use is appropriate to the natural topography, soils, and other characteristics of the site to be developed; 

(c) 
The proposed use shall not have any adverse environmental impact on the aquifer or recharge areas; 

(d) 
The proposed use shall not result in a reduction of groundwater recharge on the premises or a deterioration of existing groundwater or surface water quality whether or not such water meets established state or federal standards; 

(e) 
The Planning Board may impose any reasonable requirements, conditions, standards, or limitations to ensure that the proposed use meets the purpose and requirements of this section; 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -46 ­
ZONING 
(f) 
The Planning Board may require, as a condition of the special permit, groundwater monitoring wells or sampling of the discharge to on-site septic systems or dry wells. Reports shall be submitted to the Planning Board, Board of Health, Department of Public Works, and the Inspector of Buildings; 

(g) 
Uses allowed by special permit in the underlying district which are not specifically listed in this section shall also comply with the requirements for a special permit under this section. 


H. 	Dimensional requirements. The minimum lot area in the Water Supply Protection District shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet with two hundred (200) feet of frontage. 
I. 	Limitations upon uses. All uses within the Water Supply Protection District shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1) 
Provision shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous materials discharged or lost through corrosion, accidental damage, spillage or vandalism through such measures as spill control in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points, secure storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials, and indoor storage of corrodible or dissolvable materials; 

(2) 
Where the premises are partially outside of the Water Supply Protection District, such potential pollution sources as on-site waste disposal systems shall, to the degree feasible, be located outside the district; 

(3) 
All runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site, diverted towards areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the extent possible. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination. 


~ 200-4.15.  (Reserved) 
~ 200-4.16.  Corridor Overlay District (CO). 
A. 	District boundaries. The Corridor Overlay District shall apply to the following roadway corridors: French King Highway/High Street. 
(1) French King Highway/High Street Corridor. Overlay District shall apply to the following roadway corridors: (1) land extending from the intersection of Clark Street and High Street along High street south to Smith Street and (2) The land east of The French King Highway and north of Canada Hill Road to the junction of French King Highway and Route 2. [Subsection A amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 
B. 	Purpose. The purpose of the Corridor Overlay District is to create attractive entryways into Greenfield, to minimize strip development and traffic congestion, to protect scenic and natural features, and to promote high quality building and site design. 
C. 	Use regulations. 
(1) The Corridor Overlay District shall overlay the existing zoning districts within its boundaries, and the requirements of the district shall be in addition to the requirements of the underlying district. Where the requirements differ, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. All uses permitted in the underlying district are permitted unless otherwise regulated in the Corridor Overlay District. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -47 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
Gas stations and take-out, drive-in, or drive-through restaurants shall be prohibited in the French King Highway/High Street Corridor. 

(3) 
Accessory recreational uses located outside, such as playgrounds or play sets, shall be located to the rear or side of buildings and shall require site plan approval from the Planning Board. 

(4) 
Pad sites generally defined as accessory structures or freestanding structures not part of the anchor buildings shall not limit site accessibility or obscure the view of the anchor buildings. 

(5) 
More than one (1) principal building and use is permitted on a lot except for residential uses in all districts and for underlying residential districts unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 


D. 	Access requirements. 
(1) 
Common driveways and parallel service drives are permitted in the Corridor Overlay District with site plan approval from the Planning Board. 

(2) 
Consolidation of access driveways is encouraged for redevelopment of existing sites and may be required by the Planning Board during site plan approval if traffic generation will be increased by the redevelopment. 

(3) 
The length and width of driveways shall be sized to accommodate the anticipated traffic. Access points shall be located to the best advantage giving consideration to maximizing distances between other curb cuts and roadway intersections, coordinating or sharing of access points with existing or future developments, street alignment, site distance, and grades. Access points may be required to be signalized. Preference shall be given to sharing of access points which are already signalized rather than adding new signalized access points. 


E. 	Utilities. 
(1) 
All uses in the Corridor Overlay District requiring water or sewage disposal service except single-family residences shall be connected to the public water and sewer systems. 

(2) 
All utility lines shall be placed underground. This provision shall not apply to existing uses or to any residential uses unless required by the Planning Board under site plan approval for a substantial expansion or redevelopment of the site. 


F. 	Ridge and slope protection. The ridgeline on the east side of French King Highway/High Street is a prominent feature visible from within the Corridor and from distant vantage points in the region. The following requirements apply to all development except single-family residences in the French King Highway/High Street Corridor. 
(1) 	
The ridgeline and its contour shall not be altered, excavated, or disturbed. 

(2) 
Structures or fixtures including but not limited to buildings, light poles, flagpoles, and signs shall not be visible above the ridgeline when viewed from the east. Minor gaps in ridgeline screening may be permitted by the Planning Board if supplemented with plantings to prevent visibility. 


G. 	Buffer requirements. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -48 ­
ZONING 

(1) French King Highway/High Street Corridor. In the General Industry District, a landscaped or naturally vegetated buffer at least thirty (30) feet wide, continuous except for approved driveways, shall be established adjacent to any public roads to visually separate the development from the road. Existing wetland and wooded areas along roadways shall be preserved and included in the landscaped buffer to the maximum extent possible except to accommodate approved driveways. Buffer areas may incorporate drainage structures, signs, or other site details upon site plan approval from the Planning Board. 
H. 	Sign requirements. Signs shall comply with the Sign Regulations in ~ 200-6.7 of this ordinance along with the following additional requirements: 
(1) Flagpoles shall be limited to twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall not project above the roof line if attached to a building. 
I. 	Procedural requirements. 
(1) For any use in the Corridor Overlay District, the Site Plan Approval Authority and Special Permit Granting Authority shall be determined as follows: (i) uses that are allowed by right in the underlying zone (pursuant to Article IV and the Table of Uses) shall be governed by the Planning Board; and (ii) uses that require a special permit in the underlying zone (pursuant to Article IV and the Table of Uses) shall be governed by the Zoning Board of Appeals. For purposes of determining the Site Plan Approval Authority and the Special Permit Granting Authority within the Corridor Overlay District, this provision shall govern and supersede any other applicable special permit requirement(s) or provision(s) of this Ordinance. Any new development or changes to existing development in the Corridor Overlay District, excluding single-family residences but including signs, shall require site plan approval. 

[Amended by the Town Council on November 18, 2009] 
(2) In addition to the site plan submittal requirements in ~ 200-8.4 of this ordinance, site plans shall include: 
(a) 	
Facade elevations of all proposed new construction or renovation including at least one (1) color rendering. 

(b) 	
Photographs showing the proposed building site and surrounding properties. 

(c) 	
Drawings of proposed signs as they are to be located on the property including at least one 

(1) copy of a color rendering. 

(d) 
A landscaping plan including plan and elevation views with at least one (1) color rendering. 


J. 	Design guidelines. All development except single-family residences in the Corridor Overlay District shall comply with the Planning Board Design Guidelines. The guidelines are intended to express the City's design objectives for the Corridor and to provide direction to applicants in designing development and to the Zoning Board of Appeals in reviewing development in the Corridor Overlay District. The guidelines are intended to be flexible. Applicants shall address each design guideline but may propose alternative design solutions. 
~200-4.17 Planned Unit Development Overlay District 
[Added by Town Council on June 16, 2004] 
[Amended Sections B (5) and F (1) by Town Council vote on December 10, 2004] 

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance 
March 20, 2019 -49 ­
ZONING 

A. 	Purpose.  The Planned Unit Development Overlay District is designed to allow for planned unit developments in designated areas of City.  Through a comprehensive site plan a unified development containing a mixture of land uses and buildings is developed as a single entity.  It is the intent of this provision to ensure sound planning and zoning practices while allowing certain desirable departures from the strict provisions of specific zone classifications. 
(1) 	
Encourage flexibility in the design of development through a carefully controlled review process of particular plans rather than the strict pre-regulation of all plans within a particular zoning district. 

(2) 	
Promote the use of multiple-story buildings and campus-like clustering of buildings to maximize the amount of available open space. 

(3) 	
Encourage a less sprawling form of development which makes more efficient use of land, requires shorter networks of streets and utilities and which fosters more economical development and less consumption of developable land. 

(4) 	
Provide an efficient procedure which will ensure appropriate high-quality design and site planning. 

(5) 	
Promote high quality coordinated building and site design which buffers adjacent residential uses and protects both scenic and natural features. 


B. 	Definition.  Planned Unit Development -A development of land as a single entity under the direction of a comprehensive site plan, in which a mixture of land uses, a variety of building types and designs, and open space are provided for in a coherent manner. 
C. 	District Boundaries.  The boundaries of the Planned Unit Development Overlay District are delineated on 
the map titled “Planned Unit Development Overlay District Map”, dated March 2004. 
D. 	Dimensional Requirements.  To be eligible for a planned unit development, the parcel must have at least 50 feet of frontage and have a minimum lot area of 60,000 square feet. 
E. 	Use Regulations. 
(1) 	
The uses allowed in a planned unit development are any uses allowed either by right or special permit within the underlying zoning district.  

(2) 	
Uses in a planned unit development shall comply with all other applicable sections of this Ordinance in addition to the required provisions of this section. 

(3) 	
More than one principal building and use is permitted on a lot. 

(4) 	
A building height of 50 feet is permitted (subject to negotiation). 

(5) 	
One or more separate but contiguous parcels may be assembled to create a planned unit development.  Proposed planned unit developments may include pre-existing uses and buildings provided they are integrated into the development plan.  Planned unit developments may consist of land in more than single ownership and may be subdivided into separate lots provided all current and future owners and lots are bound by restrictive covenant(s) to the planned development permit approvals and to maintain the project as a single planned unit development.  Subdivision of lots within a planned unit development after final approval of the site plan shall be considered an 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -50 ­
ZONING 
amendment to the special permit and will require approval by the Special Permit Granting Authority. 
F. 	Access Requirements. 
(1) 	
Entrances to planned unit developments shall be limited to one access point onto a public way.  The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant additional access points to improve traffic circulation if deemed necessary. 

(2) 	
Common driveways and parallel service drives are encouraged in the planned unit development to consolidate driveway openings to a few widely spaced locations. 


G. 	Utilities. 
(1) 	
Planned unit developments shall be connected to the public water and sewer systems in accordance with the standards and specification of the Department of Public Works. 

(2) 	
All utility lines shall be placed underground where physically feasible. 


H. 	Design Requirements. 
(1) 	
Developments shall have an integrated design with respect to building placement, proportion, color, rooflines, and other architectural details. 

(2) 	
Developments must incorporate human scale features such as landscaping, pedestrian plazas and other public spaces, first floor windows, pedestrian level lighting, benches, awnings and architectural details. 

(3) 	
New buildings shall relate harmoniously to existing buildings on the site and to the surrounding neighborhood. 

(4) 	
Boxy buildings should be softened with architectural details and landscaping.  Pitched roof lines are encouraged. 

(5) 	
Long unbroken facades are not allowed.  The use of facade offsets, recesses, angular forms, and landscaping rather than ornamentation is encouraged to break up the mass of large or continuous walls. 

(6) 	
The use of exterior building materials such as masonry, stone, wood, and brick is preferred. 

(7) 	
Facade details and building elements shall be proportionate to the scale of the building. 

(8) 	
The building’s main entrance shall be clearly defined with architectural details such as raised parapets, peaked roofs, arches, canopies, and overhangs. 

(9) 	
Rear or side facades visible from other uses, parking areas, or streets must be of finished quality and consistent with the buildings main façade, details, and elements and should be landscaped. 

(10) 	
Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of buildings when feasible.  Large expanses of parking should be broken up with internal landscaping and dedicated pedestrian walkways. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -51 ­
ZONING 

(11) 	
All mechanical equipment including dish antennae, outdoor storage, and waste disposal areas shall be screened from public view. 

(12) 	
Lighting fixtures should complement the architectural design of the planned unit development. 

(13) 	
The placement of wall signs on individual buildings should complement the architectural design of the planned unit development.  Wall signs in multi-tenanted buildings must be placed within the same sign band.  


I. 	Phasing Requirements.  All applications for planned unit developments shall include sufficient information to evaluate total build-out of the site. The Special Permit Granting Authority may permit a phasing schedule in accordance with an approved master site plan. 
(1) 	
The initial construction phase shall provide sufficient on-site and off-site improvements to adequately serve the constructed portion independent of future phases, encourage completion of the build-out design, and minimize disruptions during future construction phases.  Improvements shall include but not limited to driveways, parking, sewer, water, stormwater systems, lighting, and landscaping.  The Special Permit Granting Authority may permit phased construction of improvements if deemed appropriate. 

(2) 	
The applicant shall provide the City with a performance guarantee to cover the costs of construction of the on-site and off-site improvements, subject to approval from the Special Permit Granting Authority, in the form of a performance bond, letter of credit, or cash escrow. 

(3) 	
Any changes in use or amendments to subsequent development phases shall require approval by the Special Permit Granting Authority.  Modifications or extensions to an approved phasing timetable shall not be considered substantive amendments. 


J. 	Procedural Requirements.  All Planned Unit Developments require a special permit. In addition to the Site Plan Submittal Requirements in Section 200 -8.4 and the Special Permit Requirements Section 200-8.3 of this Ordinance, site plans shall include: 
(1) 	
Color renderings of facade elevations of all sides of all proposed new construction and renovations including proposed mature landscaping. 

(2) 	
Color photographs showing the proposed building site and adjacent properties. 

(3) 	
Drawings/cut sheets of all proposed lighting, signs, and pedestrian amenities as they are to be located on the property. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan that includes all existing and proposed vegetation with elevation views and a description of all plantings (include common names), size (upon planting and upon maturity), spacing, and numbers of plants. 

(5) 	
Description of how the project will impact traffic conditions on streets and intersections likely to be affected by the project including the level of service, traffic flow, turning movements, sight distances, traffic controls, pedestrian movement and public transportation.  Provide information on the average daily and peak hour traffic projections and directional distribution of site-generated traffic. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -52 ­
ZONING ARTICLE V 

Dimensional Regulations 
~ 200-5.1.  Application. 
Any building or structure located, erected or changed or any use of land or premises in any district shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Table of Dimensional Requirements except when a portion of a lot is taken or conveyed for a public purpose. 
~ 200-5.2.  Table of Dimensional Requirements. 
[Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.] 
~ 200-5.3.  Additional dimensional provisions. 
A. 	Residences in nonresidential districts. Residences permitted in the CC, LC, GC, O, and GI Districts must comply with the requirements of the RA District. [Amended by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
B. 	If public sewer is not available to a lot, then the minimum lot area shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet with two hundred (200) feet of frontage in all districts. If public sewer and public water are not available to a lot, then the minimum lot area shall be fifty thousand (50,000) square feet with two hundred 
(200) feet of frontage. 
C. 	Front yard exception. Where the alignment of existing structures on adjoining lots differs from the above required front yard depth, the required minimum front yard may be equal to the adjoining front yards. 
D. 	Corner lots. A corner lot having frontage on two (2) streets shall have the minimum required frontage on at least one (1) of the streets measured from the side lot line to the interior angle of intersection, which is one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less, or the extended lot lines in case of a curved street or intersection (see diagram under the definition of "lot, corner" in ~ 200-2.1B). Frontage on only one (1) street shall be used to meet the minimum frontage requirement. Corner lots shall have two (2) front yards, two (2) side yards, and no rear yard. Corner lots, in all districts except the CC District, shall have a triangle of clear sight inside which no object shall be more than three (3) feet above the elevation of the center line of the street at the intersection. 
E. 	Reduced lot dimensions. 
(1) 
The Inspector of Buildings may issue a building permit for residential lots in the RA, SR, and H Districts with reduced lot area, frontage, and width requirements of not less than the average lot dimensions of residential lots within three hundred (300) feet on the same street. All lots with reduced dimensional requirements shall be served by public water and sewer and shall not be further reduced or subdivided. A lot with dimensions previously reduced under Subsection E(2) below shall not be eligible for a reduction under this provision. A list or a plan showing the lot owner, lot location, lot dimensions, and lot area of all lots within three hundred (300) feet of the lot under review, on the same street, and certified by the Greenfield Assessor's office shall be submitted with the building permit application. 

(2) 
The dimensional requirements for lots in any district may be reduced not more than twenty percent (20%) under a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals only if the Board finds that: 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -53 ­
ZONING 

(a) 
There is some difficulty in developing the lot which cannot be overcome without a reduction in the dimensional requirements or a site design is proposed which is more suitable for the lot than one which would be allowed under the permitted dimensional requirements; 

(b) 	
Adjacent properties would not be adversely impacted; and 

(c) 
The reduced dimensions would not be detrimental to the public good and would not substantially derogate from the intent or purpose of this ordinance. 


Lots reduced under this section shall not be further reduced or subdivided. Lots previously reduced under Subsection E(1) above shall not be eligible for a reduction under this provision. Lots not served by public sewer or lots located in the Water Supply Protection District shall not be eligible for a reduction in lot area under this provision. 
(3) New building lots located at the end of a cul-de-sac or along a curve in a street may have reduced frontage of no less than fifty (50) feet provided that the radius of the cul-de-sac or curve is not greater than three hundred (300) feet measured at the street line and further provided that the lot width at the building line is equal to or greater than the distance normally required in the district. 
ARTICLE VI 

General Regulations 
~ 200-6.1.  Nonconforming uses. 
A. 	Continuance. The lawful use of any structure or land existing at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this ordinance may be continued although such structure or use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, subject to the following conditions and exceptions. 
B. 	Restoration or reconstruction. 
(1) 
In the event that a nonconforming building is destroyed by fire or other cause, the same may be reconstructed or repaired on the same location for the same use or a conforming use, provided the new building is at least equal in appearance and character to the original structure. 

(2) 	
Restoration or reconstruction due to fire, explosion or other cause, must be undertaken within one 

(1) 
year of the date damage is inflicted unless, upon application to the Board of Appeals, the owner can show that restoration within the time limit is impossible, in which case extension of time may be granted. 


C. 	Change, extension or alteration. 
(1) 
As provided in MGL c. 40A, ~ 6, a nonconforming single-or two-family dwelling may be altered or extended provided that the Inspector of Buildings determines that doing so does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. Other preexisting nonconforming structures or uses may be extended, altered, or changed in use on special permit from the Board of Appeals if the Board of Appeals finds that such extension, alteration, or change will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use. 

(2) 
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -54 ­
ZONING 

D. 	Abandonment. A nonconforming use which has been abandoned for a period of two (2) years shall not be reestablished and any future use shall conform with this ordinance, except in the case of land used for agriculture, horticulture, or floriculture where such non-use shall have existed for a period of five (5) consecutive years. 
E. 	Reuse of nonconforming structures. A building or structure which is nonconforming in that such building or structure does not conform to setback, height, or other dimensional requirements may be reused for any other use permitted by right or by special permit in that zoning district without the need to conform to such dimensional requirements provided that the Inspector of Buildings determines that the new use meets all the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and that any changes or alterations to the structure do not increase the nonconforming nature of the structure or result in a new nonconformity with the existing requirements of the district; and provided further that the Zoning Board of Appeals or designated Special Permit Granting Authority issues a special permit for uses requiring a special permit. 
~ 200-6.2.  Accessory uses and structures. 
A. 	Use regulation. 
(1) 
Customary accessory uses are permitted in accordance with this section and shall be located on the same lot or on an adjacent lot in the same ownership. Any use which is accessory to a use requiring a special permit shall also require a special permit. 

(2) 
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related production may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals provided the Board finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good. 


B. 	Accessory structures. 
(1) 	
Accessory structures less than 120 square feet. 

(a) 
No accessory structure, except a permitted sign or roadside stand, shall be located within a required front yard area and no accessory structure shall be located closer than three (3) feet to any side or rear lot line. 

(b) 
An accessory structure attached to its principal structure or within ten (10) feet of it shall be considered an integral part thereof and as such shall be subject to the front, side and rear yard requirements applicable to the principal structure. 

(c) 
A private garage providing only for the storage of motor vehicles shall be considered a permitted accessory structure provided that no garage for the storage of more than three (3) automobiles shall be erected or used unless authorized by the Board of Appeals in accordance with ~ 200-8.3. 



(2) 
Accessory structures greater than or equal to 120 square feet. [Subsection 2 added by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 


(a) No accessory structure shall be located within a required front yard area and no accessory structure shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -55 ­
ZONING 

(b) 
An accessory structure attached to its principal structure or within ten (10) feet of it shall be considered an integral part thereof and as such shall be subject to the front, side and rear yard requirements applicable to the principal structure. 

(c) 
A private garage providing only for the storage of motor vehicles shall be considered a permitted accessory structure provided that no garage for the storage of more than three (3) automobiles shall be erected or used unless authorized by the Board of Appeals in accordance with ~ 200-8.3. 


C. 	Swimming pools. 
(1) 
Every outdoor swimming pool is considered to be an accessory structure which constitutes a hazard whether or not it is filled with water and shall be completely surrounded at all times by a fence or wall not less than four (4) feet in height above grade, which may be the pool wall itself. 

(2) 
Every such fence or wall shall be so constructed as to not have openings, holes or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any dimension except for doors, gates and picket fences; in the latter case, however, the gaps between pickets shall not exceed four (4) inches. 

(3) 
All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be of not less than four (4) feet in height and shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device located at least four (4) feet above the underlying ground and inaccessible from the outside to small children. Every such gate or door shall be kept locked at all times when the swimming pool is not in use, and any ladders removed. 

(4) 
A natural barrier, hedge, pool cover or other protective device approved by the Inspector of Buildings may be used in lieu of a fence or wall so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute device or structure is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure, gate, and latch described herein. 


D. 	Dish antennae. Dish antennae larger than two (2) feet in diameter shall not be located in a required front or side yard, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear property line, shall not have a diameter greater than one-third (1/3) of the required rear yard, and shall not be located on rooftops within any residential district. 
E. 	Fences. [Subsection E Added by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(1) 
All fences shall be erected on private property and shall be no closer to any public sidewalk than thirty (30) inches. 

(5) 
Fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height along the front lot line and that portion of the side lot lines between the front lot line and the minimum front setback line. Fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in height along that portion of side lot lines between the minimum front setback line and rear lot line, and along the rear lot line. 

(6) 
Fences located within the side or rear yards and exceeding six feet in height shall be set back a distance equal to their height. 

(4) 
On corner lots, no fence shall be located higher than three (3) feet within the triangle of clear site so as to obstruct visibility at the intersection in a manner that will jeopardize the safety of vehicles and 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -56 ­
ZONING 

pedestrians. The triangle of clear site is that area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at a point twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of intersection of street lines. 
(5) 	
All fences greater than six feet in height shall require a building permit. 

(6) 
Temporary fences on construction sites may be a maximum height of eight (8) feet to protect the site. 


Fence requirements may be modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals by the issuance of a Special Permit, based upon finding that such modification is not detrimental to the neighborhood nor that such modification will jeopardize vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 

~ 200-6.3.  Home occupations. 
The Inspector of Buildings may issue a permit for a home occupation as an accessory use of a dwelling provided that: 
A. 	Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling; 
B. 	The home occupation is carried on within the dwelling or within an accessory building and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the combined gross floor area of the dwelling and any accessory buildings shall be used for the purposes of the home occupation; 
C. 	New accessory buildings used for a home occupation shall not be larger than seventy-five percent (75%) of the footprint of the principal building. New accessory buildings for a home occupation larger than seventy-five percent (75%) of the footprint of the principal building may be allowed under a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals; 
D. 	The home occupation shall be owned and operated by a resident of the dwelling, and not more than two (2) people not residing on the premises shall be regularly employed on the premises; 
E. 	No stock in trade is regularly maintained, except for products of the occupation itself or for goods or materials which are customarily stored, used or sold incidental to its performance; 
F. 	Except for a permitted sign of not more than three (3) square feet, there shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, no regular outside parking of business vehicles and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or other variation from the residential character of the premises; 
G. 	Traffic shall not substantially increase volumes normally expected in a residential neighborhood; 
H. 	Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with ~ 200-6.5. Parking areas shall not be located within ten (10) feet of the front, side, or rear lot line and shall be screened from neighboring residential uses. More than five (5) parking spaces for a home occupation shall require a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals; 
I. 	The home occupation shall comply with the performance standards listed in ~ 200-6.8; 
J. 	The following home occupations shall not require a special permit: 
(1) 	Artist studio including but not limited to a craftsperson, potter, photographer, painter, musician; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -57 ­
ZONING 

(2) 	
Real estate, insurance, financial broker or agent; 

(3) 	
Dressmaker, milliner, tailor, handicraft; 

(4) 
Professional office of a doctor, dentist, cleric, lawyer, engineer, architect, landscape architect, teacher, accountant, or other office of a similar profession; 


K. 	All other home occupations including but not limited to tradesperson, hairdresser/barber, antique shop, print shop, and automobile repair shops shall require a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition to the above requirements, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the proposed home occupation is suitably located in the neighborhood in which it is proposed and will not create a nuisance, hazard, or disturbance due to air or water pollution, noise, or visual unsightliness. 
~ 200-6.4.  Reserved. [Section deleted in its entirety by Town Council on November 18, 2009] 
~ 200-6.5.  Parking requirements. 
A. 	General requirements. 
(1) 
Off-street parking for any new structure or use, expansion of existing structures, or changes in use shall be provided in accordance with the Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces and all other requirements of this section. Uses in the Central Commercial (CC) District are exempt from off-street parking requirements but shall meet all other requirements of ~ 200-6.5. Off-street parking requirements for uses not specifically identified in the Table in ~ 200-6.5E shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings based on a use listed in the Table which has characteristics similar to the use in question. [Subsection (1) Amended by the Town Council on October 20, 2010] 

(2) 
Where more than one (1) use occurs on one (1) site, the requirements of this section shall be cumulative unless the Inspector of Buildings finds that the periods during which a given use requires parking will not substantially overlap the parking periods of other uses on the site and accordingly approves a proportional reduction in required spaces. In no case shall the number of required spaces be less than the number of spaces required by the use requiring the greater number of spaces. 

(3) 
Part or all of the required parking may be enclosed within a structure conforming to all dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. 

(4) 
The required number of spaces may be reduced on special permit by the Board of Appeals if it finds that fewer spaces meet all parking needs. Such cases might include but are not limited to: 

(a) 
Use of a common parking lot for separate uses having peak demands occurring at different times; 

(b) 	
Age or other characteristics of occupants which reduce their auto usage; 

(c) 	
Peculiarities of the use which make usual measures of demand invalid; 

(d) 	
Proximity to and availability of municipal parking facilities providing overnight parking. 



(5) 
Existing parking areas or any parking areas subsequently provided in accordance with this section, shall not be decreased or discontinued while the structure or use being served is in existence unless a 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -58 ­
ZONING 

change in use also changes the parking requirements or unless parking space is provided elsewhere in accordance with this section. 
(6) The Zoning Board of Appeals or the designated Special Permit Granting Authority may grant a special permit for exceptions to the parking requirements of ~ 200-6.5 to permit the reuse or change in use of existing buildings with parking areas which do not conform to this section provided the Board determines that: 
(a) 
The existing parking areas constitute the most reasonable method of providing parking for the building and will adequately provide for the proposed use. 

(b) 
No other land is available as a practical matter for parking purposes. 

(c) 
Bringing the parking areas into conformity with the requirements of this section would result in a decrease of the parking spaces available if such spaces are reasonably needed to serve the uses of the building. 

(d) 
Public safety will not be compromised. 

(e) 
A reasonable alternative design is proposed with every effort made to meet the intent of the requirements. 

(f) 
Adverse impacts on the abutters or the character of the neighborhood will be satisfactorily mitigated. 


B. Location of parking areas. 
(1) 
Required off-street parking areas shall be provided on the same lot they serve, or may be provided on another lot if: 

(a) 
The lot is not separated from the use being served by any street having a right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet or more; 

(b) 
Access to such parking area is not more than five hundred (500) feet from the nearest street line of the lot or lots they are designed to serve; 

(c) 
Such lot is not diverted to other uses except insofar as it can be shown that substitute parking has been made available. 



(2) 
Shared off-street parking areas for two (2) or more structures or uses may be permitted provided that the total number of spaces for each use computed separately is provided. 

(3) 
In all districts except the Planned Industry (PI) District, parking areas shall not be permitted in the required front yard setback or closer than ten (10) feet to the front lot line whichever is greater except in driveways serving one-or two-family dwellings. In the Planned Industry (PI) District, parking areas shall be set back from the front lot line by a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and from the side and rear lot lines by a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 


C. Design requirements. Parking areas for five (5) or more cars shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be laid out to provide for forward-moving ingress and egress; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -59 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
There shall be not more than two (2) driveway openings onto any street from any single premises unless each opening center line is separated from the center line of all other driveways serving twenty (20) or more parking spaces, whether on or off the premises, by two hundred (200) feet (measured at the street line) if in a commercial district or by three hundred (300) feet if in any other district. No such opening shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width at the street line unless necessity of greater width is demonstrated by the applicant, and the opening is designed consistent with Massachusetts Department of Public Works Regulations, Section 11A-9, or subsequent revisions; 

(3) 
No driveway side line shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the street line of an intersecting way and shall be constructed with a minimum edge radius of five (5) feet on both sides; 

(4) 
Driveways shall have a triangle of clear sight at the intersection with the street line inside which no object shall be more than three (3) feet above the elevation of the center line of the street at the intersection; 

(5) 
All parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the Greenfield Department of Public Works Design Standards for Off-Street Parking and with the Rules and Regulations of the Architectural Barriers Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Safety; (Diagram No. 4 deleted) 

(6) 	
(Deleted) 

(7) 
Any establishment which may have lines of vehicles waiting admission or service shall have sufficient on-site space for such lines without requiring cars to stand on any public way; 

(8) 
The layout of parking areas shall allow sufficient space for the storage of plowed snow unless removal from the site is provided; 

(9) 	
Driveways and parking areas shall be designed to allow for the free flow of vehicles at all times; 

(10) 	
All parking areas and driveways shall be maintained as follows: 

(a) 
A dust free all-weather surface properly drained to dispose of all surface water accumulating within the area shall be provided. Parking areas not required by this ordinance and which are used only occasionally may be maintained in grass; 

(b) 
Parking spaces, shall be clearly marked and any one-way driveways serving them shall have the direction of travel clearly indicated other than on the pavement. Such directional signs shall not be internally illuminated; 

(c) 
Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind; 

(d) 
Parking areas and driveways shall be illuminated by shielded lights arranged, designed and with a pole height sized to prevent glare, and to prevent light from shining upon any adjoining building or property in residential use, onto adjacent streets or skyward. A lighting plan shall be submitted as part of site plans. 




D. 	Landscaping. Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped to minimize glare and reflection, to provide shading within parking lots, to provide noise buffers, to reduce the visual impact on adjacent residential property and public ways, and to prevent headlights from shining onto adjacent property. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -60 ­
ZONING 

(1) 	
Perimeter landscaping: 

(a) 	
Parking areas adjacent to residential property in all districts except the Central Commercial 

(CC) 
District shall be set back from the property line by ten (10) feet and shall have a continuous border of dense plantings at least four (4) feet wide and four (4) feet high continuously maintained to provide an effective visual screen; or fencing or berming, not less than five (5) feet but not more than six (6) feet above grade in height and landscaped on at least the side facing the abutters. Such landscaping shall include a minimum planting of trees or shrubs five (5) feet on center. [Subsection 


(a) Amended by the Town Council on October 20, 2010] 
(b) All parking areas except those within the Central Commercial (CC) District shall be separated from the street line by a ten-foot landscaped buffer strip including shade trees (three-inch diameter) forty (40) feet on center and shrubs at least three (3) feet in height upon maturity. Visibility at ingress and egress shall not be impaired and shall have a triangle of clear sight as defined in ~ 200-2.1B. [Subsection (b) Amended by the Town Council on October 20, 2010] 
(c) Parking Areas within the Central Commercial (CC) District [Subsection (c) Added by the Town Council on October 20, 2010] 
i. 	Parking areas within the Central Commercial (CC) District adjacent to residential property shall be set back from the property line by five (5) feet and shall have a continuous border of dense plantings at least three (3) feet wide and four (4) feet high continuously maintained to provide an effective visual screen; or fencing or berming, not less than five 
(5) feet but not more than six (6) feet above grade in height and landscaped on at least the side facing the abutters. Such landscaping shall include a minimum planting of trees or shrubs five (5) feet on center. 
ii. 	All parking areas within the Central Commercial (CC) District shall be separated from the street line by a five-foot landscaped buffer strip including shade trees (three-inch diameter) forty (40) feet on center and shrubs not to exceed three (3) feet in height upon maturity. Curbing and/or wheel stops shall be required. Visibility at ingress and egress shall not be impaired and shall have a triangle of clear sight as defined in ~ 200-2.1B. 

(2) 	
Internal landscaping: All parking lots shall have internal landscaping as follows: 


(a) 	Seven (7) to twenty (20) parking spaces shall have five percent (5%) planted lot area; 

[Amended by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(b) 	
Greater than twenty (20) parking spaces shall have ten percent (10%) planted lot area; 

(c) 
One (1) shade tree (at least three-inch diameter evergreen or deciduous) shall be planted for every ten (10) parking spaces. Preservation of existing trees is desirable and may be substituted for planted trees. Parking lots with distinct parking areas may be treated as separate parking lots if separated by at least five (5) feet in width of planted landscaped area. Internal landscaping shall be distributed throughout the lot for maximum shading and aesthetic improvement. 


E. 	Required off-street parking spaces. Off-street parking facilities shall meet the requirements of the Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. Where the computation results in a fractional number, the fraction shall be counted as one (1) space. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -61 ­
ZONING 

Table of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces  
Use  Required Parking Space  
Dwellings  Two (2) parking spaces per unit.  
Uses accessory to the above  In addition to the above, one (1)  
space plus one (1) space for each  
nonresident employee.  
Boardinghouse, lodging  Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space  
house, rooming house, bed- per rooming unit.  
and-breakfast/tourist home  
Dormitory  One (1) space for each occupant.  
Housing for the elderly  One and one-half (11/2) spaces per  
unit.  

Hotel, motel, inn 	One (1) space for each bedroom, plus three (3) spaces for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area available for meetings and functions and one (1) space for each four (4) employees on the largest shift. 
Convalescent, rest or One (1) space for each four (4) nursing home beds, plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. 
Hospital, sanitarium or One and one-half (11/2) spaces per similar institution bed capacity plus one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. 
Church or similar place One (1) space for each three (3) of assembly seats in the largest assembly room. 
Funeral home or chapel 	One (1) space for each three (3) seats, or one (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of floor area open to the public, whichever is greater. 
Community center, auditorium, One (1) space for each three (3) gymnasium, theater, or seats or five (5) linear feet of places of public assembly bench area or one (1) space for 
every forty (40) square feet of floor area open to the public whichever is greater. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -62 ­
ZONING 
Public library, museum, or One (1) space for each two hundred similar institution (200) square feet open to the public. 
Retail business, commercial 	One space for each three hundred 
use 	(300) square feet of floor area up to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet plus one (1) space for each six hundred (600) square feet thereafter. 
Personal service One and one-half (11/2) spaces establishment per chair and one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. 
Office, professional, 	One (1) space for each three 
business or public 	hundred (300) square feet of floor area up to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet plus one (1) space for each six hundred (600) feet thereafter. 
Medical or dental office 	One (1) space for each 
or clinic 	practitioner, four (4) patient spaces per practitioner, and one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. 
Restaurant, taverns, clubs, One (1) space for each three (3) or other places serving seats, permanent or otherwise, plus food or beverages one (1) space for each 
employee on the largest shift. 
Industrial, manufacturing, Three-quarters (3/4) space for each warehouse storage, employee on the two (2) largest laboratories or similar use shifts combined. 
Automobile washing and Two (2) waiting spaces per stall waxing establishment equipped for washing or waxing. 
Repair garages and gasoline 	Two (2) waiting spaces for each 
service stations 	pump, plus two (2) spaces for each service bay and one (1) space for each employee on the largest shift. 
Bowling alleys 	Five (5) spaces for each alley. 
Schools, preschool through One (1) space for each teacher or middle or junior high other employee anticipated during 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -63 ­
ZONING 

normal school hours excluding students and one (1) space for each six (6) seats in the largest auditorium or gymnasium. 
Schools, senior high, places One (1) space for each teacher or of higher education, other employee anticipated during professional schools normal school hours, plus one 
(1) space for each five (5) students in a senior high school or one (1) space for each two (2) students in any other such institution plus one (1) space for each three (3) seats in the largest auditorium or gymnasium trade school. 
~ 200-6.6.  Loading requirements. 
A. 	Adequate off-street loading and receiving areas shall be provided for all business, commercial, industrial, or institutional uses. 
B. 	Loading areas shall provide sufficient space on the lot so that vehicles can maneuver into position without interference with streets. 
C. 	Entrances and exists to loading areas shall not be located less than fifty (50) feet from any street intersection except in the Central Commercial (CC) District. 
D. 	In any Industrial District, no loading area shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential use. 
E. 	Loading areas adjacent to or across the street from residential property shall be screened by a ten-foot buffer strip; landscaped, bermed, or fenced at a suitable height and density to effectively screen the loading area and lights of delivery trucks from shining onto residential property. 
F. 	In the Planned Industry (PI) District, loading areas shall be set back from the front lot line by a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and from the side and rear lot lines by a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
§ 200-6.7 Sign Regulations 
[§ 200-6.7 Amended -deleted section and replaced in its entirety by Town Council July 20, 2005] 
Definitions: 

A billboard is a sign used for the display of posters, printed or painted advertising matter either illuminated or non-
illuminated, that directs attention to goods, merchandise, entertainment, or services offered elsewhere than the 
premises where the sign is located. 
Sign regulations. 

Any sign erected, altered, or enlarged after the adoption of this ordinance shall conform to the applicable provisions 
of this section. The purpose of this section is to protect the general public from damage and injury caused by the 

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -64 ­
ZONING 

distractions, hazards, and obstructions caused by signs and to preserve the value of property by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses. 
Administration and Enforcement. 
All signs, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, require a sign permit from the Inspector of Buildings who shall determine conformance of a sign allowed by right according to the provisions of this ordinance and/or by way of a special permit. No sign shall be erected except in conformity with a sign permit. The Inspector of Buildings is authorized to order the repair or removal of any sign and its supporting structures which in his/her judgment is dangerous, in disrepair, or which is erected or maintained contrary to this ordinance and/or the provisions of a special permit.  
A. Permitted signs by district. 
(1) Signs in the Residential, Semi-Residential, and Health Districts. 
(a) 
One (1) identification sign per dwelling unit for single and two family residences not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. If freestanding, it shall not be higher than four (4) feet and shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way and shall also be in accordance with § 200-5.3D, corner lots. Such signs shall be for identification purposes only, displaying the number or name of the occupant. 

(b) 
Identification signs for occupants of multifamily dwelling units shall be grouped together on one (1) sign which shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. Such signs may be located at each primary entrance to a building and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height if freestanding. 

(c) 
One (1) entrance sign identifying the name of a subdivision, multifamily or condominium development not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height and shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way. 

(d) 
One (1) bulletin or announcement board or identification sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area for each permitted nonresidential building or use provided that such sign, if freestanding, shall not be located nearer to a public right-of-way than one-half (1/2) the depth of the required front yard. Churches, public educational and other institutional uses shall be permitted two (2) such bulletin or identification signs provided one (1) does not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and the other ten (10) square feet in area. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height if freestanding. 

(e) 
One (1) sign in connection with a lawfully maintained nonconforming use or in connection with a greenhouse, nursery, or farmstand not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height if freestanding and shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the public right-of­way. 

(f) 
One (1) sign in connection with a home occupation not exceeding three (3) square feet in area. If freestanding, it shall not be higher than four (4) feet and shall be set back at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way and shall also be in accordance with § 200-5.3D, corner lots. Such signs shall be for identification purposes only, displaying any of the following the name of the home occupation, phone number and/or website address. 


(2) Signs in the Central Commercial District. City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -65 ­
ZONING 

(a) 
One (1) sign for each establishment located on the ground floor and along the frontage of a building.  The sign shall be affixed to the frontage wall of the building. If a building fronts on more than one (1) street, both frontage walls may be used for all such signs. The total combined area of such signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face upon which the signs are attached or a maximum of forty-five (45) square feet per sign, whichever is less. Individual signs shall be sized based on the building face area occupied by each establishment. Such signs shall include wall, projecting, marquee signs and awnings. 

(b) 
One (1) identification sign painted or attached to the building for each entrance not on the front of the building not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area. 

(c) 
One (1) freestanding sign identifying the establishments on the premises not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in total area and ten (10) feet in height. Such sign shall be placed at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way and shall not overhang the sidewalk. Premises occupied by more than one (1) establishment shall share one (1) freestanding sign. 

(d) 
Any sign allowed in a residential district under § 200-6.7A (1) of this ordinance shall be permitted. 


(3) 
Signs in the Limited Commercial, Office, and General Industry Districts. 

(a) 
One (1) sign for each establishment in a building affixed to one (1) wall of a building. If a building fronts on more than one (1) street, only one (1) wall may be used for such signs. The total combined area of such signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face upon which the signs are attached or a maximum of forty-five (45) square feet per sign whichever is less. Such signs shall include wall, projecting, marquee signs and awnings. 

(b) 
One (1) identification sign painted or attached to the building for each entrance not on the front of the building not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area. 

(c) 
One (1) freestanding sign identifying the establishment(s) on the premises not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area and fifteen (15) feet in height. Such sign shall be placed at least three 

(3) 
feet from the public right-of-way and shall not overhang the sidewalk. Premises occupied by more than one (1) establishment shall share one (1) freestanding sign. 

(d) 
Any sign allowed in a residential district under § 200-6.7A (1) of this ordinance shall be permitted. 



(4) 
Signs in the Planned Industry District. 

(a) 
Two (2) signs for each establishment in a building. No establishment shall affix more than one (1) sign to each wall of the building. The total combined area of such signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face upon which the signs are attached or a maximum of eighty (80) square feet whichever is less. Such signs shall include wall, projecting, marquee signs and awnings. 

(b) 
One (1) freestanding sign identifying the establishment(s) on the premises not to exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Premises occupied by more than one (1) establishment shall share one (1) freestanding sign. Such sign shall be placed at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way. 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -66 ­
ZONING 

(c) 
Any sign allowed in a residential district under § 200-6.7A (1) of this ordinance shall be 

permitted. 

(d) 
One (1) entrance sign identifying the name and occupants of an industrial park or industrial subdivision not to exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. 


(5) Signs in the General Commercial District. 
(a) 
One (1) sign for each establishment in a building affixed to one (1) wall of a building. If a building fronts on more than one (1) street, only one (1) wall may be used for such signs. The total combined area of such signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the building face upon which the signs are attached or a maximum of sixty-four (64) square feet, whichever is less. Such signs shall include wall, projecting, marquee signs and awnings. 

(b) 
One (1) identification sign painted or attached to the building for each entrance not on the front of the building not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area. 

(c) 
One (1) freestanding sign identifying the establishment(s) on the premises not to exceed sixty–four (64) square feet in area and fifteen (15) feet in height. Such sign shall be placed at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way. Premises occupied by more than one (1) establishment shall share one (1) freestanding sign. 

(d) 
Any sign allowed in a residential district under § 200-6.7A (1) of this ordinance shall be permitted. 


B. Off-premises signs. 
(1) 
Billboards shall be prohibited. 

(2) 
Other off-premises signs may be allowed under a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals only if the Board finds that such signs will serve the public convenience, will not endanger the public safety, and will not be detrimental to the neighborhood. Off-premises signs shall only pertain to directional information for establishments located in Greenfield not on a state highway and shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area and ten (10) feet in height. 

(3) 
The existence of any off-premises sign shall not necessarily mean that a special permit for an additional off-premises sign shall be granted. 


C. General sign regulations. 
(1) 
Wall signs may be painted on or attached to the wall of a building, shall be in the same plane as the wall, and shall not project from the wall by more than twelve (12) inches. 

(2) 
Projecting signs shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building, shall not project over a public street, and shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk and thirteen (13) feet above an alley, driveway, or private street. Projecting signs shall project from the wall at a ninety-degree angle. Projecting signs shall not extend vertically above the windowsill of the second story and shall not block the visibility of any other sign. Projecting signs over the public right-of-way require both a sign permit and license from the Greenfield Licensing Commission. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -67 ­
ZONING 

(3) 
All signs or advertising devices, except time and temperature indicators and barber poles shall not contain any visibly moving or movable parts. 

(4) 
No sign shall generate music or an audible message. 

(5) 
No sign shall be so designed or colored or so placed as to endanger, obscure, confuse, blind by glare, or otherwise create a hazardous condition to motorists or pedestrians nor shall any sign resemble or conflict with any traffic control signs or signals. 

(6) 
No sign attached to a building shall project horizontally beyond the end of the wall or vertically above its roof or parapet line. 

(7) 
No sign shall be located in a required side or rear yard. 

(8) 
No freestanding sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. Height is the vertical distance measured from grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-way to the highest point of the sign. 

(9) 
Double sided signs with equal and parallel faces providing identical information on both sides shall be measured on one (1) side only in determining the sign area. 

(10) 
Signs painted or placed on the inside of a window shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the window glass. 

(11) 
A marquee is a permanent roof-like structure attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements. Marquees shall be included in the total area of signage allowed on the face of a building and shall have a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet above the sidewalk. 

(12) 
Awnings are coverings either permanently attached to the building or which can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. Any lettering larger than six (6) inches in height or symbols exceeding four (4) square feet in area shall be included in the total area of signage allowed on the face of the building. The entire illuminated area of an awning shall be considered part of the sign area. Awnings projecting over the public right-of-way require a license from the Greenfield Licensing Commission. 

(13) 
Awning canopies are awnings with the long axis projecting perpendicular to the building rather than parallel and requiring posts or poles to support the end of the canopy furthest away from the building. Awning canopies shall require a license from the Greenfield Licensing Commission. 

(14) 
Roof canopies are freestanding structures or structures attached to a building designed to provide pedestrian and vehicular protection including but not limited to canopies over gas pumps and drive-up windows. Any area of a roof canopy which contains lettering, registered trademarks, symbols, internal illumination, or decorative lights shall be considered signs and shall comply with all the requirements of these sign regulations. 

(15) 
All signs shall pertain to the identification of the firm and the products or services produced or available on the premises unless the sign is an off-premises sign allowed under a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with § 200-6.7B of this ordinance. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -68 ­
ZONING 

(16) 
All signs shall be taken down and related support structures dismantled, within thirty (30) days, when a business is no longer in operation. 

(17) 
Sandwich board signs are permitted directly in front of the place of business in the Central Commercial and Limited Commercial Districts only. All sandwich board signs in the public right of way must receive a license from the Greenfield Licensing Commission. A reproduction of such license shall be attached to the sign. All sandwich board signs on private property shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and two (2) feet in width. [Added by the Town Council on November 18, 2009] 


D. Illumination. 
(1) 
Signs may be lighted internally or externally but illumination shall be shielded or indirect to prevent glare or shining onto any street or adjacent property. 

(2) 
Signs in residential districts may not be illuminated except for signs identifying a place open to the public, such as a church or nursing home, and such signs may be lighted only indirectly and in a manner that will not permit light to shine onto any street or adjacent property. 

(3) 
All lighting shall be continuous and nonflashing. 

(4) 
No sign shall be illuminated between eleven p.m. (11:00 p.m.) and seven a.m. (7:00 a.m.) unless indicating that the establishment is open to the public during those hours. 


E. Temporary signs. 
(1) 
Temporary signs, except real estate, union/labor signs and political signs, relating to a business, service, product or activity on the premises on which the sign is located shall be removed from public view within seven (7) days after the activity advertised has ceased or after thirty (30) days from the date the sign was erected, whichever comes first. 

(2) 
Temporary signs attached to or projecting from the outside of a building or from a freestanding sign which are regularly or occasionally replaced or substituted shall be considered permanent signs and shall be included in the maximum allowable sign area for wall or freestanding signs. 

(3) 
Temporary signs painted or placed on the inside of a window shall be permitted provided that the total combined area of such signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of window glass. 

(4) 
Decorative displays such as flags not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet and not containing advertising, and any American flag, shall be permitted and do not require a sign permit but will require a permit from the licensing commission if over a public way. 

(5) 
No private sign or advertisement shall be placed on any public property including but not limited to buildings, land, fences, utility poles, or trees except by permit of the Greenfield Board of License Commissioners. 

(6) 
One (1) temporary real estate sign shall be allowed in any district advertising the sale or rent of the premises on which the sign is located not exceeding six (6) square feet in area. 

(7) 
One (1) temporary sign per contractor maintained on a lot while the work is actually in progress not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area is allowed in any district. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -69 ­
ZONING 

(8) Nothing in this section shall in any way replace or expand allowances under the Municipal Tag Sale Ordinance.  
F. 	Exceptions. 
(1) 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for an exception to the number, height, location, or area requirements of a sign subject to a finding that such sign will promote the public interest and that the size, number, height, location, and design of such sign will not be detrimental to the neighborhood. The following criteria shall be considered when reviewing a special permit request: 

(a) 
The number, height, location, or area of signs should be justifiable because of multiple frontages, development scale, compliance with the regulations would not produce a visually attractive sign, or other special need; 

(b) 
Other public or private signage on nearby properties should not have its visibility unreasonably diminished; 

(c) 
Sign content should identify the specific local enterprise, rather than one of many standard brand products available on the premises; 

(d) 
Sign design should use placement, colors, and form compatible with building design; 

(e) 
Lighting should be steady, stationary, shielded and directed solely at, or internal to, the sign, with brightness not inconsistent with other signs in the vicinity of the City and shall comply with all other requirements of these sign regulations. 



(2) 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for one (1) freestanding sign for the identification of an open air use containing no building. 

(3) 
No sign, other than traffic control and route signs authorized by public agencies, shall be placed within a public right-of-way unless a special permit has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals with prior written approval from the Greenfield Licensing Commission and the Greenfield Department of Public Works for City/County rights-of-way, and the Massachusetts Department of Public Works for State rights­of-way. 


G. 	Maintenance. Any broken, worn or illegible elements of a sign awning or canopy shall be promptly repaired, replaced or removed as directed by the Inspector of Buildings in accordance with this ordinance and with the State Building Code. 
H. 	Nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs or other advertising devices legally erected may continue to be maintained provided, however, that no such sign or other advertising device shall be permitted if it is enlarged, reworded (other than in the case of theatre or cinema signs or time and temperature signs), redesigned or altered in any way including repainting in a different color, except to conform to the requirements of this ordinance and provided further that any such sign or other advertising device which has been destroyed or damaged or has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed one-third (1/3) of the replacement cost of the sign or other advertising device at the time of the restoration shall not be repaired or rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this ordinance. Any sign or other advertising device shall comply with all provisions of these Sign Regulations, § 200-6.7, if such sign or advertising device: 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -70 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
Has been abandoned; 

(2) 
Advertises or calls attention to any products, business or activities which are no longer sold or carried on at the particular premises; or 

(3) 
Has not been repaired or properly maintained within thirty (30) days after notice to that effect has been given by the Inspector of Buildings. 


I. Priority Development Sites. [§ 200-6.7(I) added by Town Council October 21, 2009] 
(1) 
For any sign allowed as-of-right at a Priority Development Site (PDS), an application therefor shall be submitted to the Inspector of Buildings no later than one hundred fifty (150) days following submission of any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by G.L. c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered no later than thirty 

(30) 
days from said date of submission. 

(2) 
For any sign at a Priority Development Site (PDS) requiring a special permit as per Section F, above, an application therefor shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by G.L. c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered no later than one hundred twenty (120) days from said date of submission. Upon the issuance of a such a permit, immediately thereafter, but not prior to the expiration of the applicable appeal period, an application for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Inspector of Buildings, who shall render a decision thereon no later than thirty (30) days from said date of submission. 


~ 200-6.8.  Performance standards. 
A. Purpose. 
(1) 
The purpose of environmental performance standards is to ensure that any use allowed by right or special permit in any district is conducted in a manner which does not adversely affect the surrounding natural or human environment by creating a dangerous, injurious or objectionable condition. 

(2) 
No use of land or a structure shall be initiated, expanded, or altered in operating procedures so as to create a violation of any of the provisions of this section. 


B. Enforcement. 
(1) 
In enforcing these standards, the Inspector of Buildings may call upon specific standards, technical specifications, and the technical expertise of such appropriate federal, state, or regional agencies having an interest in the specific kind of environmental disturbance under question, including, but not limited to the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the Massachusetts Executive Office for Environmental Affairs, the Atomic Energy Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, etc. 

(2) 
The Inspector of Buildings may require that an applicant furnish evidence of probable compliance, whether by example of similar facilities, engineering analysis, or a statement from an independent authority certifying compliance. Issuance of a permit on the basis of that evidence shall certify the City's acceptance of the conformity of the basic structure and equipment, but future equipment changes and operating procedures shall also comply with the provisions of this section. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -71 ­
ZONING 

C. Standards. 
(1) 
All use and conditions of land, buildings and structures shall be in conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 

(2) 
No sound, noise, vibration, odor, or flashing (except for warning devices, temporary construction or maintenance work, parades, agricultural activities, or other special circumstances) shall be observable without instruments in a General Industry or Planned Industry District more than four hundred fifty (450) feet from the boundaries of the originating premises, or in a Commercial District more than two hundred 


(200) feet from the boundaries of the originating premises, or in any other district more than forty (40) feet from the boundaries of the originating premises. However, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to allow activities not meeting these standards, in cases where the Board determines that no objectionable condition will thereby be created for the use of other properties. Particularly loud and/or disruptive noises shall be avoided between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(3) 
Generation of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors, or gases which cause damage to or irritate human health, animals, or vegetation or which stains or soils property is prohibited. 

(4) 
All materials, supplies and equipment shall be stored in accordance with the Fire Prevention Standards of the National Fire Protection Association and shall be screened from view from public ways or abutting properties. 

(5) 
Illuminated signs, parking lot lighting, or any other exterior lighting shall not create glare or cast observable shadows onto adjacent premises nor shall be directed skyward. 

(6) 
All hazardous materials used, created, stored, processed, disposed of by processing, diluting, burying or containment, leaching or any other manner, or transported (including piping) in the City shall be used, stored or transported in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 

(7) 
No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 

(8) 	
(a) Whenever the existing contours of the land are altered; grading, site design, and construction shall be designed to prevent soil erosion, sedimentation, uncontrolled surface water runoff or alteration of runoff to or from abutting properties. The primary reasons for having erosion and sedimentation control measures in place are to: 

(1) 	
Prevent topsoil from migrating off a construction site, 

(2) 	
Protect the City’s streets and storm water systems, 

(3) 	
Protect adjacent property from siltation, and 

(4) 	
Protect fish and other wildlife from siltation of ponds, lakes, streams and rivers. 




(b) 	Procedure: 
(1) 
These standards shall pertain to all building sites under new construction or redevelopment. The applicant shall submit an erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Inspector of Buildings for approval. If Site Plan Review and Approval is required under the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance, an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the reviewing authority along with all other submittal requirements. 

(2) 
The Inspector of Buildings or any of his designees shall conduct a site visit to ensure that all temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures required under this 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -72 ­
ZONING 

policy are properly installed prior to and maintained throughout construction. Failure to comply with these standards may result in a stop work order or the revocation of permits. 
(3) 
Erosion of soil and sedimentation shall be minimized by using the following erosion control standards, which are in addition to any erosion control measures required by the Greenfield Conservation Commission as part of the issuance of a wetland related permit (Negative Determination of Applicability with Conditions or an Order of Conditions). Temporary erosion control measures shall be installed for the following: 

(i) 
All construction areas that slope toward the road or an abutting property shall require a properly installed siltation fence and/or baled hay barrier to prevent siltation of the roadway or neighboring property. 

(ii) 
All wetland areas shall be protected by a properly installed siltation barrier. Work that occurs in or within 100 feet of a wetland resource area or within 200 feet of a perennial river or stream requires filing with the Greenfield Conservation Commission. In areas outside the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission but where the ground slopes toward a wetland area, a properly installed siltation fence and/or baled hay barrier shall be required. 


(iii) Stockpiles of loam shall be protected by a siltation fence and/or baled hay barrier. Stockpiles that remain on site for longer than 30 days shall also be seeded to prevent erosion. These measures shall remain until all material has been placed or disposed off site. 

(4) 	
The smallest practical area of land shall be disturbed at any one time. 

(5) 	
The duration of exposure of disturbed areas due to stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regarding shall be kept to a minimum. 

(6) 	
Baled hay barriers and siltation fencing are to be maintained and cleaned until all slopes have a healthy stand of grass or other approved vegetation. 

(7) 	
Baled hay and mulch shall be mowings of acceptable herbaceous growth, free from noxious weeds or woody stems.  No salt hay shall be used. 

(8) 	
All disturbed areas shall be loamed and seeded with grass or other approved vegetation. 

(9) 
After all disturbed areas have been stabilized, the temporary erosion control measures are to be removed. Disturbed areas resulting from removal of the temporary erosion control measures shall be repaired and seeded. 

(10) 
A temporary mud tracking bed (construction entrance) shall be put in place at each site entrance where necessary. This tracking bed shall consist of a four (4) inch minimum layer of 1 ¾ inch crushed stone and shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet in width. This bed shall be maintained during construction to prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right-of-way and shall be removed prior to the placement of a gravel base and pavement. 

(11) 
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to control blowing dust and soil. Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the grading is to occur within five 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -73 ­
ZONING 

hundred (500) feet of an occupied residence or place of business and may consist of 
grading fine soils on calm days only or dampening the ground with water. 
(12) 
Permanent erosion control and vegetative measures shall be in accordance with the Erosion and Sediment Control and Vegetative Practices in Site Development Guides published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 

(13) 
The construction of roads or structures on slopes of fifteen (15) percent or greater shall require a special permit from the Planning Board. Such permit shall only be granted if the Board finds that adequate provisions have been made to protect against soil erosion and sedimentation, soil instability and uncontrolled surface water runoff. 


[§ 200-6.8 (C8) Amended -deleted section and replaced in its entirety by Town Council July 15, 2009] 

~ 200-6.9.  Screening and landscaping. 
Any application for a building permit shall comply with the following, unless a special permit is granted by the Board of Appeals for a departure upon its determination that because of peculiarities of the site, alternative arrangements will perform at least equally well in meeting the functional purposes of these provisions. 
A. Areas requiring screening and landscaping. 
(1) 
Screening is required on side and rear lot boundaries of any lot in a commercial, industrial, or health service district for a new or expanded commercial, industrial, professional, institutional or multifamily use where it adjoins a lot with an existing residential use or a lot in a residential district. 

(2) 
Screening is required for all parking lots of five (5) or more parking spaces in accordance with the parking lot landscaping requirements in ~ 200-6.5D of this ordinance. 

(3) 
Screening may be omitted to the rear of any principal building if abutting properties propose an integrated parking facility provided that a plan showing the entire facility and its proposed screening is submitted at the time of application and is binding on both properties. 

(4) 
Screening is required around any outdoor storage, waste disposal, or utility for any use except single-and two-family uses. 


B. Screening and landscaping design. A screen required under this section shall consist of either: 
(1) 
A continuous border of dense plantings at least four (4) feet wide and not less than four (4) feet high but of sufficient height to interrupt the view between the two (2) sites; 

(2) 
An opaque wall or fence or earthen berm at least five (5) feet in height but not more than six (6) feet in height and landscaped on at least the side facing the abutters. Such landscaping shall include a minimum planting of trees or shrubs five (5) feet on center; 

(3) 
Areas not covered by buildings or pavement shall be maintained in a vegetated cover or organic mulch. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -74 ­
ZONING 

C. 	Screening and landscaping maintenance. Such screening and landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times to provide an effective visual screen. Screening and landscaping may be interrupted by normal entrances or exits. 
~ 200-6.10.  Unregistered motor vehicles. 
A. 	The keeping of more than one (1) unregistered motor vehicle, assembled or disassembled, except by a person licensed under MGL c. 140, ~ 59, on any premises shall not be permitted, unless said motor vehicles are stored within an enclosed building. 
B. 	A special permit to keep more than one (1) unregistered motor vehicle on any premises not within an enclosed building after a duly called public hearing to which all abutters to the premises have received notice, may be granted by the Licensing Commission, if it finds that such is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this ordinance and will not adversely affect the neighborhood or area nor constitute a nuisance. 
C. 	All such special permits granted shall limit the number of unregistered motor vehicles to be kept on the premises by the permit holder, shall not run with the land, and shall be limited to a reasonable length of time. 
D. 	This section shall not apply to motor vehicles which are designed and used for farming purposes or to contractor's equipment where contractor's yards are permitted in this ordinance. 
~ 200-6.11.  Driveways and entrances. 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide maximum protection to the public through the orderly control of traffic moving onto and off of streets; uniform design and layout of driveways and entrances; adequate vehicular access to a lot; and adequate drainage of surface water. 
B. 	Procedures. Construction of any driveway shall require written application to the Department of Public Works including a plan showing the driveway and drainage details. Before approval is granted, the application shall be referred to the Conservation Commission, if necessary. Where the development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) requires an approval hereunder, an application therefor shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by 
G.L. c. 43D, and a decision thereon shall be rendered no later than one hundred eighty (180) days from said date of submission. [Subsection B amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
C. 	Design requirements. 
(1) 
Entrances shall be located to the best advantage with regard to street alignment, profile, sight distance and safety conditions as determined by the Department of Public Works. 

(2) 	
Driveway grades and locations shall provide for access for vehicles, including fire and police. 

(3) 
Driveways, entrances, and vehicular access to and from a lot shall be through the frontage and access strip except that the Planning Board may issue a special permit allowing driveways, entrances and vehicular access to a lot over any side or rear lot line. It is not intended that this provision allow building on a lot which would not otherwise be buildable because frontage and access requirements cannot be met. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -75 ­
ZONING 

Applicants for a special permit shall show that the lot meets all frontage and access requirements of this ordinance and of the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations4 before a special permit may be granted. 
(4) 	Entrance width shall be measured at the street line or a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement. 

Minimum Maximum 
Residential 10 feet 16 feet 
All other uses: 
One-way 11 feet 20 feet 
Two-way 22 feet 30 feet 

(5) 
Wherever possible, entrances are to be set back fifty (50) feet or more from a street corner measured between the nearest edge of the off-street driveway and the cross road edge of pavement except driveways serving parking areas of five (5) or more cars shall be subject to ~ 200-6.5C of this ordinance. 

(6) 	
Driveways shall have a stopping area of no greater than four-percent slope for a distance of twelve 

(12) 
feet back from the edge of road surface. 

(7) 
Entrances off state highways shall conform to Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standards and Regulations. 

(8) 	
Any adjacent disturbed areas shall be graded and stabilized. 

(9) 	
The City reserves the right to inspect the proposed site before, during, and after construction. 


D. 	Common driveways. The Planning Board may issue a special permit for a common driveway serving up to four (4) lots if the following minimum requirements are met: 
(1) 
An easement providing permanent access for all properties served by the driveway shall be provided upon application and, if approved, recorded in the Registry of Deeds; 

(2) 
The special permit shall state that the driveway is not a private road or a public road, that it does not meet the standards for a City road, and that the driveway shall permanently remain a private driveway; 

(3) 
The grade, length, and location of common driveways shall be constructed and maintained to provide: 


(a) Adequate access and turnaround for vehicles, including sanitary and emergency vehicles, year round. A turnaround area shall be provided at the end of the driveway so that vehicles do not need to enter onto adjoining lots. The Planning Board may require passing turnouts depending on the length and design of the proposed driveway; 
4Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -76 ­
ZONING 

(b) 
A width of at least twenty (20) feet. Drainage and culverts may be required where the Planning Board deems necessary; 

(c) 
A maximum grade of ten percent (10%); 

(d) 
A maximum length of five hundred (500) feet; 

(e) 
The driveway entrance shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any street intersection; 

(f) 
No parking areas or structures shall be allowed in the driveway right-of-way; 

(g) 
The Planning Board may require a bituminous concrete surface; 


(4) 
Approval from the Department of Public Works and the Fire Department shall be obtained prior to granting the special permit; 

(5) 
The Planning Board may deny the special permit if it determines that the land being subdivided is 

better served by individual driveways or subdivision approval under the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations;5 

(6) 
Ownership and maintenance of a common driveway shall be assured through a restrictive covenant, satisfactory to the Planning Board, which binds current and future owners of each lot served by the common driveway to the responsibility for maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the common driveway. A draft covenant shall be submitted for approval with the special permit application and shall include but not be limited to specific standards for maintenance and repair of the driveway and drainage system, provision for allocating financial responsibility, and a procedure for resolution of disagreements. If the special permit is granted, the covenant shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds and shall be made part of every deed to every lot served by the common driveway; 

(7) 
The Planning Board may require a performance bond or other security for the completion of the common driveway. Such security shall be posted prior to construction of the driveway. The driveway shall be completed, inspected by the Planning Board, or its designee, and the security released prior to issuance of occupancy permits for the lots served by the common driveway; 

(8) 
It is not intended that common driveways shall service lots which would not otherwise be buildable because frontage and access requirements cannot be met. The applicant shall show that all lots to be served by a common driveway meet the frontage and access requirements of this ordinance and of the Greenfield 


Subdivision Regulations.6 
5Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 6Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -77 ­
ZONING ARTICLE VII 

Special Regulations 
~ 200-7.1.  Open space/cluster developments. 
[~200-7.1 – Deleted section and replaced in entirety on May 16, 2007 by Town Council vote] 

A. 	Description. An open space/cluster development shall mean a residential development in which the buildings are clustered together into one (1) or more groups on reduced lot sizes with the remaining land permanently undeveloped. 
B. 	Purpose. The purpose of open space/cluster development is to allow for a flexible design in residential development of single-family, two-family, and multifamily housing. The intention is to: 
(1) 	
Promote a more efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features; 

(2) 	
Encourage a less sprawling form of development that consumes less open land; 

(3) 
Encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands and other natural resources; 

(4) 
Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner; 

(5) 	
Promote diverse housing at a variety of costs. 


C. 	Open Space/cluster developments are allowed in the Urban Residential (RA), Suburban Residential (RB), and Rural Residential (RC) zoning districts subject to site plan review by the Planning Board with the following regulations and conditions. 
D. 	Procedures. 
(1) 
Preapplication review. To promote communication and avoid misunderstanding, applicants are strongly encouraged to submit preliminary materials for informal review by the Planning Board prior to formal application. 

(2) 	
Application. 

(a) 
Applicants for an open space/cluster development shall submit to the Planning Board twelve (12) copies of an application and twelve (12) prints of the development plan, with one set being reduced to 11” x 17”. If the land on the plan involves more than one (1) ownership, each owner of land included on the plan shall be a party to the application and, upon plan approval, subject to its provisions for any land shown on the plan as part of the open space/cluster development. 

(b) 	
The Planning Board approval of a cluster development site plan hereunder shall not 




substitute for compliance with the Subdivision Control Act7 nor oblige the Planning Board to approve a related definitive plan for subdivision, nor reduce any time periods for Planning Board 
7Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, ~ 81K et seq. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -78 ­
ZONING 

consideration under that law. However, in order to facilitate processing, the Planning Board may, insofar as practical under law, adopt regulations establishing procedures for submission of a combined development plan and application which shall satisfy this section and the Board's regulations under the Subdivision Control Act. 
(3) 
Submittal requirements. The development plan shall be prepared by a registered professional civil engineer, a registered land surveyor or other qualified professional at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty 

(40) 
feet and shall be on standard twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch sheets prepared, at a minimum, in 


accordance with the Site Plan Review Section, ~ 200-8.4, of this ordinance and the requirements for a preliminary subdivision plan under the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations.8 The plan shall also include the following information: 
(a) 
Identification of existing vegetative cover, natural resources, topography and land uses, including the boundaries of all wetlands on the site as determined by the Greenfield Conservation Commission; 

(b) 
Existing structures, wells, septic systems, sewer lines, water lines, utilities, and drainage; 

(c) 
Soil types, based on the Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey and on-site soil boring logs, approximate depth to groundwater, location and results of percolation tests and other subsurface tests; 

(d) 
Proposed uses of land and buildings; 

(e) 
The location and dimension of all proposed lots; 

(f) 
Proposed lot lines, streets, parking areas, walkways, drainage and utilities, existing and proposed easements; 

(g) 
The general location and description of proposed public water lines, private wells, sewer systems, water systems, and septic systems; 

(h) 
The location, size and description of proposed common open space, parks, and other community or recreational uses. The proposed use of the open space shall be specified in the application. If several uses are proposed, the plans shall specify what uses will occur in what areas. The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or disapprove particular uses proposed for the open space. 

(i) 
A proposed landscaping plan and grading plan; 

(j) 
The location, number, and types of residential dwelling units. 


(4) Additional submittal requirements: 
(a) The number of dwelling units and lots which could be constructed under this ordinance by means of a conventional development plan without open space/cluster approval; 
8Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -79 ­
ZONING 

(b) 
Impact of the development on groundwater recharge, surface and groundwater pollution, 

and measures to prevent pollution and decrease of groundwater recharge; 

(c) 
Proposed design features to integrate the development into the existing landscape, the surrounding neighborhoods, and enhance aesthetic assets; 

(d) 
Pre-and post-development runoff calculations; 

(e) 
If phasing of the development is proposed, a phasing schedule indicating which portions of the development including buildings, dwelling units, infrastructure, etc., to be constructed during each phase; 

(f) 
Materials indicating the landowner's interest in the land to be developed, the form of organization proposed to own and maintain the common land and the substance of covenants and grants of easements to be imposed upon the use of land and structures; 

(g) 
If necessary to determine compliance with the requirements or intent of this provision, the Planning Board may require further engineering or environmental analysis to be prepared at the expense of the applicant. 


(5) Review by other boards. Within ten (10) days of receiving the application and development plan, the Planning Board shall transmit one (1) copy of the plan to the Department of Public Works, Fire Department, Inspector of Buildings, Board of Health and Conservation Commission for review and comment. Failure to comment within thirty (30) days shall be deemed as no objection to the development plan. 
E. Permitted uses. 
(1) 
The permitted uses in an open space/cluster development may include single-family, two-family, and/or multifamily dwellings. In mixed used developments, multifamily dwelling units shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total number of dwelling units. 

(2) 
Multifamily dwellings shall also meet the design requirements for multifamily dwellings, ~ 200-7.2, of this ordinance. 


F. Lots/units. 
(1) 
The number of lots/dwelling units shall not exceed that which could be built on the tract in the district under this zoning ordinance. The number of lots/dwelling units shall be computed by subtracting from the total land area any land used for roadways, any lots not buildable in accordance with this ordinance, Title V of the State Sanitary Code (if not connected to municipal sewer), or any other local or state regulation and then dividing by the minimum lot requirement for each type of dwelling unit proposed. Total lots/dwelling units shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 

(2) 
Each lot shall be of a size and shape to provide a building site which shall be in harmony with the natural terrain and other features of the land. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -80 ­
ZONING 

(3) Each lot shall have adequate access on a public way or on a private way approved under the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations.9 
G. Dimensional requirements. 
(1) 
The area of the tract to be developed shall be not less than five (5) contiguous acres. 

(2) 
The minimum lot size per unit may be reduced to no less than the minimum lot area requirement of the Residential A District in ~ 200-5.2. of this ordinance. 

(3) 
Lot frontage and lot width may be reduced to a minimum of fifty (50) feet in the RA, RB and RC Districts. 

(4) 
Flag lots which meet the requirements of ~ 200-7.8 of this ordinance shall be permitted. 

(5) 
The minimum front and rear setback requirements and the open space per lot shall be the same as normally required in the district. The side yard requirements shall be ten (10) feet for single-and two-family dwellings and twenty (20) feet for multifamily structures in all residential districts. 

The Planning Board may reduce, by up to one half, the setbacks otherwise listed in the Table of Dimensional Requirements in this ordinance if the Board finds that such reduction will result in better design, improve protection of natural and scenic resources and will otherwise comply with this ordinance. 

(6) 
Further reduction of frontage, lot width, lot size, and setbacks from those set forth in this ordinance may be granted by the Planning Board by special permit if the Board finds that such reduction will result in better design, improve protection of natural and scenic resources and will otherwise comply with this ordinance. 

(7) 
The maximum building height in any open space/cluster development shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(8) 
All buildings and accessory structures and uses on a lot which adjoins a lot not within the open space/cluster development shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the district. 


H. Common open space requirements. 
(1) 
All land not devoted to dwellings, accessory uses, roads, or other development shall be set aside as common land for recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses which preserve the land in essentially its natural condition. 

(2) 
Common space shall be equivalent to the total reduction in lot sizes but shall be at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total land area of the tract in Urban Residential (RA) zones and twenty-five percent (25%) in Suburban Residential (RB) and Rural Residential (RC) zones not including wetlands determined by the Conservation Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act, floodplains, and slopes in excess of twenty-five percent (25%). In no case shall a parcel of common open space be less than one (1) acre in Urban Residential (RA) zones or one and one-quarter (1 1/4) acres in Suburban Residential (RB) or Rural Residential (RC) zones. At least one-half (1/2) of the open space shall be shaped for land uses such as recreation and agriculture. 


9Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -81 ­
ZONING 

(3) 
Further subdivision of common open space or its use for other than the above listed uses, except for easements for underground utilities and septic systems, shall be prohibited. Structures or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses may be erected but shall not exceed five-percent coverage of such common open land. 

(4) 
Such common open space shall be either: 

(a) 
Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or units within the development. If such a corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with conveyances of the lots in perpetuity; 

(b) 
Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or units within the development and to be managed by a nonprofit organization, the principle purpose of which is the conservation or preservation of open space; 

(c) 
Conveyed to the City of Greenfield, at no cost, and accepted by it for a park or open space use. Such conveyance shall be at the option of the City and shall require the approval of the City Council. 



(5) 
In any case where such land is not conveyed to the City, a conservation restriction enforceable by the City shall be recorded to ensure that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and shall not be built for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways. Such restrictions shall further provide for maintenance of the common land in a manner which will ensure its suitability for its function, appearance, cleanliness and proper maintenance of drainage, utilities and the like. 


I. Improvements. 
(1) 
Roadways, drainage, utilities, sidewalks, and grading shall be designed in accordance with the Greenfield Subdivision Regulations.10 

(2) 
All lots shall be served by adequate water and sewage disposal service. The proposed water system shall be either connected to a municipal water system or to an individual water supply approved by the Greenfield Board of Health and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. The proposed sewage disposal system shall be either municipal sanitary sewer or individual or community septic systems approved by the Board of Health and/or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 
Shared (community) septic systems shall be built in compliance with regulations for shared systems found in 310 CMR 15.000 (Title V). Septic systems shall be placed in the development to maximize the distance between systems and leaching areas shall be placed within common open areas rather than on individual lots. Individual on-site septic systems shall also be allowed on lots which meet all the standard dimensional requirements in the district and the requirements of Title 5 of the State Environmental Code. 

(4) 
Community septic systems shall only be permitted if a properly recorded ownership and maintenance agreement has been submitted and approved by the Planning Board and, if required, by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 


10Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -82 ­
ZONING 

(5) There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation, facilities, roadways, driveways, and parking. 
J. 	Community association. Ownership and maintenance of common open space, community water and sewage disposal systems, private ways, recreational facilities or any other commonly held property or facility shall be permanently assured through a nonprofit homeowners' or condominium association recorded by a covenant or other agreement in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds. Such agreements shall be submitted with the development plan and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board and City Council. 
(1) 
Such agreements shall specify ownership of all common land, facilities, etc.; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; compulsory membership in the association as a requirement of ownership of any lot or unit in the development; compulsory assessments for the cost of maintenance and the creation of a lien on the property assessed for failure to pay such assessment; guarantees that the association formed to own and maintain the common land and facilities shall not be dissolved without the consent of the Planning Board; guarantees that the ownership of common open space shall not be transferred without first offering the land to the City of Greenfield; and any other specifications deemed necessary by the Planning Board. 

(2) 
Such agreements shall provide that in the event that the association or any successor organization fails to maintain the common open space or any commonly owned facility in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may enforce such agreements and may enter onto such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common land or facility from becoming a public hazard or nuisance. If the City is required to perform any maintenance or repair work, the members of the association shall pay the cost thereof and the cost, if unpaid, shall become a lien upon their properties until said cost has been paid. 


K. 	Criteria for approval. Approval of an open space/cluster development shall be granted only if the Planning Board determines that it complies with all pertinent criteria in the Subdivision Regulations and: 
(1) 	
The requirements of this open space/cluster development provision have been complied with; 

(2) 
The plan is superior to a conventional one in preserving open space for conservation, recreation, or agriculture, in utilizing the natural features of the land, in allowing for more efficient provision of streets, utilities, and other public services, or in providing for affordable housing, and is at least equal in all aspects to a conventional subdivision plan; 

(3) 
The applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the potential for groundwater pollution is no greater from the proposed open space/cluster development than would be expected from a conventional development meeting the minimum lot size requirements located on the parcel. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant and the Board may hire professional assistance to certify impacts to groundwater at the expense of the applicant. The Board may impose conditions, including monitoring, to ensure groundwater protection; 

(4) 
The Planning Board may impose a development phasing schedule in accordance with ~ 200-8.3. of this ordinance. 


L. 	Further requirements upon approval. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -83 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
There shall be no increase in density, change in street layout, type of use or dwelling, or open space or any other substantial change as determined by the Planning Board to an approved development plan without review and further hearing by the Planning Board unless specified differently as a condition of approval. 

(2) 
No lot within an approved open space/cluster development may be further subdivided so as to increase the number of lots unless approved as a major amendment, and a notation to this effect shall be shown on any definitive plan of a subdivision based upon this section. 

(3) 
Prior to development or sale of any lot within an open space/cluster development, all lots to be so developed shall be shown on a plan recorded in the Registry of Deeds or registered with the Land Court, and a covenant or other instrument satisfactory to the Planning Board shall have been executed assuring the open land or recreational use of lands so designated in the development plan and the ownership and maintenance of any communal septic systems or other commonly owned facility. 



~ 200-7.2.  Multifamily dwellings. 
A. 	Special permit required. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for multifamily dwellings under the following procedures and requirements. Multifamily dwellings in open space/cluster developments shall also comply with the requirements of ~ 200-7.1 of this ordinance. 
B. 	Procedure. 
(1) 
Applicants shall submit seven (7) copies of an application and the proposed site plan, prepared by a registered engineer, architect, or other qualified professional, showing proposed structures, parking, drives, landscaping, topography and drainage, plus architectural elevations of all proposed buildings and any other site plan submittal requirements specified in the Site Plan, ~ 200-8.4 of this ordinance. Where the development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) requires a special permit hereunder, the aforesaid application and site plan shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by G.L. c. 43D. [Subsection 1 amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 

(2) 
Within ten (10) days of its receipt, one (1) copy of the application and site plan shall be forwarded by the Clerk of the Board of Appeals to the Planning Board, who shall submit a report of recommendations to the Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days. 

(3) 
The Board of Appeals shall not hold a public hearing on the application until receipt of the Planning Board report, or until forty-five (45) days has lapsed from the date of filing. Where the special permit sought hereunder is for the development of one (1) or more multifamily dwellings on a Priority Development Site (PDS), the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision thereon no later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of submission of the application. [Subsection 3 amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 

(4) 
More than one (1) building may be placed on one (1) lot, but no structure may contain more than twenty-four (24) dwelling units and no more than six (6) dwelling units shall be served by a single primary entrance. Each structure will be separated by a minimum of forty (40) feet. The Zoning Board of Appeals may allow more than twenty-four (24) dwellings per building in existing structures being converted to multifamily units. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -84 ­
ZONING 

(5) 
Multifamily structures shall be served by a public way having sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to accommodate the increase in traffic generated by the site. 

(6) 
The site shall be designed so that access, grading, water and sewer systems, drainage, roads and 

sidewalks meet all applicable standards established in the Greenfield Planning Board Subdivision Regulations,11 and the specifications and standards of the Department of Public Works; no building shall be floodlit; driveways and parking areas shall be illuminated only by shielded lights not higher than fifteen 

(15) 
feet; no lighting shall cast observable shadows onto adjoining premises; major topographic changes or removal of existing trees shall be avoided and effective use shall be made of the topography, landscaping, and building placement to make maximum use of solar energy, protect the character of the environs, and protect scenic views seen from public ways. 

(7) 
Parking areas shall be screened from public ways and adjacent properties by building location, grading, fencing, or planting. Parking shall be off-street and shall provide for forward moving ingress and egress onto any traveled way. No parking area shall contain more than thirty-six (36) parking spaces. 

(8) 
A development phasing schedule may be established by the Board of Appeals in accordance with ~ 200-8.3. 

(9) 
If the development will not be connected to a public water or sewer system, the applicant shall submit plans for an individual water supply system and a septic system designed by a registered sanitary engineer approved by the Greenfield Board of Health and if necessary, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering. No septic system serving the development shall exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons per day sewage flow as determined under 310 CMR Section 15.02, Title 5 of the State Environmental Code. More than one (1) septic system may serve the site in order to meet this requirement. 

(10) 
A special permit for multifamily dwellings shall not be granted unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the requirements of ~ 200-8.3 of this ordinance have been met. 


~ 200-7.3.  Reserved. 
~ 200-7.4.  Earth removal. 
Any removal of earth products shall be undertaken only in accordance with the Soil Removal Ordinance12 of the City of Greenfield under a permit issued by the Licensing Commission. 

~ 200-7.5.  Bed-and-breakfast/tourist home. 
The use of a single-family dwelling for a bed-and-breakfast/tourist home may be allowed under special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that: 
A. The bed-and-breakfast shall be owner-operated and may be owner occupied; 
11Editor's Note: See Ch. 880, Subdivision of Land. 
12Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Soil Removal. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -85 ­
ZONING 

B. 	No more than ten (10) rooms may be rented for transient occupancy. Such rooms shall share a common entrance, shall not have individual cooking facilities, and shall be served by private or shared bath/toilet facilities separate from those required for the single-family dwelling; 
C. 	The use of the single family dwelling for transient occupancy shall be secondary to the use of the dwelling as a single-family residence and shall not alter the single-family residential appearance of the building; 
D. 	One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each room; 
E. 	If the building is not served by public sewers, the Board of Health shall certify that the on-site sewage disposal system meets the requirements of the State Environmental Code and local Board of Health regulations; 
F. 	A sign identifying the operation shall not exceed the sign requirements for the district in which it is located in accordance with ~ 200-6.7 of this ordinance. 

~ 200-7.6.  Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the construction of a congregate housing facility in the RA, RB, SR, H, CC Districts, provided that: 
A. 	A congregate housing facility may have more than one (1) building on a lot, but each building may contain no more than twenty-four (24) dwelling units except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may allow more than twenty-four (24) units in existing structures being converted to congregate housing; 
B. 	A congregate housing facility shall require the minimum lot area and frontage requirements in the district for the first unit plus an additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for each additional unit in the RA, SR, H, and CC Districts and four thousand (4,000) square feet for each additional unit in the RB District; 
C. 	Connecting walkways shall be provided between structures and parking areas within the development; 
D. 	A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit plus one (1) visitor parking space for every two (2) dwelling units. 
~ 200-7.7.  Reserved. [Section deleted in its entirety by Town Council on November 18, 2009] 
~ 200-7.8.  Flag lots. 
The Planning Board may issue a special permit to reduce the frontage on lots used for single-family dwellings in the RB and RC Districts, provided that: 
A. 	A flag lot shall be created from one (1) lot which was in existence at the effective date of this flag lot provision and which conforms to all provisions of this ordinance; 
B. 	No more than two (2) flag lots shall be created from one (1) lot unless approved as part of a definitive subdivision plan; 
C. 	There shall be a minimum frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet; 
D. 	The lot area, excluding the access strip, shall be at least twice the minimum lot area required in the district; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -86 ­
ZONING 

E. 	There shall be at least two (2) lots which have the required frontage in the district between any two (2) flag lots. Continuous double or triple rows of lots comprised of standard lots along the street and parallel lines of flag lots in the rear shall not be permitted; 
F. 	The principal structure shall not be located more than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from the street line; 
G. 	Each flag lot shall have access over the frontage to the lot and an access strip of not less than fifty (50) feet wide from the front lot line to the buildable portion of the lot; 
H. 	The width of the lot where the principal building is to be constructed shall equal or exceed one and one-half (11/2) times the minimum lot width required in the district; 
I. 	Front, rear and side yards shall equal or exceed those required in the district. Any lot line which adjoins the rear lot line of a front lot shall have a front yard setback requirement as shown below: 

J. 	The access driveways shall be constructed and maintained to meet the following standards: 
(1) 	
A width of at least fifteen (15) feet. Drainage and culverts may be required where necessary; 

(2) 
A maximum grade of ten percent (10%) and a distance of no closer than ten (10) feet to any abutting property; 

(3) 
Access and turnaround space shall be provided year round for all vehicles including emergency and sanitary vehicles; 

(4) 	
No parking areas or structures shall be allowed in the access strip. 


K. 	The Planning Board may require that there be maintained a naturally occurring or a planted vegetated buffer zone between any flag lot and any adjacent lot sufficient to provide an effective visual screen between the buildings at grade level; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -87 ­
ZONING 

L. 	Once approved as a flag lot, such lot shall not be used for other than a single-family use or subsequently be subdivided unless as part of an approved definitive subdivision plan; 
M. 	Plans submitted under this section shall be the same as the plans submitted to the Planning Board under the Subdivision Control Law,13 and shall include the statement "Lot(s) _____ is a flag lot; building is 
permitted only in accordance with the special permit flag lot provision of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance"; 
N. 	The Planning Board shall not endorse any plan under the Subdivision Control Law for the purpose of creating a flag lot unless a special permit has been issued for the flag lot. 
~ 200-7.9.  Commercial camping. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for a commercial campground provided the following minimum requirements are met: 
A. 	Parcel is a minimum of ten (10) acres; 
B. 	Each rental plot shall have an area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, inclusive of parking and exclusive of access drives; 
C. 	If each plot is not serviced with water and sanitary sewer, common sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Title 5 of the State Environmental Code and local Board of Health regulations; 
D. 	No unit for overnight occupancy shall be placed within one hundred (100) feet of a street or other lot line, except that the Board of Appeals may reduce this requirement to fifty (50) feet if dense planting or topography provides effective screening; 
E. 	A condition for approval of a special permit for a campground shall be that the campground be developed and operated in accordance with a plan which has been reviewed by the Planning Board, designating plots, vehicular access, auto parking facilities and water and sewer systems. 
~ 200-7.10.  Mixed residential/business uses. 
[200-7.10. D Amended -deleted section and replaced in its entirety by Town Council September 6, 2005] 

The use of an existing or a new structure for mixed business and residential uses is permitted in the CC District without a special permit and in the GC, LC, SR and H Districts under a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals provided the following conditions are met in all districts: 
A. 	All dwelling units shall be above the first-floor level (the street level which faces the street with the highest traffic use); 
B. 	Business uses mixed with residential uses on the same floor shall be limited to office uses only; 
C. 	Business uses shall be limited to only those business uses allowed by right in the district in which the building is located; 
13Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, ~ 81K et seq. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -88 ­
ZONING 

D. 	Mixed uses requiring building permits shall require two (2) off-street parking spaces for each residential unit, except in the Central Commercial (CC) District. Mixed uses in the Central Commercial District shall not be required to have off street parking spaces for residential units. Mixed uses shall not be exempt from parking regulations, ~ 200-6.5; [Subsection amended by Town Council on November 18, 2009] 
E. 	Balconies and decks, other than those required for access or by the State Building Code, shall not be placed on the front of the building; 
F. 	Extra floors added to the building shall be in harmony with the design and character of the existing structure and the area. The maximum height shall not exceed the height limitations for the district; 
G. 	The design and size of each unit shall conform to all applicable building, health, and other codes; 
H. 	Mixed uses shall comply with the site plan review requirements of ~ 200-8.4; 
I. 	Mixed uses requiring a special permit shall also comply with the special permit requirements of ~ 200-8.3 of this ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require additional or more stringent conditions when deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare such as additional parking; 
J. 	Mixed uses in the GC, LC, SR, and H Districts shall comply with the dimensional requirements for multifamily dwellings as specified in Article V of this ordinance. 
~ 200-7.11.  Mobile homes and campers. 
A. 	No mobile home, trailer or camper shall be used for permanent residence. 
B. 	A mobile home or camper may be temporarily occupied: 
(1) 
By nonpaying guests of the owner of the premises for a period not to exceed two (2) weeks in any calendar year upon issuance of a permit by the Inspector of Buildings; 

(2) 
As a temporary office incidental to construction or development of the premises on which it is located upon issuance of a permit by the Building Inspector; 

(3) 
Within a duly licensed campground, provided however, a permit for this purpose is first obtained from the licensing authority before the land can be so occupied; 

(4) 
By the owner and occupier of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or other natural holocaust while the residence is being rebuilt for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. 


C. 	Whenever a mobile home, trailer or camper is parked for occupancy, said trailer, camper or mobile home must conform with local and state health and sanitation regulations and any rules, regulations or building codes adopted by the inhabitants of the City of Greenfield. 
~ 200-7.12.  Major development review. 
[~ 200-7.12 Amended -deleted section and replaced in its entirety by Town Council May 10, 2006] 

A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to identify and attempt to mitigate potential negative impacts to the City of Greenfield, such as to City services, traffic patterns, the environment, abutting properties, or the public health and safety, caused directly or indirectly by major development. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -89 ­
ZONING 

B. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to any of the following uses: 
(1) 
All new uses as defined by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance that generate three thousand (3,000) vehicle trips per day or more in the General Commercial District, and/or fifteen hundred (1,500) vehicle trips per day in any other district. [Subsection B1 amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 

(2) 	
All uses that create fifty (50) or more dwelling units. 

(3) 	
All subdivisions of land into fifty (50) or more building lots. 

(4) 
All new nonresidential uses of one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of gross floor area or more in the Planned Industry District, thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet of gross floor area in the Central Commercial and Limited Commercial Districts, and seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet or more of gross floor area in all other districts. [Subsection B4 amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 


C. 	Reviewing Authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall be as follows: 
(1) The SPGA shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Subsection C amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 
D. 	Submittal requirements. Uses subject to this section shall require a special permit and site plan approval in accordance with § 200-8.3 and 200-8.4 of this ordinance. 
(1) 	In addition to the submittal requirements for special permits and site plans in § 200-8.3 and § 200­
8.4 of this ordinance, the following additional information shall also be submitted: 
(a) 	
Facade elevations of all sides of any new building or structure or alterations to any existing building or structure. 

(b) 	
Photographs showing the proposed building site and abutting properties. 

(c) 	
Plans for phased construction. 

(d) 	
Contingency plans or bond relative to financial ability to complete the project. 

(e) 	
An impact statement prepared in accordance with the Major Development Review Rules and Regulations for Impact Statements. 


(2) The SPGA may require an independent consultant, contracted by the City and paid for by the applicant, to perform a peer review to review all or portions of the project’s Impact Statement. 
E. 	Criteria for approval of a major development. The Special Permit Granting Authority may issue a special permit for a major development only after finding that the proposed project will not create a materially adversely impact on adjacent properties, the neighborhood, the City, or the environment. The following criteria shall be considered: [Subsection E amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 
(1) 	
The special permit criteria in § 200-8.3F of this ordinance. 

(2) 	
The site plan approval guidelines in § 200-8.4 of this ordinance. 

(3) 
The standards for evaluating the impacts of a project set forth in the Major Development Review Rules and Regulations for Impact Statements. 


F. Project Decision Notwithstanding, the provisions of MGL c. 40A, all decisions of the SPGA shall be made within 210 days from the initial date of application.  The failure to issue a decision within 210 days shall result in the granting of the special permit as presented and a constructive grant shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of MGL 40A. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -90 ­
ZONING 

The provisions of this regulation shall be severable. Should any section or provision of this regulation be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, this shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section or provision of this regulation and this regulation, exclusive of the invalid or unenforceable section or provision, shall to the full extent consistent with law remain in full force and affect. [Subsection F amended by City Council on March 20, 2019] 
Upon review of the project, the SPGA shall: 
(1) 
Deny the special permit, stating specific conditions which cannot be sufficiently mitigated, or 

(2) 
Grant the special permit with conditions, safeguards and/or limitations, stated in writing, or 

(3) 
Grant the special permit as presented. 


~ 200-7.13.  Adult entertainment uses. 
A. Purpose and intent. 
(1) 
The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of adult entertainment uses within the City of Greenfield. The intent of the ordinance is to address and mitigate the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment uses. Numerous studies have documented that the quality of life in a community is degraded by adult entertainment establishments as a result of increased levels of crime; depreciation of property values; adverse impacts on the business climate; adverse impacts on neighborhood character; and adverse impacts on public health including noise, litter, unsanitary conditions, traffic, and adverse influence on children. 

(2) 
The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented materials; and it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market. It is not the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or other illegal matter or materials. 


B. Definitions. For purposes herein: 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES --Includes the following uses: 
(1) 
ADULT BOOKSTORE --An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals, pictures and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 

(2) 
ADULT CABARET --A nightclub, bar, restaurant, tavern, dance hall, or similar commercial establishment which features: 

(a) 
Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 

(b) 
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting anatomical areas specified as less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement; or 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -91 ­
ZONING 

(c) Motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, slides, DVDs or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of anatomical areas specified as above, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 
(3) 
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER --An enclosed building or outdoor venue used for public uses, for presenting material (motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, slides, DVDs or any other such visual or electronic media) distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 

(4) 
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE --An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in devices, objects, tools, toys or electronic media which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 

(5) 
ADULT VIDEO STORE --An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rent) motion pictures, films, video cassettes, DVDs and other film material or similar audio/visual media and electronic media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 

(6) 
ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH DISPLAY LIVE NUDITY FOR THEIR PATRONS ---An establishment which provides live entertainment for its patrons, that includes persons in the state of nudity; or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting anatomical areas specified as less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement. 

(7) 
NUDITY (as defined in MGL c. 272, ~ 31) --Uncovered or less than opaquely covered human genitals, pubic areas, the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple or areola only are covered. 

(8) 
SEXUAL CONDUCT (as defined in MGL c. 272, ~ 31) --Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, normal or perverted, any lewd exhibitions of the genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, any lewd touching of the genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, and any depiction or representation of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship. Sexual intercourse is simulated when it depicts explicit sexual intercourse which gives the appearance of the consummation of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted. 

(9) 
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT (as defined in MGL c. 272, ~ 31) --The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female while in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity. 

(10) 
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF STOCK --More than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area, utilized for display to rent or sell. 


C. Applicability. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -92 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
Adult entertainment uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except for: adult bookstores, adult paraphernalia stores, and adult video stores as defined in ~ 200-7.13B shall only be allowed in the General Commercial District. 

(2) 
Adult cabarets, adult motion-picture theaters and establishments which display live nudity for their patrons as defined in ~ 200-7.13B shall only be allowed in the Adult Entertainment Overlay District which shall be defined as the portion of land within the General Commercial District located west of the I-91 and Route 2 rotary. See Adult Entertainment Overlay District Reference Map. All adult entertainment uses may be permitted only upon granting of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 


D. 	Application procedures and submittal requirements. Applications for a special permit under this section shall comply with the requirements of the special permit and site plan review and approval, ~~ 200-8.3 and 200-8.4 of this ordinance. In addition to the submittal requirements required in ~ 200-8.3 and 200-8.4 the special permit application and site plan shall include the following information: 
(1) 
The name and address of the legal owner of the establishment, the legal owner of the property, and the manager of the proposed establishment. 

(2) 
The distances between the proposed adult entertainment use and the property line of all uses listed in ~ 200-7.13.E(1) of this provision. 


E. 	Criteria for approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for an adult entertainment use only if the following minimum criteria are met: 
(1) 	Adult entertainment uses shall not be located within: 
(a) 	
Fifty (50) feet from any residence. 

(b) 
One thousand (1,000) feet from any public or private school, state approved child-care facility, or nursery school. 

(c) 	
One thousand (1,000) feet from any church or other facility used for religious purposes. 

(d) 
One thousand (1,000) feet from any public park, playground or other facility where children congregate. 

(e) 
One thousand (1,000) feet from any other adult entertainment use within the General Commercial District. 

(f) 
Eight hundred fifty (850) feet from any other adult entertainment use within the Adult Entertainment Overlay District (to be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each adult entertainment use). 

(g) 	
Five hundred (500) feet from any establishment licensed under MGL c. 138, ~ 12. 


[Measure of distance. The distances specified above (besides the distances between adult entertainment uses in the Adult Entertainment Overlay District) shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the proposed adult entertainment use is to be located to the nearest boundary line of a residential zoning district or to the nearest property line of any of the other designated uses set forth above.] 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -93 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
Adult bookstores, adult paraphernalia stores and adult video stores as defined in ~ 200-7.13B shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 8:00 a.m. and close no later than 12:00 a.m. 

(3) 
Adult cabarets and establishments which display live nudity for their patrons as defined in ~ 200­7.13B shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 11:00 a.m. and close no later than 1:00 a.m. 

(4) 
No adult entertainment use special permit shall be issued to any person convicted of violating the provisions of MGL c.119, ~ 63, or MGL c. 272, ~ 28. 

(5) 
All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public. 

(6) 
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to display for advertisement or other purpose any signs, placards or other like materials to the general public on the exterior of the building or on the interior where the same may be seen through glass or other like transparent material any sexually oriented material as defined in MGL c.272, ~ 31. 

(7) 
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view displays or linger on the premises. 

(8) 	
No adult entertainment use shall have any flashing lights visible from outside the establishment. 

(9) 	
No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign. 

(10) 
Any special permit granted for an adult entertainment use shall be personal to the applicant, shall not run with the land and shall expire upon expiration of the applicant's lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject's property/business. 

(11) 
Any adult entertainment use granted a special permit shall comply with all other City ordinances and all statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof. 


F. 	Conditions, safeguards, limitations for adult entertainment uses. In granting a special permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose additional conditions, safeguards and limitations on the permit including but not limited to: additional buffer zones, or screening. 
G. 	Expiration. Any adult entertainment use special permit granted shall expire after a period of two (2) calendar years from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for successive two-year periods thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the Special Permit Granting Authority prior to said expiration and that no objection to said renewal is made and sustained by the Special Permit Granting Authority based upon the public safety factors applied at the time that the original special permit was granted. 
H. 	Preexisting adult entertainment uses. Any existing adult entertainment use shall apply for a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals within ninety (90) days following the adoption of this ordinance. 
I. 	Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -94 ­
ZONING 

~ 200-7.14.  Wireless communications facilities. [Added 10-17-2001, approved by AG 1-29-2002] 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to encourage the development of telecommunications and wireless services while minimizing the adverse impacts of these facilities on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, historic or scenic resources and the environment; minimize the overall number and height of such facilities to only what is necessary; and promote shared use of existing facilities in order to reduce the need for constructing new facilities. 
B. 	Definitions. 
CARRIER --A company that provides wireless communication services. 
CO-LOCATION --The use of a single wireless communication structure by more than one (1) carrier. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION BUILDING --Any building or shelter used to house equipment primarily used for wireless communication devices. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE --Any antenna, appurtenance, wiring, or equipment used in connection with the reception or transmission of radio frequency signals. Such signals shall include but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, personal communication services (PCS), and microwave communications. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY --A general term to include wireless communication structures, communication devices, and wireless communication buildings. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION STRUCTURE --Any structure, monopole or tower intended to support wireless communication devices. Any wireless communication device that extends vertically more than fifteen (15) feet. 
C. 	Applicability. Wireless communication structures shall only be erected upon the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals. New wireless communication structures shall only be considered upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that all existing or approved structures cannot accommodate the wireless communication devices planned for the proposed structure. Wireless communication devices shall only be erected upon the issuance of a building permit from the Inspector of Buildings. 
D. 	Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance: 
(1) 	
Wireless communication facilities used solely for City, state, or federal emergency services. 

(2) 
Amateur radio towers used in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and used solely for that purpose. 

(3) 
Wireless communication structures used expressly for television and radio reception and transmission including dish antennae, which are covered in ~ 200-6.2D of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 


E. 	Siting requirements. The following requirements shall be used when preparing plans for siting all wireless communication facilities. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -95 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
Siting preferences. The following is a guideline of preferred locations for proposed wireless communication facilities, from most to least favorable districts/properties. The applicant must demonstrate that it is not feasible to locate in a more preferred districts/properties. 

(a) 	
Existing or approved wireless communication structure or existing nonresidential structure. 

(b) 	
General and Planned Industry Districts. 

(c) 	
General Commercial District. 

(d) 	
Rural Residential District. 



(2) 
The height of a wireless communication structure shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate anticipated future use. 

(3) 
The applicant shall float a balloon the same height as the proposed structure, for fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing. The balloon should be of a size and color to be seen from a distance of at least one (1) mile. 

(4) 
Wireless communication structures shall, to the greatest extent possible, be sited off ridgelines and located where their visual impact is least detrimental to historic and scenic resources. 

(5) 
The minimum distance from the base of the wireless communication structure to any property line or road right-of-way shall be at least the height of the wireless communication structure in nonresidential zones and one and five-tenths (1.5) times the height of the structure in residential zones, including the height of any mounted wireless communication devices. This distance will be designated as the "fall zone" of the wireless communication structure. 

(6) 
The setback requirements for any wireless communication buildings shall comply with that of the zoning district. 


F. 	Design requirements. The following guidelines shall be used when preparing plans for the construction of all wireless communication facilities. 
(1) 
Wireless communication facilities shall be designed for co-location and accommodate the maximum number of carriers as technologically feasible. 

(2) 	
Only freestanding monopoles are allowed. Lattice-style towers and similar facilities requiring three 

(3) 
or more legs and/or guy wires for support are not permitted. 

(3) 
There shall be no signs or advertisements, except for no trespassing signs and a required sign giving a phone number where the owner can be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis. Any signs required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) are allowed. 

(4) 
All wireless communication structures, devices and buildings shall be colored, molded, and installed to blend into the structure and landscape to the greatest extent feasible. 

(5) 
Existing trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Vegetative screening shall be used to screen all abutting residential properties and roadways and shall be species that are consistent with the surrounding natural vegetation. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -96 ­
ZONING 

(6) 
Fencing shall be provided to control access to the facility and shall not consist of razor or barbed wire. 

(7) 
All utilities serving the facility shall be installed underground. 

(8) 
Lighting of the wireless communication structure shall be prohibited. 

(9) 
There shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space for each wireless communication facility to be used in connection with maintenance of the site and not to be used for the storage of vehicles or other equipment. 


G. Procedures. An application for a special permit for the siting a wireless communication facility shall be 
filed in accordance with the established special permit procedures as stated in the Greenfield Zoning Ordinances and all rules and regulations adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.14 
(1) 
In the event the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that circumstances necessitate expert technical review, all reasonable expenses shall be paid for by the applicant. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant in writing of the estimated costs of the review. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all review fees and the fees shall be paid to the City within ten (10) days of receipt of notification. The City Treasurer shall hold in a separate account all review fees. The Board may request additional funds if needed to cover the cost of an outside review in the same manner as above. Failure by the applicant to make timely payments shall be adequate reason to deny the application. 

(a) 
The selection of an outside consultant may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeals are limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications consist of either an educational degree or three (3) or more years of practice in the field. The required time limits for action upon an application by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the City Council within thirty (30) days following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall stand. 

(b) 
Any excess amount in review fees paid by the applicant, including any accrued interest, at the completion of the project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest, and a final expenditures report on the fees shall be made available along with a copy of any reports produced by the consultant. 



(2) 
For siting a new wireless communication facility. 


(a) Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Massachusetts, on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet or one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, where appropriate, and one (1) copy reduced to an eleven-inch­by-seventeen-inch sheet which includes the following: 
[1] North arrow, date, scale, seal(s) of the licensed professional engineer(s) who prepared the plans. 
Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning, and Part X, Zoning Board of Appeals Regulations, of the Code of the City of Greenfield, respectively. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -97 ­
ZONING 

[2] Name and address of the landowner and the name and address of all abutters. 
[3] The exact location of the proposed wireless communication facility with the maximum height and setback distances of the wireless communication structure clearly indicated. 
[4] Property lines and the location of permanent structures and buildings within a three hundred-foot radius of the proposed wireless communication structure. 
[5] Existing and proposed contours at a minimum of two-foot intervals and spot elevations at the base of all the proposed and existing structures. 
[6] Plans for anchoring and supporting the structure, including specifications of hardware and other building material. 
[7] Plans for drainage of surface water and erosion control both during construction and as a permanent measure. 
[8] Delineation of all wetlands, if applicable. 
[9] A landscape plan including: a description of the existing vegetation to be removed or altered and the location, size, and description of any proposed fencing, landscaping and/or screening. 
[10] Layout and details of surfacing for the access road or driveway and parking. 
(b) 
A locus map at a scale one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet which shows streets, buildings, and significant landscape features. 

(c) 
A description of the soil and surficial geology at the proposed site. 

(d) 
A color photograph or rendition of the wireless communication facility with all proposed wireless communication devices clearly shown in the photo. 

(e) 
Photographs of four (4) view lines of the balloon float from any historic, scenic or other areas as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

(f) 
A map showing the signal coverage areas of the proposed wireless communication structure including the location of other proposed or existing facilities, the interface with adjacent service areas, and the results of any drive tests. 

(g) 
Proof of approval of all federal, state and local permits required for construction and operation. 

(h) 
A detailed narrative report written by a licensed professional engineer that includes: 


[1] Justification of the selection of the proposed site location including why it is not feasible in a more preferred district/property as described in Subsection E(1). 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -98 ­
ZONING 

[2] Demonstration that the height of the proposed structure is the minimum feasible to 
provide the intended service. 
[3] Description of the capacity of the structure, including the number and type of additional wireless communication devices it can accommodate. 
[4] Projected future needs of the carrier for at least the next five (5) years, and how the proposed wireless communication facility will meet future demand projections for the City and for adjacent towns. 
[5] A sample lease agreement should another carrier desire to co-locate. 
[6] All special design features used to minimize the visual and environmental impacts of the proposed wireless communication facility. 
(3) For siting a wireless communication device on an existing wireless communication structures or existing nonresidential structures, such as buildings, silos, water towers, utility poles, steeples, and co-location with another carrier, provided that the new device does not add more than fifteen (15) feet to the height of the structure. 
(a) 
Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Massachusetts, on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet or one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, where appropriate, and a reduced copy on an eleven-inch-by­seventeen-inch sheet which shows the following: 

[1] North arrow, date, scale, seal(s) of the licensed professional engineer(s) who prepared the plans. 
[2] Plans for supporting and attaching the device to the structure including specifications of hardware and all other building materials. 
[3] Plans for any new wireless communication buildings. 
[4] Layout and details of surfacing for an access road and parking, if the site is to be altered from existing conditions. 

(b) 
A map showing the signal coverage areas of proposed device(s) and their interface with adjacent service areas and results of any drive tests. 

(c) 
A color photograph or rendition of the wireless communication device(s) as it will look on the structure. 

(d) 
A detailed narrative report written by a licensed professional engineer that includes: 


[1] A draft of the contract between the structure/building owner and the applicant. 
[2] Demonstration that the wireless communication structure or nonresidential structure to which the device will be mounted has the structural integrity to support such a device. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -99 ­
ZONING 

[3] Demonstration that the wireless communication devices installed on preexisting structures preserves the character of such structures to the greatest extent possible. 
[4] Demonstration of coordination of services with adjacent towns to minimize the number of devices. 
[5] Description of the projected future needs of the carrier, and how the proposed facility addresses those future projections. 
[6] All design features used to minimize the visual impact of the proposed wireless communication device. 
H. 	Criteria for approval. In granting a special permit for a wireless communication facility, in addition to the findings required by the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance for special permits, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find: 
(1) 
The applicant clearly demonstrated that no existing or approved structures can accommodate the wireless communication devices planned for the proposed structure. 

(2) 	
The size and height of the structure is the minimum necessary. 

(3) 
The proposed wireless communication facility minimizes its impacts on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, the environment, and areas of historic or scenic value. 


I. 	Conditions of use. 
(1) 
All wireless communication facilities shall be maintained in good order and repair. Any paint and finish must be maintained and repaired when blemishes are visible from the property line. Failure to perform the required maintenance shall be grounds for revoking the special permit. 

(2) 
Any extension, construction or replacement of the structures or buildings within the wireless communication facility shall be subject to an amendment to the special permit. 

(3) 	
Regulatory compliance. 

(a) 
The holder of the special permit shall file an annual certification demonstrating structural integrity and continuing compliance with current standards of the FCC, FAA and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), which shall be filed with the Building Inspector. 

(b) 
If the FCC or the FAA regulations are changed, the owner or operator shall bring the facilities into compliance within ninety (90) days unless a more stringent compliance schedule is included in the regulation. 

(c) 
Failure to comply with any federal, state, or local regulations shall be grounds for removal of all noncomplying structures, buildings, and devices at the owner's expense. The Building Inspector shall give the holder of the special permit ninety (90) days' written notice in advance of any demolition action. 



(4) 	
Removal. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -100 ­
ZONING 

(a) 
An applicant shall post a performance bond with the City for the dismantling and removal of the telecommunications facility. The Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the issuance of the special permit shall determine a bond amount that will cover the full cost of dismantling and removal of the facility. 

(b) 
Wireless communication facilities shall be removed within one (1) year of cessation of use at the owner's expense. The Building Inspector shall give the holder of the special permit ninety 

(90) 
days' written notice in advance of any demolition action. 


~ 200-7.15.  Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. [Added by the Town Council on March 17, 2010 and amended by the Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the creation of new large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations. 
B. 	Applicability. This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment. 
C. 	General Requirements for all Large Scale Solar Power Generation Installations. 
(1) 
Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations.  The construction and operation of all large scale solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.  All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code. 

(2) 
Building Permit and Building Inspection.  No large scale solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. 

(3) 
Site Plan Review.  Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity allowed by right shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section. Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity allowed by special permit shall undergo site plan review by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

(4) 
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts. 

(5) 
Required Documents.  In addition to the submittal requirements under ~ 200-8.4 of the Zoning Ordinance, the project proponent shall provide the following documents: 


(a) 	Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from nearby structures; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -101 ­
ZONING 

(b)  One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic installation,  
associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National  
Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;  
(c)  Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the PV panels,  
mounting system, and inverter;  
(d)  Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;  
(e)  Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all co- 
proponents or property owners, if any;  
(f)  The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the project  
proponent;  
(g)  Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site;  
(h)  An operation and maintenance plan;  
(i)  Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project site  
(submission of a copy of a zoning map with the parcel(s) identified is suitable for this  
purpose);  
(j)  Proof of liability insurance; and   
(k)  Description of financial surety that satisfies Subsection (13)(c) of this ordinance.  
(l)  A list of any hazardous materials proposed to be located on the site in excess of  
household quantities and a plan to prevent their release to the environment, as  
appropriate;  
(m)  Documentation by an acoustical engineer of the noise levels projected to be generated  
by the installation;  
(n)  Documentation of soil types on all land involved with the project;  
(o)  Locations of wetlands and Priority Habitat Areas defined by the Natural Heritage &  
Endangered Species Program (NHESP);  
(p)  Locations of floodplains or inundation areas for moderate or high hazard dams;  
(q)  Provision of water including that needed for fire protection; and  
(r)  Existing trees 6” caliper or larger.  

In addition to items (a)-(r) above, for large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation projects exceeding 10 acres, the following documents are also required: 
(s) 	
Location on the site plan of all existing trail networks and woods roads in the project area; and 

(t) 	
Map of adjacent properties and land uses. 


The Reviewing Authority may waive documentary requirements that are not applicable to the project under consideration. 
(6) 
Site Control. The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation. 

(7) 
Operation & Maintenance Plan.  The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation. 

(8) 
Utility Notification.  No large-scale ground –mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given  to the Site Plan Review Authority that the utility company that 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -102 ­
ZONING 

operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.  Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(9) 	
Dimension and Density Requirements. 

(a) 	
Setbacks.  For large -scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows: i Front yard: The front yard depth shall be at least 50 feet. ii Side yard. Each side yard shall have a depth at least 25 feet. iii Rear yard. The rear yard depth shall be at least 25 feet. For large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations exceeding 10 acres, all setbacks shall increase to fifty (50) feet when the boundary line abuts a residential use or district, conservation area, public recreation area, or public roadway. 

(b) 	
Appurtenant Structures.  All appurtenant structures to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements.  All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other.  Structures should be screened from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. 

(c) 	
Height of Structures.  The height of any structure associated with a Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Electric Installation shall not exceed 20 feet. 

(d) 	
Project Area. The total project area of any structure and improvements associated with a large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall not exceed ten (10) acres, except in the Planned Industry Zoning District for which the limit shall be fifty (50) acres. Projects greater than ten (10) acres in size within the Planned Industry District shall require a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 



(10) 	
Design and Performance Standards. 

(a) 	
Lighting.  Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law.  Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.  Lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 

(b) 	
Signage.  Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall comply with ~ 200-6.7.  A sign consistent with ~ 200-6.7 shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.  Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation. 

(c) 	
Utility Connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider. 

(d) 	
Control of Vegetation.  Herbicides shall not be used to control vegetation at the solar electric installation. Mowing, grazing or using geotextile materials underneath the solar array are possible alternatives. 

(e) 	
Noise.  Noise generated by Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Electric Installations and associated equipment and machinery shall conform to applicable state and local noise 




City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -103 ­
ZONING 

regulations, including the DEP’s Division of Air Quality noise regulations, 310 CMR 7.10. 
A source of sound will be considered in violation of said regulations if the source: 
i. 	Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10 db(A) above ambient; or 
ii. 	Produces a “pure tone” condition, when an octave band center frequency sound pressure level exceeds the two (2) adjacent center frequency sound pressure levels by three (3) decibels or more. Said criteria are measured both at the property line and at the nearest inhabited residence. “Ambient” is defined as the background A-weighted sound level that is exceeded 90% of the time measured during equipment hours, unless established by other means with the consent of the DEP. Noise generated shall further comply with Section 200-6.8 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 
(f) 	Impact on Agricultural and Environmentally Sensitive Land.  The facility shall be designed to minimize impacts to agricultural and environmentally sensitive land and to be compatible with continued agricultural use of the land. 
i. 	If documentation of soil types under Subsection C(5)(o) above identifies any Prime 
Agricultural soils or soils of statewideimportance, as identified by the USDA’s 
Natural Resource Conservation Service, on the property or the property is being actively farmed, then a copy of all application materials shall be forwarded to the Agricultural Commission for their review and recommendations.  Failure of the Agricultural Commission to comment within 30 days after receipt shall be deemed as no objection to the proposal. 
ii. 	Identified Prime Agricultural soils or soils of statewide importance, as identified 
by the USDA’s Natural Resource Conservation Service, on the property shall not 
be removed from the property. 
(g) 	Visual Impacts/Screening.  Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be designed to minimize visual impacts including preserving natural vegetation to the maximum extent possible, blending in equipment with the surroundings, and adding vegetative buffers to provide an effective visual barrier from adjacent roads and driveways, and to screen abutting residential dwellings. Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be screened from view by a minimum fifteen (15) foot wide staggered and grouped planting of shrubs and small trees. Such plantings shall use native plants and a mix of deciduous and evergreen species and may be located within the setback area. 
(11) 	Safety and Environmental Standards. 
(a) 	
Emergency Services.  The large scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Greenfield Fire Chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan.  All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked.  The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation. 

(b) 	
Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts.  Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the large – scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws. 

(c) 	
For large-scale projects exceeding 10 acres where existing trail networks or woods roads, which often serve as wildlife corridors, are disrupted by the location of the Ground-Mounted Solar Electric Installation the plans shall show alternative trail 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -104 ­
ZONING 

alignments to be constructed by the applicant, although no rights of public access may be established hereunder. 
(12) 	
Monitoring and Maintenance. 

(a) 	
Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions. The large -scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Greenfield Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way. 

(b) 	
Modifications.  All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board. 



(13) 	
Abandonment or Decommissioning. 


(a) 	Removal Requirements.  Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Subsection (13)(b) of this ordinance shall be removed.  The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.   Decommissioning shall consist of: i Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic 
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site. 
ii 	Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations. 
iii 	Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Planning Board or SPGA may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation. 
iv 	Soil decompaction in areas where Prime Agricultural Soils or soils of statewide 
importance, as identified by the USDA’s Natural Resource Conservation Service, 
have been identified or areas that are or have been actively farmed prior to the 
installation of the facility. 
(b) 	
Abandonment.  Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the City may enter the property and physically remove the installation. 

(c) 	
Financial Surety.  Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the City must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125 percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project proponent. Such 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -105 ­
ZONING 

surety will not be required for municipally-or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation. 
~ 200-7.16. Non-Commercial Scale Solar Energy Installations. [Added by the Town Council on December 19, 2012] 
A. 	Purpose The purpose of this ordinance is to allow orderly development of non-commercial scale solar energy installations and facilities and to minimize the impacts on scenic, natural, and historic resources of the City. The provisions set forth in this section shall take precedence over all other sections when considering applications related to the construction, operation, and/or repair of non-commercial scale solar energy installations. 
B. 	Accessory Installations, Building-mounted Building-Integrated Solar Energy Systems are permitted in all zoning districts. The installation shall have an automatic and manual means of shutdown with clear instructional signage. 
C. 	Accessory Installations, Ground-mounted Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted by right within the Health (H), Central Commercial (CC), Limited Commercial (LC), General Commercial (GC), Office (O), General Industry (GI), and Planned Industry (PI) Districts and permitted by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals within the Rural Residential (RC), Suburban Residential (RB), Urban Residential (RA), and Semi-Residential (SR) Districts subject to Section 8.3 of the Zoning Ordinance in addition to the following requirements: 
(1) 
All installations shall have an automatic and manual means of shutdown with clear instructional signage. 

(2) 
The solar installation shall meet the setback and dimensional requirements of the Zoning District for accessory structures. 

(3) 
The total surface area of all Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems on the lot shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum open space requirement of the Zoning District in which it is located as specified in the Table of Dimensional Requirements or 2,500 square feet, whichever is less. 

(4) 
Impact on Agricultural and Environmentally Sensitive Land.  The facility shall be designed to minimize impacts to agricultural and environmentally sensitive land and to be compatible with continued agricultural use of the land.  Identified Prime Agricultural soils on the property shall not be removed from the property. 

(5) 
The maximum height of Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 

(6) 	
The solar installation shall be an On-Site Solar Energy System. 

(7) 	
Dimensional exceptions may be allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -106 ­
ZONING 

D. General Requirements for all Non-commercial Scale Solar Energy Installations. 
(1) 
Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations.  The construction and operation of all non­commercial scale solar energy installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.  All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar energy installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code. 

(2) 
Building Permit and Building Inspection.  No non-commercial scale solar energy installation shall be constructed, installed, or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. 

(3) 
Site Plan Review.  Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems permitted by right shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board and Small-Scale, Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Systems permitted by special permit shall undergo site plan review by the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section and Section 200-8.4, Site Plan Review, of the Zoning Ordinance. 



~ 200-7.17.  Marijuana Establishments [Added by the Town Council on June 20, 2018] 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the orderly placement of medical and recreational marijuana establishments in areas where such use is not inconsistent with the neighborhood character and in accordance with State law. 
B. Applicability 
(1) 
No more than eight (8) Marijuana Retailers shall be allowed within the City of Greenfield. The number of licenses for brick and mortar Marijuana Retailers shall be capped at eight (8). 

(2) 
All Marijuana Establishments shall require a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

(2) 
The commercial cultivation production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or dispensing of Marijuana is prohibited unless permitted as a Marijuana Establishment under this Section. 

(3) 
No Marijuana Establishment shall be established except in compliance with the provisions of this Section. 

(4) 
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to supersede federal and state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs. 

(5) 
If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this end the provisions of this Section are severable. 


C. Definitions. 
The following definitions can be found in Section 200-2.1, Definitions, of the Zoning Ordinance: Cannabis 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -107 ­
ZONING 

or Marijuana, Craft Marijuana Cooperative, Commission (CCC), Hemp, Host Community, Host Community Agreement, Marijuana Cultivator, Marijuana Establishment, Marijuana Micro-Business, Marijuana Independent Testing Laboratory, Marijuana Research Facility, Marijuana Retailer, Marijuana Product Manufacturer, Marijuana Standards Testing Laboratory, Marijuana Transporter, and Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
D. Eligible Locations for Marijuana Establishments 
See Article IV, Use Regulations, and Appendix A, Table of Uses, of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 
E. General Requirements and Conditions for all Marijuana Establishments 
(1) 
All processing, testing, product manufacturing, and retail must take place within a fully enclosed building. 

(2) 
Marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia shall not be visible from outside the building in which the marijuana establishment is located.  No outside storage is permitted. 

(3) 
The hours of operation of Marijuana Establishments shall be set by the Special Permit Granting Authority, but in no event shall said Marijuana Establishments be open and/or operating between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM. 

(4) 
No Marijuana Establishment shall be located within a radius of two-hundred and fifty (250) feet of a pre-existing public or private school providing education in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12. The of two-hundred and fifty (250) foot distance under this section shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line in question to the nearest point of the property line where the 

Marijuana Establishment is or will be located. 15 

(5) 
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises of a Marijuana Establishment. 

(6) 
No Marijuana Establishment shall be located inside transient housing such as motels and dormitories, or inside a movable or mobile structure such as a van or truck. 

(7) 
All business signage for marijuana establishments shall be subject to the requirements promulgated by the Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission and the requirements of Section 200-6.7 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 
Marijuana Establishments shall provide the Greenfield Police Department, Building Inspector and the Special Permit Granting Authority with the names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management staff and keyholders to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the establishment. 

(9) 
Marijuana Establishments are not permitted as a Home Occupation, as defined per Section 200-6.3 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance. 


Editor's Note: The Greenfield Board of Health may require a greater setback distance. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -108 ­
ZONING 

(10) All applicants for Marijuana Establishments shall give 30 days prior written notice by certified mail to all preexisting House of Worships within three hundred (300) feet of the public meeting at which the Special Permit shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
F. Special Permit Requirements 
(1) 
In addition to the application requirements set forth in Section E of this Ordinance, a special permit application for a Marijuana Establishment shall include the following: 

(a) 
proof that the application to the CCC has been deemed complete pursuant to 935 CMR 500.102; 

(b) 
the name and address of each owner of the facility; 

(c) 
copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the Marijuana Establishment; 

(d) 
evidence of the Applicant’s right to use the site of the Marijuana Establishment for the Marijuana Establishment, such as a deed, or lease; 

(e) 
if the Applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the above are entities rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose the identity of the owners of such entities until the disclosure contains the names of individuals; 

(f) 
a certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the hearing for the special permit application, taken from the most recent tax list of the City and certified by the City Assessor; 

(g) 
an approval letter from the Greenfield Chief of Police regarding the proposed security measures for the Marijuana Establishment, including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. 



(2) 
Mandatory Findings. The Special Permit Authority shall not issue a special permit for a Marijuana Establishment unless it finds that: 

(a) 
the Marijuana Establishment is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in M.G.L. c. 40A, §11; 

(b) 
the Marijuana Establishment demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations; and 

(c) 
the Applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of Sections E and F herein; 




G. Abandonment or Discontinuance of Use 
(1) A Special Permit shall lapse if not exercised within one year of issuance. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -109 ­
ZONING 

(2) A Marijuana Establishment shall be required to remove all material, plants equipment and other paraphernalia prior to surrendering its state issued licenses or permits; or within six months of ceasing operations; whichever comes first. 
~ 200-7.18.  Accessory Dwelling Units [Added by the Town Council on August 17, 2016] 
A. 	Purpose.  The purpose of permitting accessory dwelling units (aka accessory apartments or in-law apartments) is to: 
(1) 
Develop housing units in owner occupied single-family homes that are appropriate for households at a variety of stages in their life cycle; 

(2) 
Provide older homeowners with a means of obtaining rental income, companionship, security, and services, thereby enabling them to stay more comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise be forced to leave; 

(3) 
Add moderately priced rental units to the housing stock to meet the needs of smaller households and make housing units available to low and moderate income households who might otherwise have difficulty finding housing; 

(4) 	
Provide housing units for persons with disabilities; 

(5) 	
Protect stability, property values, and the residential character of a neighborhood. 

(6) 	
Encourage increased housing density; and 

(7) 	
Legalize existing conversions to encourage compliance with the State Building Code. 


B. 	Definitions. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, WITHIN – An Accessory Dwelling Unit that is within a single-family home is a self-contained housing unit incorporated within the single-family home that is clearly a subordinate part of the single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED --An attached Accessory Dwelling Unit is a self-contained housing unit added as an addition to a single-family home that is clearly a subordinate part of the single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED --A detached Accessory Dwelling Unit is a self-contained housing unit that is located on the same lot as the structure of a single-family home and may be incorporated within a garage or carriage house or other accessory structure or as a standalone structure that is clearly subordinate to the primary use as a single-family home and complies with each of the criteria stated in this ordinance. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted. 
C. 	Applicability. 
(1) Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within. The Inspector of Buildings may issue a Building Permit authorizing the installation and use of an Accessory Dwelling Unit within an existing or new owner-
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -110 ­
ZONING 
occupied, single-family home within the Urban Residential (RA), Suburban Residential (RB), Rural Residential (RC), Semi-Residential (SR), and Limited Commercial (LC) Zoning Districts. 
(2) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. An attached Accessory Dwelling Unit shall require a Special Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals within the Urban Residential (RA), Suburban Residential (RB), Rural Residential (RC), Semi-Residential (SR), and Limited Commercial (LC) Zoning Districts. 

(3) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. A detached Accessory Dwelling Unit shall require a Special Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals within the Urban Residential (RA), Suburban Residential (RB), Rural Residential (RC), Semi-Residential (SR), and Limited Commercial (LC) Zoning Districts. 

(4) 
Any proposed non-conforming attached or detached ADU is subject to a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 


D. Accessory Dwelling Unit Standards. 
(1) 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be a complete, separate housekeeping unit containing both kitchen and bath. 

(2) 
Only one Accessory Dwelling Unit may be created within a single-family house or house lot. 

(3) 
The owner(s) of the residence in which the Accessory Dwelling Unit is created must continue to occupy at least one of the dwelling units as their primary residence. 

(4) 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence as much as feasibly possible. Any new entrances shall be located on the side or rear of the building. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be compatible in design with the primary residence. Any stairways, access, or egress alterations serving the Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be enclosed, screened, or located so that visibility from public ways is minimized. 

(5) 
The maximum gross floor area of Accessory Dwelling Units shall be 900 sq. ft. or one-third the total gross floor area of the single family home, whichever is greater. 

(6) 
Once an Accessory Dwelling Unit has been added to a single-family residence or lot, the Accessory Dwelling Unit shall never be enlarged beyond the square footage of the original permit for the Accessory Dwelling Unit. 

(7) 
An Accessory Dwelling Unit may not be occupied by more than three (3) people nor have more than two bedrooms. 

(8) 
A minimum of two (2) but no more than four (4) off-street parking spaces must be available for use by the owner-occupants and tenants. 

(9) 
The construction of any Accessory Dwelling Unit must be in conformity with the State Building Code, Title V of the State Sanitary Code, 527 CMR – MA Fire Prevention Regulations and other local ordinances and regulations. 

(10) 
Prior to issuance of a permit, the owner(s) must send a notarized letter to the appropriate permitting authority stating that the owner(s) will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises as the owner's permanent/primary residence. 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -111 ­
ZONING 

(11) 
When a structure which has received a Permit for an Accessory Dwelling Unit is sold, the new owner(s), if they wish to continue to exercise the Permit, must, within thirty (30) days of the sale, submit a notarized letter to the Inspector of Buildings stating that they will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises as their primary residence. This statement shall be listed as condition on any Permits which are issued under this Section. 

(12) 
Permits issued under this section shall specify that the owner must occupy one of the dwelling units. The Special Permit and the notarized letters must be recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds or Land Court, as appropriate, in the chain of title to the property, with documentation of the recording provided to the Inspector of Buildings, prior to the occupancy of the Accessory Dwelling Unit. 

(13) 
Prior to issuance of a permit, a floor plan must be submitted showing the proposed interior and exterior changes to the building. 

(14) 
For dwellings to be served by on-site septic system, the owner must obtain a letter from the Board of Health stating that the existing sewage disposal system is adequate for the proposed Accessory Dwelling Unit before a Special Permit can be obtained. 

(15) 
In order to encourage the development of housing units for disabled and handicapped individuals and persons with limited mobility, the Inspector of Buildings or Zoning Board of Appeals may allow reasonable deviation from the stated conditions where necessary to install features that facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons. 


E. Existing Owner-Occupied Single Family Dwellings within Non-Residential Zoning Districts 
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as SPGA may authorize the use of an attached or detached Accessory Dwelling Unit for an existing owner-occupied single family home or lot within non-residential zoning districts provided that all provisions of this ordinance are met. 
F. Accessory Dwelling Units in Existence before the Adoption of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Ordinance 
(1) To ensure that Accessory Dwelling Units or conversions in existence before the adoption of this Accessory Dwelling Unit ordinance are in compliance with the State Building Code the following application process is available. 
(a) 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize, under a Special Permit and in consultation with the Inspector of Buildings, a use known as an Accessory Dwelling Unit in an Owner-Occupied, Single-Family Dwelling. The Board in consultation with the Inspector of Buildings will review each existing use on a case-by-case basis to determine if the dwelling conforms to State Building Code. 

(b) 
The applicant must follow the same procedure described in this ordinance including the submission of a notarized letter declaring owner occupancy. 


G. Administration and Enforcement. 
(1) 
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Buildings to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 

(2) 
No building shall be constructed or changed in use or configuration, until the Inspector of Buildings has issued a permit. No permit shall be issued until a sewage disposal works permit, when 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -112 ­
ZONING 

applicable, has first been obtained from the Board of Health and the proposed building and location thereof conform with the City’s laws and ordinances. Any new building or structure shall conform to all adopted state and City laws, ordinances, codes and regulations. No Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Inspector of Buildings where required. 
(3) 
The Inspector of Buildings shall refuse to issue any permit, which would result in a violation of any provision of this ordinance or in a violation of the conditions or terms of any special permit or variance granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority or its agent. 

(4) 
The Inspector of Buildings shall issue a cease and desist order on any work in progress or on the use of any premises, either of which are in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 

(5) 
Upon request of the homeowner applicant, the Zoning Board of Appeals as SPGA may, after making findings of fact that a waiver is merited given the totality of circumstances based on any or all of the following factors, waive standards of Section D of this ordinance. 

(a) 
The showing of good and sufficient cause that a waiver is not inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter as a whole; 

(b) 
A determination that failure to grant the waiver would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 

(c) 	
Danger to life or property; 

(d) 
The necessity to accommodate requests of the Conservation Commission, Planning Board or Historical Commission or any municipal department; 

(e) 	
Extraordinary expense which is undue given the purpose of the provision(s) waived; 

(f) 
The availability of alternative methods to substantially meet the purpose of the provision(s) waived; 

(g) 	
No municipal function, nor any direct abutter, will be substantially affected by the waiver. 





~ 200-7.19. Biomass and Wood Burning Energy Systems 
A. 	Purpose. Commercial Scale wood burning is a common practice in Greenfield. The health effects of wood smoke exposure have been well documented and the American Lung Association and other health organizations advise against wood combustion because of the adverse health outcomes. In order to minimize wood smoke exposure to the residents of Greenfield, it is important to establish clear and enforceable standards that take into consideration already existing uses of wood for fuel and the need to reduce air pollution exposures. 
The rules governing Biomass and Wood Burning Energy Systems set forth in this ordinance are subject to review as biomass and wood burning energy system technologies improve efficiency and operating standards. 
B. 	Applicability. Any new or existing commercial biomass energy systems, located in the City of Greenfield, for thermal, electricity or Combined Heat and Power (CHP) use located on any property shall be subject to all requirements of this ordinance. Commercial biomass energy systems shall be allowed by right within the Planning Industry (PI) and General Industry (GI) Zoning Districts with site plan review by the Planning Board.  Commercial biomass energy systems shall be allowed by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals within the Central Commercial (CC), Limited Commercial (LC), General Commercial (GC), Health Service (H), and Office (O) Zoning Districts.  Commercial biomass energy systems shall be prohibited within the Rural Residential (RC), Suburban Residential (RB), Urban Residential (RA), and Semi-residential (SR) Zoning Districts. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -113 ­
ZONING 

C. Definitions: 
ANAEROBIC DIGESTER --Anaerobic Digester means the naturally occurring process that converts organic compounds such as wastewater sludge and regional or local organic waste to produce biogas (methane), which can be used as a fuel for thermal use, electricity production, CHP, or as compressed natural gas.     
BIOMASS ENERGY SYSTEM--Biomass energy system means a thermal and/or energy producing energy system that uses wood pellets, wood chips or stick wood for fuel. 
CLEAN DRY WOOD --Clean dry wood means wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings, and wood that has not been treated with preservatives, including but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol, and with a moisture content of 20% or less. 
CLEAN WOOD CHIPS --Clean wood chips means wood chips that are derived from wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings, and wood that has not been treated with preservatives, including but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol. 
CLEAN WOOD PELLETS --Clean wood pellets means pellets that are of 100% wood composition with no construction or demolition debris such as pressure treated or painted wood (which may contain heavy metals such as copper, chromium, arsenic, lead and cadmium) or plastic binders or fillers. Pellets must have a calorific value of no less than 8000 Btu/lb, low ash content (<1%), low moisture content (<8%), chlorides less than 300 ppm and no other additives (0%). 
COMMERCIAL BIOMASS ENERGY SYSTEM --Commercial biomass energy system means any biomass burning energy system for thermal, electricity or Combined Heat and Power located on a single property with a total and combined capacity over 250,000 and up to 1 million btu’s per hour rated heat input as rated by the test method identified in 310 CMR 7.26(54)(c)2. 
EXISTING BIOMASS BURNING ENERGY SYSTEMS --Existing biomass burning energy systems means any biomass energy system contracted and paid for, or installed before June 17, 2015.  
INDUSTRIAL WOOD BURNING ENERGY SYSTEM --Industrial wood burning energy system means any biomass energy system for thermal, electricity or Combined Heat and Power located on a single property with a total and combined capacity of more than 1 million btu per hour rated heat input as rated by the test method identified in 310 CMR 7.26(54)(c)2. 
NEW BIOMASS ENERGY SYSTEM --New biomass energy system means any biomass energy system contracted and paid for, or installed, after June 17, 2015.      
NON-COMPLIANT ENERGY SYSTEMS, APPLIANCES OR DEVICES --Non-compliant energy systems, appliances or devices means any biomass burning use that does not meet the criteria of this ordinance. 
OWNER --Owner means the owner of any wood burning energy system or appliance and/or the authorized agent of the owner and /or the person who has overall responsibility for the operation of a biomass energy system. 
RESIDENTIAL BIOMASS ENERGY STSTEM --A biomass burner or boiler that delivers heat to a home or apartment. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -114 ­
ZONING 

SENSITIVE RECEPTOR SITES --All institutional applications at schools, health care facilities, nursing homes, or other locations with similar sensitive populations. 
STICK WOOD BOILER --A boiler that burns logs or other unprocessed wood, rather than wood chips or pellets. 
TOTAL COMBINED CAPACITY --Total or combined capacity means the number of btu’s for all uses on a single property based on the thermal only btu capacity. 
WASTE-TO-ENERGY SYSTEM --Waste-to-Energy energy system means any energy system that produces thermal energy, electrical energy or combined heat and power from solid waste relying on combustion, pyrolization or other advance combustion technologies. 
D. 	Prohibited Uses. 
(1) 	
Waste-to-energy systems shall be prohibited in the City. 

(2) 	
Industrial biomass energy systems shall be prohibited in the City. 


E. 	Exemptions. This ordinance shall not apply to: 
(1) 	
Anaerobic digesters. 

(2) 	
Residential biomass energy systems. 


F. 	Allowable fuels for all new and existing commercial wood burning energy systems: 
(1) 	Only clean dry wood, clean wood pellets or clean wood ships are allowed. 
G. 	Prohibited fuels.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the burning of any of the following items in a biomass energy system: 
(1) 	
any wood that does not meet the definition of clean dry wood; 

(2) 	
garbage; 

(3) 	
tires; 

(4) 	
lawn clippings, leaves, brush trimmings, or general yard waste; 

(5) 	
materials containing asbestos; 

(6) 	
materials containing lead, mercury,  or other heavy or toxic metals; 

(7) 	
materials containing plastic; 

(8) 	
materials containing rubber; 

(9) 	
waste petroleum products; 

(10) 	
paints and paint thinners; 

(11) 	
chemicals; 

(12) 	
coal; 

(13) 	
glossy or colored papers; 

(14) 	
construction and demolition debris; 

(15) 	
plywood; 

(16) 	
particleboard; 

(17) 	
salt water driftwood and other previously salt water saturated materials; 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -115 ­
ZONING 

(18) 
manure; 

(19) 
animal carcasses; and 

(20) 
asphalt products. 

(21) 
medical waste. 


H. Nuisances for all new or existing commercial wood burning energy systems. 
(1) 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any wood burning energy system  in such a manner as to create a condition of air pollution as defined in 310 CMR 7.00. 

(2) 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any biomass energy system except 


in conformance with the manufacturer’s operating and maintenance instructions. 
(3) No wood burning energy system shall create a nuisance to the surrounding properties or the public as defined and enforced under MGL Chapter 111 Section 122. 
I. Biomass Energy System change out requirements. 
(1) Any commercial biomass energy system for thermal, electricity or CHP use located on any property shall be uninstalled, and no longer used on that property in the case that the property changes ownership, unless it meets the requirements for biomass energy systems defined in this ordinance within six (6) months of sale. 
J. Performance Standards for Commercial Biomass Energy Systems. 
(1) 
All new commercial scale wood burning devices or energy system shall be subjected to a Board of Health environmental impact site assignment. 

(2) 
New commercial biomass energy systems must achieve the following standards.  All systems shall be limited to high-efficiency and low-emissions systems with thermal storage, bulk storage and emission control technology and use a sustainable premium wood pellet fuel or clean dry wood or clean wood chips. The system operation must be optimized using an energy management system to provide maximum efficiency on a seasonal and diurnal basis and minimize boiler cycling. Commercial Biomass Energy Systems must follow each of these criteria 


(a) Efficiency Standards. Commercial wood pellet energy systems and wood chip  energy systems must be fully automatic in the case of pellet boilers, and wood chip boilers must have a fully automated combustion process – though fuel can be delivered manually from the bulk storage container to the combustion day bin. They must be low mass (low volume) and have sensors and controls to optimize combustion performance. This is most easily achieved using a staged combustion design with lambda control. All commercial biomass energy systems must have a minimum efficiency of 85% at rated output using the higher heating value (HHV) of the pellet fuel or wood chip fuel if tested using an input/output method. Alternatively a simple full load, steady-state combustion efficiency measurement by the stack loss method (Canadian Standards Association B415) may be used, but in this case, the minimum efficiency requirement is 88% HHV. Where combustion efficiency is used, the return water temperature must be greater than 130 degrees Fahrenheit.  
(1) Multi-Boiler Cascade System (recommended for all commercial biomass energy systems) -Cascading two or more biomass boilers allows for the installed 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -116 ­
ZONING 

equipment to meet seasonal heat demand most efficiently. Boilers are brought online at maximum efficiency as needed to meet the heating load. 
(2) Energy Efficient Motors.  All commercial biomass energy systems must have motors that are National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) designated “premium efficiency” motors. Motors must meet or exceed NEMA’s MG1-1993 standard. 
(b) Emissions Standards. 
(1) 
Fine Particles (PM): The biomass system for commercial installations shall have a PM emissions rate of no more than 0.080 lb/MMBtu. All institutional applications at schools, health care facilities, nursing homes, or other locations with similar sensitive populations, must have a PM emissions rate of no more than 0.030 lb/MMBtu. 

Installers and owners shall include advanced emissions control including bag houses and static precipitator technology to achieve emissions rates lower than these basic requirements, including emissions control technologies such as condensing units that can also improve energy efficiency of the heating system. The owner will be required to submit particulate emissions performance verification results. Testing for PM must have been performed by an independent third-party using the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Conditional Test Method 39, EPA Federally Referenced Methods 5 and 202, or EPA Other Test Method 15. Alternatively, European Norm 303-5 test results may also be considered, but must include dust and organic gases. 

(2) 
Carbon Monoxide (CO):  Commercial biomass energy systems must have a flue gas CO concentration at rated output of no more than 270 ppm at 7% oxygen at high load. For health and safety, a CO detection system must be included in the boiler room design. The CO monitoring system must have the ability to sound an audible alarm, provide phone notification to energy systems staff and trigger an automatic boiler shutdown if necessary. 

(3) 
Nitrogen Oxide Emissions: Wood pellet and wood chip boilers shall use a staged combustion cycle in order to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions. 

(4) 
Stack Height: The design of the exhaust stack and location should be done carefully to prevent exposure to building occupants and visitors or to people in frequently occupied outdoor areas such as playgrounds. The energy systems boiler stack height must be sufficient to adequately disperse emissions from the immediate vicinity and prevent entrainment of exhaust gases and particles into the building air intakes and to minimize exposure at ground level adjacent to the building on which the stack is being located. 


At a minimum, the stack shall be 5 feet above the highest point of the building that it is serving and above the roof height of any other taller building within 100 feet of the unit. In no case should the stack height be at or below the building height. In addition, the stack should not be placed in close proximity to an air intake or operable window. Stack design should also minimize horizontal piping and bends. 
(c) Health and Environmental Impact Assessment. To reduce exposure to outdoor air pollutants with a particular focus on burdened neighborhoods commercial biomass  energy systems at schools, hospitals or locations with similar populations, the owner will be required to perform a 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -117 ­
ZONING 

health assessment (e.g. air impact assessment) to evaluate the potential public health risks associated with burning biomass. This assessment consists of modeling the anticipated emissions due to the new commercial biomass system and evaluating the resulting concentrations with a focus on ambient concentrations in the schoolyard, near doors and windows, and at building air intakes. An estimate of the number of deliveries by the pellet trucks or wood chip trucks and a comparison to the current fuel delivery schedule must be included as well. The resulting ambient particulate and gaseous concentrations are then compared to the conditions existing prior to the pellet or wood chip heating system installation. If there is a net increase in ambient concentrations, then an assessment of exposure is performed. Owners shall include an assessment of any higher emitting biomass sources (e.g. outdoor wood boilers or pre-certification wood stoves) to be switched-out with a cleaner burning unit to result in no net increase in emissions for the immediate vicinity. 
(d) 
Proper Boiler Sizing. Commercial Biomass energy systems shall be sized to meet the current heat load of the building, not the anticipated heat load or the peak load. Cascading boilers using biomass or existing fossil fuel boilers shall cover peak heat loads. Additionally, the biomass energy system must be designed for installation in a weatherproof, insulated space inside a building, either in a basement or a room designed specifically to accommodate the system. If space does not permit, it may be installed in a separate structure. Boilers and systems must be sized and systems planned to optimize performance throughout the heating season using thermal storage. Use of a cleaner heat source during heating season shoulders (late October or March) and for supplemental needs is strongly encouraged. These cleaner heat sources may include, for example, natural gas-, propane-, or oil-fired boilers and solar thermal sources. A bin-hour analysis of heating needs based on an energy audit, previous heating needs, and historical local temperatures during the heating season should be performed. The annual heat load profile, diurnal heat load profile on demand day, and diurnal heat load profile on a shoulder day should also be determined. Biomass energy systems shallbe sized to =60% of the design load as it will capture the majority of the heating season and promote higher performance. Higher loads may be met by utilizing an existing natural gas, propane, or oil-fired boiler, a new boiler, staging of wood fired boilers, or some other strategy involving careful energy management and thermal storage. Low loads, common during shoulder months, can be met by an auxiliary boiler or other energy management strategy. The energy system must be sized based on the heat load of the building where the heat load is determined using a well defined protocol such as Manual J of the Air Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA) or an equivalent energy simulation program. 

(e) 
Thermal Storage. Commercial scale systems must include thermal storage to minimize boiler cycling and to assist in energy management strategies. The minimum size thermal storage 


should be based on the boiler manufacturer’s recommendation for the application and size of the 
boiler but must not be less than 20 gallons per 10,000 Btu/h. For example, a commercial 1.0 MMBtu/h boiler would require a minimum storage of 2,000 gallons. 
(f) Pellet and woodchip storage. The risks of exposures of high levels of dust and off-gas CO shall be minimized. Due to concerns regarding explosive dust and CO exposure and the absence of a documented effective ventilation strategy for pellet and wood chip storage, all pellets and woodchips storage must be outside of the building. That may include confined spaces that are: 1) large enough for a person to enter to perform work, 2) have limited means of ingress and egress, and 3) are not intended for human occupancy. Pellet storage silos meet these criteria and because of the CO off-gassing, require an Occupational Safety and Health and Administration (OSHA) permit. Owners shall identify fire and building code and health and safety features including all applicable 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -118 ­
ZONING 

training requirements for personnel. Signs communicating potential CO hazards associated with bulk pellet and wood chip storage must also be posted. In addition: 
(1) 
Pellet Boiler systems must utilize an appropriately sized covered bulk fuel storage unit suitable for the capacity of the proposed boiler; and must receive bulk pellet delivery. 

(2) 
Wood chip boiler systems must utilize an appropriately sized covered bulk fuel storage unit suitable for the capacity of the proposed boiler. Recommended: Bulk chip storage units utilizing air flow to partially remove water vapor from wood chip surfaces and to improve the caloric value of the feedstock is HIGHLY recommended. Owners should evaluate incorporating any technology utilizing passive evaporation from airflow such as solar hot air, waste or by-product heating or active heating such as fan blown air to partially pre-dry chips. An accumulator tank is recommended to prolong pump life. 


(g) 	
Energy Management System. 

(1) 
The commercial biomass energy system must use an energy management system and optimize boiler operation to meet seasonal and diurnal heating needs of the particular building’s heat load. The system design should use a strategy that optimizes the use of both the pellet or woodchip boiler and thermal storage and the temperature requirements of the heat distribution system. By using a large enough thermal storage tank to help meet the peak demand and a properly sized boiler, the call for heat may be met with a smaller boiler without the need for additional heat input from the existing oil-fired boilers. The hot water storage can be recharged during periods when there is little call for heat in the building, which is several hours each day. 

(2) 
All systems shall modulate to lower output and/or shut down when the heating load decreases or has been satisfied. 

(3) 	
Pellet boilers and wood chip boilers must use a multipass heat exchanger. 

(4) 
Containerized high-efficiency biomass systems that offer substantial savings compared to boiler room renovations are encouraged, but not required. When containers are used, the stack height must be sufficient to adequately disperse emissions from the immediate vicinity and prevent entrainment of exhaust gases and particles into the building air intakes. Steps should be taken to minimize thermal losses to non-heated spaces including, but not limited to insulating the container that houses the boiler and insulating pipes between the container and building(s) being served. 



(h) 
Integration of Solar Thermal. The integration of solar thermal water heating technology is encouraged. Solar thermal integration reduces fuel consumption and can prolong the life of the biomass boiler. A solar thermal system would be integrated into the biomass heating system using best engineering practices. 


K. 	Air Plan Application. All solid fuel hand fed Biomass Boilers over 1 MMBTU heat input rating, and solid fuel automatic fed Biomass Boilers over 3 MMBTU heat input rating, as subject to 310 CMR 7.00, must submit a Comprehensive Plan Application to MassDEP. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -119 ­
ZONING 

L. 	Continuous Compliance. All Institutional, Commercial and Industrial boilers, as defined in 40 CFR Part 63 subpart JJJJJJ section 63.11237 are subject to a biennial tune-up as defined in 40 CFR Part 63 subpart JJJJJJ section 63.11223, and annual tune ups according to MGL Chapter 146. 
M. 	Severability. Each part of this regulation shall be construed as separate to the end that if any paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of that regulation and all other regulations shall continue in full force. If regulations are promulgated by the Greenfield Board of Health, or state, federal or other local agencies that are more restrictive than the present regulations, the state, federal or local regulations will supersede only those portions of this regulation that are less restrictive than those state, federal of local regulations. 
N. 	Remedies. The owner of any biomass energy system operated in violation of this ordinance shall be warned on two separate occasions. Thereafter, the owner will be punished for the first offense, by a fine of not less than fifty dollars not more than one hundred dollars and for a subsequent offense, by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than three hundred dollars. For the purpose of this paragraph each day or part thereof of violation of these regulations whether such a violation is continuous or intermittent shall be construed as a separate and succeeding offense. The enforcement agents shall order the energy system cease its operation if the energy system is deemed a continued nuisance or a health hazard. 
O. 	Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the Board of Health, Fire Department, Building Inspector, or their designees. 
The rules governing Biomass and Wood Burning Energy Systems set forth in this ordinance are subject to review as biomass and wood burning energy system technologies improve efficiency and operating standards. 
ARTICLE VIII 

Administration 
~ 200-8.1.  Enforcement. 
A. 	Inspector of Buildings. 
(1) 	
The Inspector of Buildings shall enforce this ordinance. 

(2) 
The construction, alteration, or use of any building, structure, or premises shall require a permit from the Inspector of Buildings. 

(3) 
The Inspector of Buildings shall not issue a permit for the construction, alteration or use of any building, structure or premises in violation of any provision of this ordinance. 

(4) 
Whenever any permit or license is refused because of some provision of this ordinance, the reason therefor shall be clearly stated in writing. 


B. 	Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance, or any of the conditions under which a permit, special permit, variance, or appeal is issued or granted, shall upon conviction be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100) for each day that each violation continues following written notification by the Inspector of Buildings of such violation. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -120 ­
ZONING 

~ 200-8.2.  Permits. 
A. 	This ordinance or any amendment to it shall not affect any lawful permits issued or buildings begun previous to notice of hearings on the ordinance or amendments to it, as provided in MGL c. 40A, ~ 6, as amended. 
B. 	Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this ordinance unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 

~ 200-8.3.  Special permits. 
A. 	Special Permit Granting Authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals unless otherwise designated by this ordinance, in which case the Planning Board or the Licensing Commission, whichever is designated, shall act in the same manner and be subject to the same criteria and conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
B. 	Filing of application and public hearing. Special permits shall only be issued following a public hearing held within sixty-five (65) days from the date of filing. All applications for special permits shall be filed by the petitioner with the City Clerk. A copy of the application, including the date and time of filing, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the Special Permit Granting Authority. An application hereunder for the development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) shall be submitted simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by 
G.L. c. 43D. [Subsection B amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
C. 	Decision. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall take final action on an application for special permit within ninety (90) days following the close of the public hearing provided, however, that final action on an application for the development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) shall be taken and a decision rendered thereon no later than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of submission of said application. [Subsection C amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
D. 	Application procedures. Rules relative to the application, submittal requirements, and approval of special permits shall be adopted and from time to time may be amended by each Special Permit Granting Authority for special permits under its authority as specified in this ordinance. Copies of rules and regulations are available from the Special Permit Granting Authority and are on file with the City Clerk. 
E. 	Expiration. Special permits shall expire if a substantial use thereof has not commenced, except for good cause, within two (2) years of special permit approval (exclusive of time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in MGL c. 40A, ~ 17, from the grant thereof). 
F. 	Criteria for approval. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall grant a special permit only after finding that the proposed use or structure will not adversely impact adjacent properties, the neighborhood, the City, or the environment. The following criteria shall be considered: 
(1) Provision shall be made for convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the site and in relation to adjacent streets and property. The service level of adjacent streets shall not be significantly reduced due to added traffic volume or type of traffic in accordance with the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -121 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
The proposed use shall not overload the capacity of water and sewer systems, storm drainage, schools, solid waste disposal facilities, and other public facilities; 

(3) 
The design of the project shall provide for adequate methods of disposal of sewage, refuse, or other wastes generated by the proposed use; 

(4) 
The proposed project shall not increase erosion, flooding, or sedimentation either on-site or on neighboring properties and shall be consistent with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, ~ 40); 

(5) 
The proposed project shall not create a significant adverse impact on the quality of the natural environment including wildlife, vegetation, air, surface and groundwater, during or after construction; 

(6) 
The design of the project shall minimize earth removal, volume of cut and fill, grade changes, and the removal of existing trees and vegetation; 

(7) 
The proposed project shall not have a significant adverse fiscal impact on the City in terms of balancing as near as possible the cost of public services and public revenue provided through taxes and other income; 

(8) 
The project shall be compatible with existing uses and other uses allowed by right in the district, and shall not detract from the character and scale of neighboring properties; 

(9) 
The design of the project shall minimize the visibility of visually degrading elements and maximize the use of screening, vegetated buffer zones, and open space; 

(10) 	
The proposed project shall be consistent with the purposes and intent of this ordinance. 


G. 	Phasing of development. The Special Permit Granting Authority may establish a development phasing schedule for multifamily dwellings and for open space/cluster developments regulating the annual rate at which dwelling units may be authorized by building or occupancy permits. In establishing a development phasing schedule as part of a special permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider and address in its findings the following: 
(1) 
The responsibility of the City to provide for at least its historic share of residential development and to provide for the City's affordable housing needs; 

(2) 
The ability of the City to adequately service the proposed development with schools, streets, protective services, and utilities, including consideration of items listed in the most recently published Capital Improvements Program; 

(3) 
Commitments already made in development phasing authorizations and the demonstrated ability of the Greenfield housing market to absorb additional units; 

(4) 	
The developer's requested phasing schedule if one is proposed. 


H. 	Conditions, safeguards, limitations. In granting a special permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority may, in accordance with the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations. Such conditions, safeguards, and limitations shall be in writing and may include but are not limited to the following: 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -122 ­
ZONING 

(1) 	
Front, side and rear yards greater than the minimum required in this ordinance; 

(2) 
Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining properties or from streets by the use of walls, fences, plantings or other such devices; 

(3) 	
Limitations of size, number of occupants, method or time of operation or extent of facilities; 

(4) 	
Modification to buildings, structures, signs, or landscape materials; 

(5) 	
Additional parking, loading or traffic requirements beyond the minimum required in this ordinance; 

(6) 	
Measures to protect against environmental pollution; 

(7) 
Performance bond or other security to ensure that the project meets the conditions specified in the special permit; 

(8) 	
Any other conditions when deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 


I. 	Changes, alterations, expansion. Any substantial change, alteration or expansion of a use allowed by special permit shall require a special permit from the appropriate Special Permit Granting Authority. 
~ 200-8.4.  Site plan review and approval. 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that new development conforms to the requirements of this ordinance and is designed in a manner which reasonably protects the visual, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the neighborhood and the City. 
B. 	Projects requiring site plans. The creation, expansion, substantial alteration, or change in use of the following uses shall require site plan review and approval: 
(1) 	
All uses requiring a special permit; 

(2) 
Any business, commercial, industrial, or institutional use (except home occupations not requiring a special permit); 

(3) 	
Any residential use of two (2) or more units including subdivisions; 

(4) 	
Any site containing more than one (1) principal use. 


C. 	Procedures. 
(1) 	Reviewing authority. 
(a) All uses of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area shall be reviewed and approved by the Inspector of Buildings. For all site plans reviewed and approved by the Inspector of Buildings, the application for site plan and seven (7) copies of the site plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the application for a building permit. The Inspector of Buildings shall act on the site plan within forty-five (45) days. [Subsection (a) amended by Town Council on October 20, 2010] 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -123 ­
ZONING 

(b) 
Site plans required as part of a special permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate Special Permit Granting Authority. Seven (7) copies of the site plan shall be submitted with the application for special permit. The site plan shall be acted on as part of the special permit, within the time periods allowed under the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, and the Special Permits Section, ~ 200-8.3 of this ordinance, but a public hearing shall not be held until a response has been received from the boards/departments as required under this section or until forty-five 

(45) 
days have lapsed from the date of filing. 

(c) 
All other uses requiring site plan review shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. Uses requiring site plan review and approval from the Planning Board shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Board prior to application for a building permit and, where development of a Priority Development Site (PDS) is proposed, simultaneously with any other permit application(s) required (a) by this Ordinance or (b) by the Code, generally, relating to the use or development of land, buildings or structures and not otherwise exempted by G.L. c. 43D. The Planning Board shall have forty-five (45) days to review and act on the site plan. [Subsection 


(c) amended by Town Council on October 21, 2009] 
(2) 
The reviewing authority shall within ten (10) days of receiving the application transmit one (1) copy of the site plan to the Department of Public Works, Fire Department, Inspector of Buildings, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Board of health, and Historic Commission for review and comment. Failure to comment within thirty (30) days shall be deemed as no objection to the site plan. [Subsection (C2) amended by Town Council on May 17, 2017] 

(3) 
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure for which site plan approval is required unless approval has been granted by the reviewing authority in compliance with this section or unless the required time period has elapsed without a response. 

(4) 
The reviewing authority may adopt and from time to time revise reasonable regulations for the administration of this section. 


D. Submittal requirements. [Subsection D amended by the Town Council on July 15, 2009] 
(1) All site plans shall be prepared to scale and shall, at a minimum, accurately show the following information if applicable: 
(a) 
A locus map; 

(b) 
The name of the applicant and property owner, the name of the person preparing the plan, the scale, north arrow, and the date of plan; 

(c) 
The location and boundaries of the lot, adjacent streets or ways, and the location and owners' names of all adjacent properties; 

(d) 
Existing and proposed topography including contours, the location of wetlands, streams, waterbodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique natural land features showing how it enhances and preserves scenic or environmentally sensitive areas along the water frontage; 

(e) 
Existing and proposed structures including dimensions and interior layout of proposed structures; 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -124 ­
ZONING 

(f) 
An elevation plan showing front, side and rear views of the proposed structure to be built. 

(g) 
The location of parking and loading areas, driveways, walkways, access and egress points and distance to the nearest driveways and intersections; 

(h) 
The location and a description of all proposed septic systems, water supply, storm drainage systems, utilities, lighting, and refuse and other waste disposal methods; 

(i) 
Proposed landscape features including the location and a description of screening, fencing and plantings; 

(j) 
The location, dimensions, height and characteristics of proposed signs; 

(k) 
The location, description and percentage of proposed open space or recreation areas; 

(l) 
A snow removal plan; 

(m) 
Handicapped parking/access; 

(n) 
Bicycle parking; 

(o) 
The location and description of all existing and proposed exterior storage; 

(p) 
The location and description of all existing and proposed easements; 

(q) 
Measures to prevent pollution of surface and groundwater, increased runoff, changes in groundwater levels, and flooding; 

(r) 
Design features which will integrate the proposed development into the existing landscape, maintain neighborhood character, enhance aesthetic assets and screen objectionable features from neighbors and roadways; 

(s) 
Control measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation during and after construction and the sequence of grading and construction activities, location of temporary control measures, and final stabilization of the site; 

(t) 
Estimated average daily and peak hour vehicle trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns for both vehicles and pedestrians showing adequate access to and from the site and adequate circulation within the site; 

(u) 
Any other information required by the reviewing authority in its rules and regulations. 


E. Approval guidelines. In considering any site plan submittal, the following concerns shall be reviewed: 
(1) Provision for integrating the project into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape by minimizing use of wetlands, steep slopes, and hilltops; protecting visual amenities and scenic views; preserving unique natural or historical features; minimizing tree, vegetation and soil removal; and minimizing grade changes; 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -125 ­
ZONING 

(2) 
The use of landscaping to establish buffers between incompatible land uses and to screen unsightly features; 

(3) 	
The provision of open spaces and pedestrian amenities available to the public; 

(4) 
The arrangement of access points, service roads, driveways, parking areas, lighting, and pedestrian walkways in a manner which maximizes the convenience and safety of pedestrian and vehicular movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways; 

(5) 
Ease of access, travel and on-site movement for fire and police equipment and other emergency services for public safety; 

(6) 	
Provisions for underground placement of utilities; 

(7) 
Provisions for surface runoff and drainage which protects the site and adjacent properties from erosion, maximizes groundwater recharge, and prevents the collection of surface runoff on paved surfaces which may obstruct pedestrian or vehicular flow; 

(8) 
The siting of buildings, structures, and open spaces to permit maximum use of passive solar energy, to permit maximum protection from adverse impacts of winds, vapors or other emissions, shadows and noise, and to provide for adequate light, air and circulation; 

(9) 	
Protection of historic features and design which does not detract from properties in the area; 

(10) 	
Measures to prevent pollution of surface or groundwater, and to prevent increased flooding; 

(11) 
Compliance with the parking, loading, dimensional, performance standards and all other sections of this ordinance. 


F. 	Decision. 
(1) 
The site plan may be approved or approved with conditions. Before approval of a site plan, the reviewing authority may request the applicant to make modifications in the proposed design of the project. If the site plan does not comply with the purposes and requirements of this ordinance, it may be disapproved. If disapproved, the plan may be revised and resubmitted without prejudice. Failure of any of the reviewing authorities to act on a site plan within the required time period shall constitute approval. 

(2) 
The reviewing authority may require the posting of security to ensure compliance with the plan and conditions. A permit or license may be suspended when work is not performed as approved. 


G. 	Appeals. Decisions on site plans reviewed by the Inspector of Buildings may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with ~ 200-8.6 of this ordinance and with Sections 8 and 15 of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A. Decisions on site plans reviewed by the Planning Board or by a Special Permit Granting Authority as part of a special permit application may be appealed to superior court in accordance with Section 17 of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A. 
H. 	Expiration. Site plan approval issued under this section shall expire within two (2) years if a substantial use thereof has not commenced except for good cause. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -126 ­
ZONING 

~ 200-8.5.  Zoning Board of Appeals. 
A. 	Establishment. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate 
members to be appointed by the Mayor, as provided in MGL c. 40A, and the City of Greenfield Charter, Rule 9,16 which shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction under this ordinance in the manner prescribed in the Massachusetts General Laws. 
B. 	Powers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide petitions for appeals, variances, and special permits as provided for in this ordinance and in accordance with the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A. 
~ 200-8.6.  Appeals. 
A. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from: 
(1) 
Any person aggrieved by reason of an inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer under the provisions of MGL c. 40A; 

(2) 	
The Franklin Regional Council of Governments who act as the Regional Planning Agency; 

(3) 
Any person including any officer or board of the City of Greenfield or of any abutting City, if aggrieved by any order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings or other administrative official, in violation of any provision of MGL c. 40A or this ordinance. 


B. 	Any appeal shall be filed by the petitioner with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the order or decision which is being appealed. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal. A copy of the notice, including the date and time of filing certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed immediately by the petitioner with the Zoning Board of Appeals and with the officer or board whose order or decision is being appealed in accordance with the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, ~ 15. 
C. 	In accordance with the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, ~ 15, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the receipt of notice by the Board of such appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a decision on the appeal within one hundred (100) days after the date of the filing with the City Clerk. 
~ 200-8.7.  Variances. 
A. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the provisions of this ordinance with respect to particular land or structures, provided that no variance within the Water Supply Protection District will be allowed by the Zoning Board of Appeals without a written advisory report from the Board of Health and the Greenfield Department of Public Works. Review and recommendation of the Planning Board and the Conservation Commission shall also be considered in the granting of the variance. Such variance shall be granted only in cases where the Board of Appeals finds all of the following: 
16Editor's Note: "Rule 9" refers to the 1983 Charter, rescinded effective 7-1-2003. See now Section 6-13, Zoning Board of Appeals, of the 2002 Charter. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -127 ­
ZONING 

(1) 
A literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant; 

(2) 
The hardship is owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located; 

(3) 
Desirable relief may be granted without either substantial detriment to the public good or without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this ordinance. 


B. 	Any appeal or petition for a variance shall be filed by the petitioner with the City Clerk. A copy of the petition, including the date and time of filing certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed immediately by the petitioner with the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
C. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from receipt of the petition for a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a decision on the petition for a variance within one hundred (100) days after the date of filing with the City Clerk. 
D. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations on both time and of use, including the continued existence of any particular structures but excluding any condition, safeguard or limitation based upon the continued ownership of the land or structures to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner, or owner. 
E. 	Rights granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals and not exercised within one (1) year shall lapse and may be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing. 
ARTICLE IX 

Applicability and Amendment 
~ 200-9.1.  Applicability. 
Where the application of the ordinance imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
~ 200-9.2.  Validity. 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
~ 200-9.3.  Amendment. 
This ordinance may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition or repeal by the City Council in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, ~ 5, and any amendments thereto. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -128 ­
ZONING 

APPENDIX Table of Uses 
The attached Table of Uses is general in nature and is provided for reference only. The text under Use Regulation Schedule, Article IV, must be consulted for details. 
The Floodplain and Water Supply Protection Districts are established as overlay districts. All uses in the underlying district(s) are permitted subject to the restrictions in ~~ 200-4.13, 200-4.14, and 200-4.16. The text must be consulted for details. 
The following abbreviations are used in the Schedule: 
Rural Residential District  RC  
Suburban Residential District  RB  
Urban Residential District  RA  
Semi-Residential District  SR  
Health Service District  H  
Central Commercial District  CC  
Limited Commercial District  LC  
General Commercial District  GC  
Office District  O  
General Industry District  GI  
Planned Industry District  PI  
Floodplain District  F  
Water Supply Protection District  WP  

Yes, a permitted use Y No, an excluded or prohibited use N The use requires a special permit SP 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -129 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Agricultural uses Farms Farms or the keeping of livestock or poultry on parcels of less than five (5) acres Greenhouse, nursery, or farm stand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have been produced on the premises Greenhouse, nursery, or farm stand where fifty percent (50%) or more of the products for sale have not been produced on the premises Forestry Residential Uses Single-family dwelling Two-family dwelling Multifamily dwelling Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped Family day-care home Lodging/boarding house  Y SP Y SP Y Y Y SP N SP N  Y SP Y SP Y Y Y SP SP SP N  Y SP Y SP Y Y Y SP SP SP SP  Y SP Y SP Y Y Y SP SP Y SP  Y SP Y N Y Y Y SP SP Y N  Y SP Y Y Y N N Y SP N SP1  Y SP Y Y Y Y Y SP N N N  Y SP Y Y Y SP SP SP N N SP  Y SP Y N Y N N N N N N  Y SP Y N Y N N N N N N  Y SP N N Y N N N N N N  

(1)Only as a mixed residential/business use in accordance with § 200-7.10. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -130 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Dormitories Shared housing Open space/cluster development Home occupation (Certain uses require a special permit. Refer to § 200-6.3) Bed-and-breakfast or tourist home Accessory Dwelling Unit, Within pursuant to § 200-7.18 Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached pursuant to § 200-7.18 Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached pursuant to § 200-7.18 Institutional and Municipal Uses Hospital Educational or religious uses exempt from zoning regulation under the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, §3 Assisted living facility Nursing home, convalescent home, rest home Philanthropic or charitable institution  SP SP Y Y SP Y SP SP N Y SP N N  SP SP Y Y SP Y SP SP SP Y SP SP N  N SP Y Y SP Y SP SP SP Y SP SP N  N SP N Y SP Y SP SP N Y SP N Y  SP2 SP N Y N N N N Y Y SP Y N  N SP N Y N N N N N Y SP N Y  N N N Y SP Y SP SP N Y SP N Y  SP N N Y SP N N N N Y SP N Y  N N N Y N N N N N Y N N Y3  N N N Y N N N N N Y N N Y3  N N N Y N N N N N Y N N Y  

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -131 ­
ZONING 

Private school not exempt from zoning under § 200-4.1B(1) Cemetery  SP SP  SP SP  SP SP  SP N  SP N  SP N  SP N  SP N  SP N  SP N  SP4 N  

(2)In conjunction with a medical training facility only. 
(3)Philanthropic institution only. (4)Industrial or trade school only. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -132 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Recreational Uses Crematory Municipal uses Municipal or commercial parking lot or garage Indoor recreation Outdoor recreation Commercial camping Public park, public playground or other public recreational facility Communication, Utility, and Transportation Uses Radio, television transmission or other communications use: Excluding towers Including towers Power plant Public or private utility, substation Bus or railroad passenger terminal or taxi dispatch  SP Y N N SP SP Y SP SP N SP N  SP Y N N SP N Y SP N N SP N  N Y SP5 N N N Y SP N N SP N  SP Y N N N N Y SP N N SP N  SP Y N N N N Y N N N N N  N Y Y SP N N Y SP N N N Y  Y Y Y SP N N Y SP N N SP Y  Y Y Y SP N N Y SP SP N SP Y  N Y N N N N Y SP N N SP N  N Y N N N N Y SP SP SP SP N  N Y SP N N N Y SP SP SP Y6 N  

(5)Municipal parking lot or garage only. (6)In an enclosed building only. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -133 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Commercial Uses Adult entertainment7 Animal kennel or hospital Automotive repair and servicing shop Bulk storage and/or sale of fuel or other fluid other than waste Car wash (on public sewer only) Construction supply establishment Funeral home Gas station Hotel, motel, inn Conference center Medical center/clinic including accessory research Photocopying and data processing  N SP N N N N N N N N N N  N SP N N N N N N N N N N  N SP N N N N SP N N N N N  N SP N N N N SP N N N N N  N N N N N N SP N N N Y N  N N N N N N SP N SP SP SP Y  N N SP N Y Y Y SP Y Y Y Y  SP SP SP SP Y Y Y SP Y Y Y Y  N N N N N N N N N N Y Y  N N SP SP N Y N N SP SP Y Y  N N N SP N N N N N N N Y  

(7)Only adult bookstore, adult video store, and adult paraphernalia store. See the Entertainment Overlay District § 200-7.13C for adult cabaret, adult motion-picture theater and establishments which display live nudity for their patrons. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -134 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Newspaper, printing, publishing Business and professional offices Office park Personal and consumer service establishment Retail establishment Restaurant, bar or lounge for serving food or drinks primarily within the building Take-out restaurant Drive-in or drive-through restaurant Sale or leasing of motor vehicles, boats, farm implements, campers or other vehicles or heavy equipment Sale, leasing, repair and servicing of new and used motor vehicles with a Class 1 Motor Vehicles License issued by the City of Greenfield10 Service and repair shops for appliances, small equipment, business and consumer products Theatre  N N N N N N N N N -N N  N N N N N N N N N -N N  N N N N N N N N N -N N  N Y8 N N N N N N N -N N  N Y9 N N N N N N N -N N  SP Y N Y Y Y Y N N SP10 Y Y  SP Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y -Y Y  SP Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y -Y Y  Y Y Y N N N N N N -N N  Y Y Y SP N N N N N -N N  Y Y Y N N N N N N -SP N  

(8)Offices requiring ten (10) or less parking spaces only. 
(9)Offices related to health services only. 
(10)This use only applies to the Central Commercial District. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -135 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Trucking firm (on public sewer only) Warehouse or freight transport terminal Wholesale laundry or dry-cleaning plant Wholesale trade and distribution Self storage Trade shop including carpenter, Builder, electrician, plumber, Landscaper or similar trade with indoor storage of tools, supplies, and equipment Garden center Commercial biomass energy system pursuant to ~ 200-7.19 Industrial Uses Accessory activities connected with scientific research Assembly, bottling, packaging or finishing plant in an enclosed building  N N N N N N N N SP N  N N N N N N N N SP N  N N N N N N N N SP N  N N N N N N N N SP N  N N N N N N N SP SP N  N N SP SP N SP Y SP SP N  N N SP SP Y Y Y SP SP N  N SP SP SP Y Y Y SP SP SP  N N N Y Y N N SP SP SP  Y Y SP Y Y Y N Y SP Y  Y Y SP Y N N N Y SP Y  

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -136 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield 
Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 

RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Contractor’s yard Open storage of raw materials, finished goods, or equipment Light industry, manufacturing or processing plant Research and development facilities Salvage/junkyard Waste hauling establishment Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations pursuant to ~ 200-7.15 Renewable/alternative energy R&D facility Renewable/alternative energy manufacturing facility Building-Integrated Solar Energy System pursuant to ~ 200-7.16 Small-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System pursuant to ~ 200-7.16 Other Uses Conservation area Processing of earth authorized for removal under the City of Greenfield Soil Removal Ordinance Mixed residential/business uses Private club or membership  N N N N N N SP N N Y SP Y SP N N  N N N N N N SP N N Y SP Y N N N  N N N N N N N N N Y SP Y N N N  N N N N N N N N N Y SP Y N SP12 SP  N N N SP11 N N N N N Y Y Y N SP12 N  N N N SP N N N N N Y Y Y N Y Y  N N N SP N N N N N Y Y Y N SP Y  SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N Y Y Y N SP Y  N N N SP N N SP N N Y Y Y N N N  Y Y Y Y SP SP Y Y Y Y Y Y SP N N  N SP Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N  

City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -137 ­
ZONING 

organization Marijuana dispensary pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Craft  marijuana cooperative pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Marijuana cultivator pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Marijuana retailer pursuant to ~ 200­7.17 Marijuana independent testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Marijuana standards testing laboratory pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Marijuana research facility pursuant to ~ 200-7.17 Marijuana product manufacturer pursuant to ~ 200-7.17  N SP SP N N N N N  N N N N N N N N  N N N N N N N N  N N N N N N N N  SP N N N SP SP SP N  SP N N SP SP SP SP SP  SP N N SP SP SP SP SP  SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  N N N N SP SP SP N  SP SP SP N N N N SP  N SP SP N SP SP SP SP  

(11)Medical research and development only. 
(12)Mixed residential/office use only in accordance with § 200-7.10. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -138 ­
ZONING 

Table of Uses 
City of Greenfield Ch. 200, Zoning (cont’d) 
RC  RB  RA  SR  H  CC  LC  GC  O  GI  PI  
Accessory Uses Cafeterias for employees, automatic teller machines, day-care centers and other normal accessory uses to a nonresidential use Retail sales incidental to a permitted use or use allowed by special permit Uses Not Elsewhere Classified  N N SP  N N SP  N N SP  N N SP  Y13 N SP  Y N SP  Y N SP  Y N SP  Y N SP  Y SP SP  Y Y SP  

(13)Not including automatic teller machines. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -139 ­
ZONING  
(Revised 7.15.09)  Table of Dimensional Requirements  
Minimum Yard in Feet  
Minimum Lot  Minimum Lot  Minimum  
District  Area in Sq. Ft.(1)  Frontage in Ft. & Lot Width(1)  Front  Side(2)  Rear(2)  Height in Ft.  Landscaped Open Space(3)  

RA 8,000 65 25 10 30 35 40% 10,000 
RB 	12,000 80 25 15 30 35 40% 15,000 
RC 	40,000 200 30 20 30 35 40% 50,000 
SR 8,000 65 25 10 30 35 40% 10,000 
H 8,000 65 25 10 30 35/50(4) 25% 10,000 
CC --------0 0/15 0/15 50 15% 
LC ----30 0 0/15 0/25 35 0% 
GC ----30 25 0/15 0/25 40 0% 
O 	----30 25 0/15 0/25 35 25% 
GI ----30 30 15/50 15/50 50(5) 0% 
(5)
PI 43,560 50 50 25 25 5030% (1 acre) 
WP 60,000 200 (same as underlying district) 80% 80,000 Footnotes to Table of Dimensional Requirements. 
1 	The first number is for all principal uses including single-family dwellings. The second number is for two-family dwellings. For multifamily structures there shall be the minimum requirement for two-family dwellings plus an additional increase in lot area for each additional unit equal to the following: 
RA, SR, H -2,000 square feet 
RB, LC, GC -4,000 square feet 
RC -5,000 square feet 

Frontage for multifamily dwelling lots shall be as follows: 
RA, SR, H, LC, 	GC -100 feet 
RB -140 feet 
RC -200 feet 

2 	Minimum side and rear yards shall be increased to the second number when a nonresidential use abuts a residential, school or religious use or a residential district. 
3 	Open space requirements. The percent of usable open space defined as not having a slope of fifteen percent (15%) or more and not containing wetlands as delineated under the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and as defined in 310 CMR 10.00. 
4 	Height requirement in Health Service District. The first height applies to the Health Service District outside of the “Hospital Campus” and the second height applies to the “Hospital Campus” defined as the area bounded by Sanderson, High, Beacon, and North Streets. Additional height may be allowed in the “Hospital Campus” byspecialpermit. 
5. The maximum height limit for structures and buildings in the GI and PI zoning districts may be increased on a special permit by the ZBA if it finds the proposed structure will not adversely impact adjacent properties, the neighborhood, the City, or the environment. The special permit criteria in Section 200­
8.3 F. of this Zoning Ordinance shall be considered when reviewing the special permit; in addition, the applicant shall clearly demonstrate that the size and height of the structure is the minimum necessary. 
City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -140 ­
ZONING 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -141 ­
ZONING 


City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -143 ­City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -144 ­City of Greenfield Zoning Ordinance March 20, 2019 -145 ­

Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
1
Chapter 880
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Planning Board of the Town of Greenfield effective November 21, 2008 (originally effective 3-19-1966; revised 5-14-1984; revised 5-29-1984). Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
STATUTORY AUTHORITY
MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq. (Subdivision Control Law)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Establishment of Planning Board — See Ch. 34.
Building construction — See Ch. 39.
Drainage — See Ch. 61.
Soil removal — See Ch. 154.
Street numbering — See Ch. 159.
Wells — See Ch. 191.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Sewer use — See Ch. 650.
Water use —See Ch. 689.
Corridor design — See Ch. 808.
Major development review — See Ch. 842.
Site plans — See Ch. 865.
Special permits — See Ch. 870.
Zone changes — See Ch. 896.
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 880-1. Purpose.
The Subdivision Control Law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of Greenfield by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in the subdivisions and, in proper cases, parks and open areas. The power of the Planning Board and of a Board of Appeals under the Subdivision Control Law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire, police, and other similar municipal equipment, and street lighting and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and the public ways in the Town and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions.
§ 880-2. Interpretation of rules and regulations.
The Town of Greenfield shall not be held responsible for any individual interpretation of these rules and regulations. The word “shall” is mandatory and the words “should” and “may” are
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
2
permissive. In the event of conflicting provisions in the text of these regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 880-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ATTORNEY. The attorney employed by the city unless otherwise stated.
BLOCK. The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of the subdivision.
CONCEPT PLAN or SKETCH PLAN. A generalized plan of a proposed subdivision indicating lot layouts, streets, park areas and water and sewer systems presented to the city officials at the pre-application meeting.
CONTOUR MAP. A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations. “Contour interval” is the vertical height between contour lines.
CORNER LOT. A lot bordered on at least the front and side by streets.
EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
ENGINEER. A registered engineer.
DEFINITIVE PLAN. The final map or drawing indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for their consideration and which meets all the requirements of this chapter.
FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot fronting upon a street to be measured continuously along one (1) street line between its side lines and their intersection with the street line. The required frontage dimension shall extend from the street line to the building line. Frontage shall provide both rights of access and potential vehicular access across that lot line to a potential building site. The portion of a lot fronting on a discontinued or unconstructed road does not constitute frontage.
LOCUS MAP. A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely shows the area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it to a given distance.
LOT. A parcel of land
LOT, FLAG. A lot which abuts a right-of-way via a narrow strip of land which connects that portion of the lot containing the required lot width to the right-of-way and is in conformance with section 200-7.8 of the Greenfield Zoning Bylaws.
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
3
OWNER. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.
PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public right-of-way across or within a block intended to be used by pedestrians.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PRELIMINARY PLAN. The preliminary map or drawing indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for their consideration, and which meets all the requirements of this chapter.
PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to one or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public as right-of-way.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between private parties and constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land dedicated and used for public purposes, such as a street, alley or crosswalk.
STREET. A public way, a private way shown on a plan approved under the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the abutting land or land to be served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to erected thereon.
(a) Principal Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by forty (40) or more dwelling units or which serves property either used or zoned for commerce or industry.
(b) Major Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than twenty (20) but fewer than (40) dwelling units, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for extension to serve more than 40 dwelling units.
(c) Minor Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to: (a.) that generated by more than ten (10) but fewer than twenty (20) dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential (RB) zoning districts, or (b.) that generated by more than one (1) but fewer than twenty (20) dwelling units in the Urban Residential (RA) zoning district; and (c.) which has no abutting property either used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for an extension to serve more than 20 dwelling units.
(d) Rural Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than one (1) but fewer than (10) dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
4
Residential (RB) zoning districts, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for extension to serve more than 40 dwelling units.
STREET WIDTH. For the purpose of this chapter, the width of the paved way.
SUBDIVIDER. The owner of land proposed for subdivision or his or her authorized agent who commences proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION.
(1) The described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into two or more parcels.
(2) The term includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
TRAIL. A right-of-way designed for movement of non-motorized traffic.
§ 880-4. Plan filing at registry.
No plan, whether of a subdivision or not, shall be accepted at the Registry of Deeds or Land Court unless it has been endorsed by the Planning Board (or in special cases is accompanied by a Town Clerk's certificate) as either being approved or not requiring approval.
§ 880-5. Building permits.
No building permits will be issued for lots in a subdivision unless the subdivision plans have been endorsed and any conditions endorsed on the plan have been satisfied or waived.
§ 880-6. Street acceptance.
Street acceptance and installation of municipal services on any way within a subdivision but not shown on an endorsed subdivision plan can be done only with a two-thirds (2/3) vote at Town Council. (See MGL c. 41, § 81Y.)
ARTICLE II
Plans for Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE NOTES:
A. Plans believed to require endorsement only (§ 880-7).
B. Subdivision plans:
(1) Preliminary plans (§ 880-8).
(2) Definitive plans (§ 880-9).
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
5
§ 880-7. Plans believed to require endorsement only.
A. Endorsements. These plans require only an endorsement by the Planning Board.
(1) The applicant for such endorsement must submit to the Planning Board the original plan, including a locus map showing major transportation routes and other major landmarks, which will be returned; five (5) copies which will not be returned; and a Form A, Application for Subdivision Believed Not Requiring Approval, with a description of the intended use of the land. The applicant must also notify the Town Clerk by either delivering or sending by registered mail a notice giving the date of submission, description of the land sufficient for location (including map and parcel number) and the name and address of the owner. In order to be considered, it is the intent of the Subdivision Control Law that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive approval if said plan conforms to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that such Board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in MGL c. 41, § 81R, such portions of the rules and regulations as deemed advisable. The Planning Board shall act on the plan within twenty-one (21) days after its submission.
(2) Plan submissions. In order to be considered by the Board, a fee shall be paid in accordance with § 880-38 and such plans shall show all of the following:
(a) Any existing structures on the land and dimension of yards relating to such structures;
(b) Any existing structures on any remaining adjoining land owned by the applicant and dimensions of yards relating to such structures;
(c) Remaining frontage of any adjoining land in the same ownership;
(d) Present owner of the land shown of the plan, and all abutting owners; and
(e) Location of any easement or way, public or private across the land, with a designation as to the use of the same.
B. Endorsements by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall endorse such plan as not requiring approval unless it shows a subdivision. MGL c. 41, § 81L, states that "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall include resubdivision. However, the division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan theretofore approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or (c) a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as in then required by the Greenfield Zoning
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
6
Bylaw
1
(1) Specifications for ways-in-existence. Grounds on which an existing way will be found adequate for providing frontage should be the same as any other way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield, which has in those portions that provide a means of reaching the premises in questions, the following: right-of-way width generally of thirty-three (33) feet or more with no locations of less than twenty-four (24) feet; horizontal and vertical alignment of the traveled way providing at least one hundred fifty (150) feet stopping sight distance; grades not exceeding ten percent (10%) except for short intervals; adequate provisions for drainage and snow removal; traveled way constructed at least eighteen (18) feet wide with at least eight (8) inches of gravel and, in cases where the way potentially provides access to ten (10) or more dwelling units, bituminous paving of the traveled way as of January 1, 1983; or where provisions satisfactory to the Planning Board and the Town Engineer have been made to secure compliance with these standards without cost to the Town. for erection of a building on such lot. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as to leave any lot so affected without said required frontage or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect on March 16, 1966, in Greenfield into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing shall not constitute a subdivision.
C. Notice to Town Clerk. The Planning Board must act and notify the Town Clerk within twenty-one (21) days of submission, or they are deemed to have determined that approval was not required.
§ 880-8. Preliminary plans for subdivision requiring approval.
A. General. To save costly changes in detailed engineering drawings, it is suggested but not required that a preliminary plan of any proposed residential subdivision be submitted so that any differences between the developer and the Town may be resolved at an early stage in the process. A preliminary plan must be submitted for all nonresidential subdivisions.
B. A request for a waiver of a requirement, rule, or regulation shall be made in writing by the applicant, and submitted, whenever feasible, with the submission of the Preliminary Plan.
C. Fees. The applicant for approval of a preliminary plan must submit to the Department of Planning and Development, twelve (12) copies of the plan, one copy reduced to 11”x17”, a Form B, Application for Approval of a Preliminary Plan, and a certified check made payable to the “Town of Greenfield”. The cost of a preliminary plan is seventy-five dollars ($75) per lot plus a hundred dollar ($100) application fee.
D. Submissions. If a preliminary plan is submitted, it is requested that the following be included as part of the submission:
(1) The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend, and stating "Preliminary Plan";
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
7
(2) The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of the designer, engineer, and/or surveyor;
(3) The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent local tax list;
(4) The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and any public areas within the subdivision in a general manner;
(5) The proposed system of drainage including adjacent existing natural waterways in a general manner; proposed sewer system in a general manner and if the system is to be by individual on-site sewage disposals systems, then sufficient deep hole and percolation tests to establish the general suitability of the locus for subsurface sewer disposal;
(6) The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions;
(7) The approximate location of all proposed houses and accessory structures.
(8) The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets;
(9) The topography of the land in a general manner;
(10) A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its relation to the surrounding area, at a scale of one (1) inch equals five hundred (500) feet;
(11) In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land owned by the developer, a plan showing in a general manner the proposed overall development of all of said land;
(12) Location of all zoning district boundaries, if encountered.
E. Review by Board. The Planning Board shall act within forty-five (45) days of submission of a preliminary plan. Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of a subdivision, and a preliminary plan shall not be recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
F. Town agency review. At this stage, arrangements for sanitary sewerage disposal, performance guarantees, and required installation of facilities shall be discussed in a general manner with the appropriate Town agencies. This shall be directed through the Planning Board to the Board of Health, the Fire Chief, the Department of Planning and Development, Town Attorney, Town Engineer, and the Conservation Commission if appropriate.
§ 880-9. Definitive plans.
A. General.
(1) The following must be filed at the Town Clerk's Office for submittal to the Planning Board in applying for approval of a definite plan.
(a) A properly completed application form, Form C, Application for Approval of a Definitive Plan;
(b) The cost of a definitive plan is one hundred dollars ($100) per lot plus a five
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
8
hundred dollar ($500) application fee if a preliminary plan is approved or two hundred dollars ($200) per lot plus a one thousand, two hundred and fifty dollar ($1250) application fee if no preliminary plan is submitted. The applicant is responsible for paying all advertising costs.
(c) Twelve (12) copies of the definitive plan and road profiles, dark line on white background;
(d) A list of all landowners abutting the land shown on the subdivision plan as appearing on the most recent tax list. The list shall be typewritten and in label format.
(2) The applicant must submit a total of twelve (12) prints and one set reduced to 11”x17” to be distributed as follows: Planning Board seven (7) copies; Town Engineer [one (1) copy]; Board of Health [one (1) copy]; Fire Chief [one (1) copy]; Inspector of Buildings [one (1) copy]; and Department of Planning and Development [one (1) copy]. One (1) additional copy must be submitted for the Conservation Commission if the Wetlands Protection Act2
B. Definitive plan submission requirements. is involved. The final, original plan is to be retained by the applicant until signed by the Board.
(1) The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor. Construction details shall be designed by a registered civil engineer. The Plan shall be prepared on linen or polyester film, single matte with a thickness of .004 mils, and must have an opacity so as to allow consistent diazo and microfilm reproduction. All plans shall be prepared using a compatible ink with excellent cohesiveness which will produce a permanent bond and result in a plan with long-term durability. Linen or polyester reproductions shall be accepted provided they comply with the other requirements.
(2) Scale shall be one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet or other scale acceptable to the Board, sheet size not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, using an index sheet if necessary. The plan shall contain the following information:
(a) Subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date and scale.
(b) Name and address of record owner, subdivider, surveyor and engineer.
(c) Location and names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax list.
(d) Existing watercourses.
(e) Sufficient data to determine the location, direction, width, and length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the ground. The areas of all lots shall be shown, and all lots shall be numbered.
(f) Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to whether existing or proposed.
(g) Location, names and present widths of streets bounding or approaching the
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
9
subdivision.
(h) Indication of purpose, width, and location of easements outside of the road lines.
(i) Suitable space for recording the action of the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
(NOTE: Items in Subsection B(2)(j), (k), (l) and (m) may be submitted on the same sheet as the definitive plan or on separate sheets.)
(j) Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals whenever it is deemed necessary.
(k) Existing and proposed center-line profiles of proposed streets and of intersecting streets for at least one hundred (100) feet each side of the intersection of the street center lines at a horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet and vertical scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet, or such other scales acceptable to the Board. Elevations shall be indicated every fifty (50) feet on straight grades and every twenty-five (25) feet on vertical curves. All elevations shall refer to the US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum where available. Profile stationing shall be referenced to a plan drawing.
(l) Proposed layout (including cross sections and profiles) of sewerage, storm drainage and water supply, including invert elevations, slopes, capacity, and velocity.
(m) Where sewage disposal is to be by individual on-site sewage disposal systems, the definitive plan shall be accompanied by a feasibility report of the proposed sanitary sewage systems certified by a registered civil engineer.
(n) Indication of all areas believed to be subject to control under the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, under procedures outlined at 310 CMR 10.00.
(o) Identification of zoning districts.
(p) A locus plan of the subdivision, showing the outline of the parcel being subdivided, the pattern of streets within it, streets in the surrounding area, and zoning district and overlay district boundaries, at the same scale as the Assessor's map which includes that parcel [one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet].
(q) An overlay at the same scale as the definitive plan showing the SCS interpretation of suitability for on-site sewerage disposal, or showing USGS surfacial geology, or both.
(r) Test pit logs for locations selected by the Planning Board and shown on one of the above overlays, with not more than one (1) pit per four (4) proposed lots, selected to reveal general patterns of subsurface characteristics, after consultation with the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
10
(s) Where connection to the public water system is not proposed, information indicating why such connection is not feasible, description of provisions to be made for water for fire fighting, and information adequate to allow determination of compliance with Section IV-D-3 (b) requirements regarding potable water quality and quantity.
(t) Stormwater management plan in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 695 of the Greenfield Code.
(u) An erosion control plan, indicating the erosion control measures to be employed, including description of locations of temporary stockpiles, spoil areas, temporary drainage systems, slope stabilization techniques, sediment basins, etc., and narrative description of how erosion from individual lots onto streets and into drainage systems is proposed to be controlled. Review comments on the plan by the Conservation Commission and by the Soil Conservation Service or by others acceptable to the Board as expert in soil erosion. Any site disturbing more than one (1) acre must have a detailed Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and an Erosion Control Plan submitted to and approved by the EPA or its designee in accordance with EPA’s NPDES Phase II regulations.
(v) Landscaping Plan showing the location of all existing and proposed landscaping. Indicate which mature trees are proposed to be removed.
C. Electronic file. To facilitate maintaining the Town of Greenfield records, for example the assessor’s tax maps, an electronic file (the “standard digital file”) that complies with Level III of the current version of the MassGIS “Standard for Digital Plan Submission to Municipalities” (hereafter “the standard”) shall be filed within 15 business days of the plan being endorsed by the Planning Board. The standard is available on the Internet at http://www.mass.gov/mgis/standards.htm. The standard digital file submitted must comply with Level III of the standard, the vertical datum shall be the North American Vertical Datum 1988.
Upon written request, the Planning Board may waive the requirement for submitting the standard digital file or for complying with Level III of the standard. In place of the Level III requirement, the Planning Board may allow submission of a standard digital file that complies with Level I. Any request for a waiver must include a statement as to why submitting a digital file is not possible or why the requirement should be for Level I of the standard.
The “standard digital file” must be submitted on CD_ROM and must pass the checklist in Appendix A of the current MassGIS Standard for Digital Plan Submission to Municipalities. All media shall be free from any and all defects and viruses, and labeled as to their contents. The template for the required standard digital file is available on the MassGIS web site at http://www.mass.gov/mgis/standards.htm (both DWG and DXF formatted templates are provided).
Prior to final approval by the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit two copies of the approved version of the Definitive Plan in a “standard digital file”. Failure to submit such
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
11
digital plans to the Planning Board, and to obtain a compliance letter may be cause for the Planning Board to rescind approval or not to endorse said plan. A letter from the Planning Board verifying receipt of electronic files and compliance with Planning Board standards shall be submitted to the applicant within ten days. The Planning Board or the Board’s agent will review and verify the integrity of the data submitted within thirty days.
D. Sewer Extension Permits.
(1) Under the provisions of MGL c. 21, § 43, an application must be submitted by the applicant to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection for a permit to allow construction of any sewer extensions of a public sewerage system, including construction plans for pumping stations, forced mains, siphons and other appurtenances.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prepare said application, submit it for signature to the Town Engineer, and forward the completed application form to the Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Wetlands Protection Act.
(1) In accordance with MGL c. 131, § 40, no person shall remove, fill, dredge or alter any bank, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow or swamp bordering on any existing creek, river, stream, pond, lake or any land under said waters or subject to flooding without filing a written notice of intention to perform said work with the local Conservation Commission and the Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) In order to determine if the proposed subdivision, or parts thereof, are subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, the Planning Board will, where it deems necessary, submit a copy of the definitive plan to the Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission shall, to the extent practicable, file a report with the Planning Board not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the plan stating that the proposed plans are not subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, or the Wetlands Protection Act applies to certain designated areas. In the event the plan shall be governed by said Act, the Planning Board shall include in its decision for approval a condition that the applicant shall obtain approval from the Conservation Commission prior to any construction activity in the affected areas.
F. Review by Board of Health.
(1) The Board of Health shall, within forty-five (45) days after filing of the plan, report to the Planning Board in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan. If the Board of Health disapproves such plan, it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefore in such report, and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
(2) Such Health Board or Officer shall send a copy of such report, if any, to the person who submitted said plan. Any approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall then only be given on condition that the lots or land, unto which such doubt exists, shall not be built upon without prior written consent of the Board of Health to the Planning Board, and shall endorse on the plan such condition, specifying the lots or land to
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
12
which said condition applies. Any lot so located that it cannot be serviced by a connection to the municipal sewer system shall be provided with a septic tank and leaching system satisfactory to the Board of Health.
G. Public hearing.
(1) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the definitive plan in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81T, which requires advertising twice, the first time at least two (2) weeks before the hearing, and notification of all abutters by registered mail. The Board shall submit copies of the plan for review by the Department of Planning and Development, Department of Public Works, Inspector of Buildings, and Fire Department. Within ninety (90) days for nonresidential and ninety (90) days for residential if preliminary plans were submitted, one hundred thirty-five (135) days if a preliminary plan has not been submitted (unless an extension is agreed upon), the Planning Board shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the plan, and shall notify the applicant and the Town Clerk of its action, in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81U.
(2) Following approval, there is a twenty-day appeal period, after which the Planning Board will endorse its approval of the plan, provided no appeals have been filed and that by then the Board has received satisfactory security for performance of required street and utility improvements, and a linen or polyester reproduction of the approved plan has been provided for the Board's file.
(3) If the endorsed plan replaces a previously endorsed plan, the applicant shall withdraw the original plan from the Registry of Deeds prior to the endorsement and filing of the new plan.
(4) The developer is to provide the Town with a satisfactory performance guarantee within thirty (30) days after the twenty-day appeals period has expired, and upon acceptance of guarantee, the plan will be endorsed within thirty (30) days by the Planning Board.
H. Approval not acceptance. Approval of a definitive plan does not constitute layout or Town acceptance of any ways, nor does subsequent release of security upon completion of such ways constitute layout or Town acceptance of any street which action is reserved by statute to the Town Council.
ARTICLE III
Design Requirements
§ 880-10. Streets.
A. General. Design guidelines. All subdivisions shall be designed and improvements made by the developer consistent with the requirements of Article IV. Design and construction shall do the following:
(1) Reduce, to the extent reasonably possibly, the following:
(a) Volume of cut and fill;
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
13
(b) Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed; especially if within two hundred (200) feet of a river, pond, or stream, or having a slope of more than fifteen percent (15%);
(c) Number of mature trees removed;
(d) Extent of waterways altered or relocated;
(e) The number of driveways exiting onto existing streets
(f) Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary for safety or orientation;
(g) Erosion and siltation;
(h) Flood damage.
(2) Increase, to the extent reasonably possible, the following:
(a) Use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets providing house frontages;
(b) Visual prominence of natural feature of the landscape;
(c) Vistas and water views from public ways.
(d) Street layout facilitating south orientation of houses
B. Design standards.
Classification of Streets.
(1) Principal Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by forty (40) or more dwelling units or which serves property either used or zoned for commerce or industry.
(2) Major Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than twenty (20) but fewer than (40) dwelling units, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for extension to serve more than 40 dwelling units.
(3) Minor Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to: (a.) that generated by more than ten (10) but fewer than twenty (20) dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential (RB) zoning districts, or (b.) that generated by more than one (1) but fewer than twenty (20) dwelling units in the Urban Residential (RA) zoning district; and (c.) which has no abutting property either used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for an extension to serve more than 20 dwelling units.
(4) Rural Street: a street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by more than one (1) but fewer than (10) dwelling units in the Rural Residential (RC) and the Suburban Residential (RB) zoning districts, which has no abutting property used or zoned for commerce or industry and which is not capable for extension to serve more
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
14
than 40 dwelling units.
Principal
Major
Minor
Rural
Layout Width
60 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
Number of moving lanes
2
2
2
2
Width of Lanes
20 ft.
15 ft.
13 ft.
12 ft.
Total Width of pavement (curb to curb)
40 ft.
30 ft.
26 ft.
24 ft.
(end of pavement to end of pavement)
Sidewalks/Pathways/Trails Required
Yes
Determined by the Board
Determined by Board
Determined by Board
Sidewalk width
4.5 ft.
4.5 ft.
4.5 ft
4.5 ft
Curbing Required
Yes
Determined by Board
Determined by Board
Determined by the Board
Curbing Type
Granite or Concrete
Bituminous Concrete
Bituminous Concrete
Bituminous Concrete
Horizontal Alignment
Curve at center line - min. radius
250 ft.
125 ft.
125 ft.
125 ft.
Grade:
Maximum
6%
10%
10%
10%
Minimum
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
Safe Stopping sight distance (3.5 ft. above pavement)
300 ft.
200 ft.
150 ft.
150 ft.
Intersections
Angle - minimum
70°
60°
60°
60°
Offsets (street jogs) – minimum
125 ft.
125 ft.
125 ft.
150 ft.
Radius of edge of layout
40 ft.
30 ft.
30 ft.
30 ft.
Sight stopping distance
300 ft.
200 ft.
200 ft.
200 ft.
Cul-de-sacs
Length - maximum
800 ft.
800 ft.
800 ft.
800 ft.
Minimum turnaround diameter (layout)
120 ft.
120 ft.
120 ft.
120 ft.
Minimum turnaround diameter (roadway)
100 ft.
100 ft.
100 ft.
100 ft.
Maximum turnaround diameter (roadway inner edge)
40 ft.
40 ft.
40 ft.
40 ft.
NOTES:
** A cul-de-sac or a dead-end street shall be defined as a street closed at one (1) end. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured along its center line from the street line of the intersecting street to the center of the turnaround. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be permitted to connect into another cul-de-sac street unless the distance measured along the centerlines from the street line of the connecting non cul-de-sac street to the center of the proposed turnaround is not
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
15
more than eight hundred (800) feet.
C. Access.
(1) No subdivision plan shall be approved unless its streets system will connect with:
(a) A way legally accepted by Town Council vote; or
(b) A way established by county, state, or federal authority; or
(c) A way established by a subdivision plan approved in accordance with Subdivision Control Law, or any other way in existence on the date the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Greenfield if determined by the Planning Board to be sufficient for the needs for access and utilities to serve potential needs of land abutting on or to be served thereby without reduction in the level of traffic service or creation of hazard.
(2) The creation of fifty (50) or more units requires a special permit for Major Development Review (MDR). See § 200-7.12. of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance.
§ 880-11. Open space.
Where appropriate, the Planning Board may require reservation of open space for up to three (3) years upon completion of the subdivision to provide an opportunity for the Town to purchase it for open space or recreation purposes. The Planning Board shall not require reservation of more than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the subdivision for such purposes, and shall not require reservation of areas smaller than four (4) acres, except in extraordinary circumstances.
§ 880-12. Protection of natural features.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as mature trees, watercourses, scenic vistas, locations of historical significance, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
§ 880-13. Easements.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided, where necessary, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, the Board requires that there be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width [minimum of twenty (20) feet] to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary purposes.
§ 880-14. Environmental assessment.
A comparative environmental assessment may be required for any subdivision creating frontage of ten (10) or more dwelling units within one thousand (1,000) feet of a perennial river or stream as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00). The scope of such assessment, including development alternatives to be compared and consequences to be studied, shall be as agreed to by the Planning Board and may be required to include up to
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
16
two (2) major alternatives to the plan proposed including a cluster version, with as much of the following information as determined by the Planning Board to be necessary for plan evaluation; and shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team to include a land surveyor, civil engineer, and an architect or landscape architect, unless otherwise agreed to by the Planning Board.
A. Narrative discussion of differences among alternatives regarding:
(1) Impact upon surface water quality and level;
(2) Impact upon ground water quality and level;
(3) Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding botanical features, and scenic or historic environs;
(4) Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion control efforts to support proposed development without danger of erosion, silting, or other instability;
(5) Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, ~~ 40 and 40A (the Wetlands Protection Act).
(6) Estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on ground water and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, and other activities within the development.
(7) Lot layout and house siting for potential solar energy capabilities.
B. Discussion of impact on a waterway of a subdivision with topographical features of more than thirty (30) feet above said waterway.
C. Environmental assessment process.
(1) The applicant shall complete the Environmental Assessment report along with the preliminary plan or prior to submission of a definitive plan outlining what environmental issues the applicant believes will occur because of this project, including wetlands.
(2) The Planning Board will distribute this statement to the Town Engineer, Board of Health, Town agencies or the regional planning commission for review and comment. Comments will be accepted up to twenty-one (21) days from date of receipt of the environmental assessment form.
(3) The Planning Board shall review any comments within fourteen (14) days of the close of comment period, determine the issues to be addressed by the applicant, and issue a final scope to the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall present responses and alternative as required elsewhere in these regulations relative to each issue raised.
(5) The Board shall have forty-five (45) days to review the responses and may work with the applicant to select the most desirable alternative to mitigate environmental concerns.
(6) If, upon preliminary review, additional clarification is necessary, the applicant may request a suspension of the forty-five-day period, and request an opportunity to resubmit plans.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
17
(7) A final plan shall be prepared by the applicant based upon the decision of the Board.
§ 880-15. Water Supply Protection District.
Any portion of a proposed subdivision which lies within the limits of the Town’s Water Supply Protection District shall conform to the requirements of said district as outlined in section 200-4.14 of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance.
§ 880-16. Flood Hazard Areas.
Any portion of a proposed subdivision which is located within the 100-year floodplain as shown on the Town of Greenfield Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) together with the Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps contained in the Flood Insurance Study shall meet the following requirements:
A. All requirements of § 200-4.13 Floodplain District (F) of the Greenfield Zoning Ordinance.
B. The subdivision, including utilities and drainage, shall be designed to be consistent with the needs to minimize flood damage and provide adequate drainage.
C. Subdivisions shall include base flood elevation data.
ARTICLE IV
Required General Road Improvements and Specifications
§ 880-17. Compliance required.
The following improvements shall be made by the subdivider without expense to the Town.
A. Street obstructions. The entire area of each street or way shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, like material and all trees not intended for preservation.
B. Subsurface removal. All loam, clay, peat or other yielding material shall be removed beneath all street layouts to a depth specified by the Town Engineer and shall be replaced with a granular material acceptable to the Town Engineer.
C. Fill types allowable. Whenever it is necessary to install fill to bring a roadway to sub-grade, said fill shall be of a granular material satisfactory to the Town Engineer and the Greenfield Department of Public Works. All fill shall be placed in nine-inch layers compacted to not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of maximum dry density as specified in the MassHighway Standards. The developer shall be responsible for the costs of all soil testing and analysis required by the Town Engineer.
D. Ground water. Wherever ground water is encountered within four (4) feet of the proposed roadway surface or wherever the soil type indicates the possibility of a capillary rise of water in the sub-grade soil, sub-drains shall be installed under both shoulders of the roadway. The design and depth of the sub-drains shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Town Engineer and the Greenfield Department of Public Works.
E. Rock excavations. Wherever rock is encountered, it shall be excavated to a depth of two (2)
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
18
feet below the sub-base of the roadway for the full width of the street layout. The excavated rock shall be replaced with a granular material satisfactory to the Town Engineer and the Greenfield Department of Public Works.
F. Sub-base. Roadways shall be brought to the bottom of the sub-base elevation prior to the installation of the water mains, storm drains, sanitary sewers or other utilities.
G. Sub-base compaction. The gravel base and sub-base of the roadway shall be compacted to not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of maximum dry density.
H. Curbs.
(1) Curbing, where required, should be standard granite, precast concrete, or bituminous concrete as determined by the Planning Board with recommendations by the Town Engineer and the Department of Public Works. All catch basins should have granite drop inlets.
(2) Where bituminous concrete curbs are allowed, the curb type shall be approved by the Town Engineer before installation. Bituminous concrete curbs, with a width of twelve (12) inches and minimum pitch of three (3) inches to five (5) inches, may be allowed where grades are less than three percent (3%).
§ 880-18. Roadway material requirements.
A. The structure of the roadway will be composed of the following items:
(1) Bituminous concrete pavement. The material used for roadway pavement shall be Class I Bituminous Concrete Type I-1 applied in two (2) courses. All work shall conform to the requirements of Section 460 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications for both the binder and top courses. All materials shall conform to Section M3 of said Standard Specifications.
(2) Base. The material used for a base course shall be a processed gravel that meets with the approval of the Town Engineer. The gravel shall conform to the requirements of Section M1.03.1 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications.
(3) Sub-base. The material used for a sub-base shall be a bank run or crushed gravel that meets with the approval of the Town Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of Section M1.03.0 of the MassHighway Standard Specifications.
(4) Sub-grade (sand borrow). When sand borrow is required below the sub-base, the material used shall conform to Section M1.04.0 Type B of the MassHighway Standard Specifications and shall be compacted to ninety-five percent (95%) of maximum dry density.
B. Subsurface soil data.
(1) Soil information. The Board may require subsurface soil information to evaluate the adequacy of the roadway design. Such information may include test pits, borings, or probings along each proposed street, primarily at locations such as cut sections, areas of questionable foundation material, and areas of potentially high groundwater elevations. The requirement for and location of test pits shall be established by the
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
19
Board during the preliminary plan review process. If a preliminary plan did not precede the definitive plan submittal, test pit data will be required at locations every eight hundred (800) feet along roadway center lines, plus areas where the proposed grade is three (3) feet or more below existing grade and probings will be required along the center line and sideline at twenty-five-foot intervals where the roadway crosses wetlands or other areas of unsuitable material.
(2) Soil test pit specifications. Borings and test pits shall be to a depth at least four (4) feet below finished grade and the logs submitted to the Board shall indicate their location and ground elevation, a classification o the soil strata by depth, depth at which groundwater or rock, if any, is encountered and the date of the test.
(3) Probings. Probings shall be used to determine the depth of unsuitable material and the data shall be submitted to the Board on a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet drawing showing the roadway center line (with stations) and sidelines, and test locations with existing ground elevations and the depths of unsuitable materials.
(4) Planning Board present. All subsurface soil investigations shall be made in the presence of a representative of the Planning Board or its designated agent.
(5) Registered engineer. All soil logs to be submitted to the Board shall be stamped by a registered professional engineer.
C. Street cross-section/drainage/grade and slope stabilization requirements.
(1) Drawn to scale. Typical street cross-section for each class of street within the subdivision, drawn at one (1) inch equals four (4) feet, showing location of all elements within the street right-of-way, and typical cross-sections of any altered drainage courses or off-street paths shall be drawn.
(2) Easements, Drainage calculations, evidence of ownership, language of any easements, covenants, or restrictions applying or proposed to apply to the area being subdivided, rights and easements obtained for utilities or drainage outside of the subdivision, description of erosion control methods to be employed shall be presented.
(3) Drain pipes, manholes, catch basins. Drain pipes and related manholes and catch basins shall be constructed in conformity with the specifications and requirements of the Greenfield Department of Public Works.
§ 880-19. Roadway design standards.
A. In general, the roadway structure designs for all streets shall be in accordance with the following, unless otherwise required by the Town Engineer.
B. The sub-grade shall be classified as follows:
(1) Poor: Sub-grade soils which become quite soft and plastic when wet. Included in this classification are those soils having appreciable amounts of clay, silt, and fine sand where front penetration of the sub-grade is expected.
(2) Medium: Sub-grade soils which retain a moderate degree of firmness when saturated.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
20
Included are such soils as fine sand, silty sand and sandy gravel with some silts and clays.
(3) Good to Excellent: Sub-grade soils which retain a substantial amount of their load supporting capacity when saturated shall be classified as good. Included are clean sand and gravel free from detrimental amounts of plastic silts and clay.
Required Roadway Structure
Type of Roadway
Pavement Section
Depth of Section for Sub-grade Type (inches)
Poor
Medium
Good
Major
Minor
Rural
Bituminous Concrete Top Course
1
1
1
Bituminous Concrete Binder Course
2
2
2
Processed Gravel Base Course
6
6
6
Gravel Borrow Sub-base
18
12
6
Principal
Bituminous Concrete Top Course
1
1
1
Bituminous Concrete Binder Course
2
2
2
Processed
9
9
9
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
21
Gravel Base Course
Gravel Borrow Sub-base
18
12
6
M1.04.0 Type B Sand Borrow
12
0
0
§ 880-20. Gutters.
Paved gutters shall be installed at the discretion of the Town Engineer, as deemed necessary due to special conditions of topography, drainage or alignment.
§ 880-21. Sidewalks/Pathways/Trails.
Sidewalks shall be required for all proposed Principal Streets, except those within the Planned Industry (PI) Zoning District, and may be required for proposed Major, Minor and Rural Streets if deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Sidewalk construction within a roadway layout shall conform to Article III - Design Requirements - of these regulations and the Greenfield Department of Public Works specifications.
§ 880-22. Utilities.
All gas, telephone, electricity and cable antenna television lines shall be installed underground. Utilities shall be located in accordance with the "Greenfield Standard Locations for Construction of Streets and Appurtenances," dated April 6, 1982, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 880-23. Street Lights.
Installation of street lights shall be in accordance with the Greenfield Department of Public Works “Guidelines for Approval of New Streetlights on Public Ways”.
§ 880-24. Sewers.
Sanitary sewer pipes and related equipment, such as manholes and connecting Y's, shall be constructed in conformity with specifications issued by the Greenfield Department of Public Works. Where, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, existing public sewer mains are not reasonably accessible, the plan may be approved without provision of street sewers provided:
A. That no lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot sewerage disposal facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health in accordance with Title V of the Massachusetts Sanitary Code; and
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
22
B. That the Town Engineer may require installation of so-called "dry-sewers" in conformity with specifications of the Greenfield Department of Public Works in any street where, in its estimation, sanitary sewers may become accessible within a period of ten (10) years.
§ 880-25. Water.
Water pipes and related equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff valves, shall be constructed to serve all lots on each street in the subdivision in conformity with specifications and requirements issued by the Greenfield Department of Public Works. Where, in the opinion of the Greenfield Department of Public Works, existing water mains are not reasonably accessible, the plan may be approved without provision of street water lines provided:
A. That no lot shall be built upon without the provisions of on-lot water facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health; and
B. That the Town Engineer may require such special provisions of water for fire-fighting as are deemed necessary by the Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 880-26. Stormwater and Drainage.
A. Stormwater and Drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the stormwater specifications issued by the Greenfield Department of Public Works and require the submittal of a stormwater management plan.
B. Proposed stormwater detention basins shall be located on separate lot(s) and not be included as part of a building lot, and shall be deeded to the Town if the street(s) is accepted as a public way in accordance with section 880-34.
C. All detention basins, drainage swales, level spreaders, and drainage outflows shall be constructed and stabilized with vegetation or erosion control matting prior to the construction of approved roads. Inspections during and after construction by the Department of Public Works shall take place to ensure conformance to Town regulations and specifications.
§ 880-27. Stone bounds; monuments.
Permanent monuments of granite shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in direction or curvature of streets, and at all other points required by good engineering practice, after completion of all construction. Certification in writing shall be made by the registered engineer of the developer, to the Greenfield Department of Public Works, that all monuments have been properly set in accordance with the final plan.
§ 880-28. Grass plots and trees.
A. The entire width of the right-of-way, except for roadway, curb and gutter, and sidewalk, shall be devoted to grass plot, consisting of at least six (6) inches of good quality of loam and seeded.
B. No utility poles, transformers, sign or similar items shall be placed within the grass plot so as to be less then two (2) feet from the edge of the roadway.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
23
C. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, existing or proposed tress on the adjacent lot are not adequate, two (2) or more trees per lot may be required. No trees shall be planted in the grass plot between the sidewalk area and gutter. Species, size, location, and planting procedure for such trees shall conform to current practice of the Town in planting roadside trees.
§ 880-29. Construction Entrances and Identification Signs
A temporary mud tracking bed (construction entrance) shall be put in place at each site entrance and shall consist of a four (4) inch minimum layer of 2 ½”-4” crushed stone and shall be thirty (30) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet wide. This bed shall be maintained during construction to prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right-of-way and shall be removed prior to the placement of gravel base and pavement.
The Planning Board may require a temporary and/or permanent sign that identifies the name of the subdivision to be posted at the entrance of the subdivision. The identification sign whether a monument or other type of sign must be placed outside of the road right-of-way.
ARTICLE V
Performance Guarantee
§ 880-30. Guarantee required; relationship to cost.
A. MGL c. 41, ~ 81U, requires that no definitive plan shall be endorsed by the Planning Board until the applicant has guaranteed the construction of all required improvements within the subdivision as shown on the definitive plan. This guarantee may be provided by a proper bond (~ 880-31), by a deposit of money or negotiable security ~ 880-32, by a covenant (~ 880-33), by a lender's agreement (~ 880-34), or by any combination thereof.
B. The penal sum of any such bond held under ~ 880-31 or any deposit held under ~ 880-32 or any amount of funds retained pursuant to an agreement under ~ 880-34 shall bear a direct and reasonable relationship to the expected cost, including the effects of inflation, necessary to complete the subject work. Such amount or amounts shall, from time to time, be reduced so that the amount bonded, deposited or retained continues to reflect the actual expected cost of work remaining to be completed.
C. The developer is to provide the Town with a satisfactory performance guarantee within sixty (60) days after the twenty-day appeals period has expired, and upon acceptance of guarantee, the plan will be endorsed within sixty (60) days by the Planning Board.
§ 880-31. Final approval with bonds.
A. The subdivider shall file a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board, to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services as specified in Article IV, and as are required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which such construction shall be completed.
B. Such bond shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney;
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
24
shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services within a period to be agreed to and specified by the Planning Board and applicant and shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer.
§ 880-32. Final approval with deposit of money or negotiable securities.
A. The subdivider shall file a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and installation of municipal services, as specified in Article IV, and as are required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which such construction shall be completed.
B. Such deposit of money or negotiable securities shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Treasurer, shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services within a period to be agreed upon by the Planning Board, and shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer.
§ 880-33. Final approval with covenant.
A. The subdivider shall file a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided as specified in Article IV, to serve any lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgaged deed, provided that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been provided to service such lot, and provided, further, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of the covenant but not later than three (3) years from the date of such deed.
B. Such covenant shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney and shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services within a period to be agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
§ 880-34. Final approval with lender's agreement.
A. The subdivider shall file with the Planning Board an agreement executed after the recording of a first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion thereof given as security for advances to be made to the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender and shall provide for the retention by the lender of funds sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning Board and otherwise due the applicant, to secure the construction of ways and installation of municipal services, as specified in Article IV.
B. Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various stages of the work, and shall further provide that,
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
25
in the event the work is not completed within the time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed shall be available for completion. Such agreement shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Attorney and shall be contingent on completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance with the schedule of disbursements which shall be approved by the Planning Board prior to execution of the agreement.
§ 880-35. Release of performance guarantee.
A. Upon the completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance with the rules and regulation of the Planning Board, security for the performance of which was given by bond, deposit or covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant with respect to any lot, the applicant shall submit a completed Form O stating that the said construction or installation in connection with which such bond, deposit, or covenant has been completed in accordance with said rules and regulations. Along with the Form O, the applicant shall also submit two (2) copies of as-built plans in an electronic format acceptable to the Department of Public Works and one (1) mylar. The applicant shall also send by registered mail to the Town Clerk and the Planning Board a written statement that the said construction or installation in connection with which such bond, deposit, or covenant has been given has been completed in accordance with said rules and regulations, such statement to contain the address of the applicant. If the Planning Board determined that said construction or installation has been completed, it shall release the interest of the Town in such bond and return the bond or the deposit to the person who furnished the same, or release the covenant by appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
B. If the Board determines that said construction or installation has not been completed, it shall specify, in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and to the Town Clerk, the details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with its rules and regulations and upon failure so to do within forty-five (45) days after the receipt by the Town Clerk of said statement all obligations under the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of law, any deposit shall be returned and any such covenant shall become void. In the event that said forty-five (45) day period expires without such specifications, or without the release and return of the bond or return of the deposit or release of the covenant such aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 880-36. Variation.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law. In waving strict compliance the Board may require such alternative conditions as will serve substantially the same objective as the standards or regulations waived.
§ 880-37. Appeals.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
26
Appeals may be taken to the Superior Court in accordance with MGL c. 41, ~ 81BB.
§ 880-38. Administrative fees (nonrefundable).
A. The following fees are to be charged to the applicant for the various reviews listed in the following schedule:
Subdivision Control
Endorsement by Planning Board (ANR Form A)
$25.00 per lot*
Preliminary Plan (Form B)
$100 application fee and
$75.00 per lot
Definitive Plan (Form C)
$500 application fee and $100.00 per lot if preliminary plan approved
$1250.00 application fee and $200.00 per lot if no preliminary plan submitted
Amendment/Revision to a Definitive Plan
$250.00/submission
Inspection Fee
0.5% of total cost of improvements
NOTES:
* The fee for approval not required plans which reconfigure existing lots but do not create any additional new lots shall be twenty-five dollars ($25).
B. Such fees are to be paid in the form of a certified check made out to the "Town of Greenfield" and are to be received at the beginning of the review period.
C. An additional fee of one hundred dollars ($100) per hour for a maximum of two (2) hours will be charged to cover extra time spent by Town Departments such as Engineering, DPW, Board of Health and Department of Planning and Development, if required, to review preliminary or final plans beyond five (5) hours for either plan review.
D. All expenses for notification of abutters, legal notice advertising, and recording of plans shall be paid for directly by the applicant.
E. Other costs.
(1) The services of an outside consultant may be obtained by the Planning Board to review and advise the Board on the applicant's proposed project. All reasonable expenses incurred by the Board for such review shall be paid by the applicant. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of the estimated costs for the
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
27
review. The review fees shall be paid by the applicant within ten (10) days of receipt of the notification. The review fees shall be held by the Town Treasurer in a separate account. The Board may request additional funds if needed to cover the cost of outside review in the same manner as above. Failure by the applicant to make timely payments shall be adequate reason to deny the application.
(2) The selection of an outside consultant may be appealed to the Office of the Mayor. Such appeals are limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications consist of either an educational degree in the field at issue or a related field, or three (3) or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limits for action upon an application by the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Office of the Mayor within one (1) month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand.
F. Any excess amount in review fees paid by the applicant, including any accrued interest, at the completion of the project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest, and a final report on expenditures made from the fees shall be made available.
§ 880-39. Submission of road to Town to consider acceptance as public way.
Once the road(s) and associated public utilities are completed and the developer desires to submit it for consideration for acceptance as a public way by the Town, the following procedure shall be followed:
A. The developer of a subdivision road shall submit a completed Certificate of Completion (Form O of Subdivision Regulations) to the Planning Board for approval and release of the performance guarantee.
B. The developer or petitioner shall file a written petition to the Town Council requesting that the road be laid out and accepted as a public way. The petition shall include:
(1) A legal description of the public way, easements, and any other documentation to be considered.
(2) A list of names and addresses of abutters, utility companies, banks holding mortgages, and the developer/owner.
(3) A mylar plan of the roadway layout and three (3) paper copies.
C. The plan shall be prepared to the following specifications:
(1) Scale 1 inch = 40 feet.
(2) Must be prepared in accordance with Franklin County Registry of Deeds Plan Regulations.
(a) no larger than 24” x 36”
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
28
(b) ¾” boundary
(c) 3 ½ square inch space reserved for registry use
(3) Only one proposed street to be shown per sheet.
(4) Match lines to be used if a street is to be shown on more than one sheet.
(5) Title block to be:
Street Acceptance Plan of
(name of street)
Town of Greenfield, Mass. Franklin County
(6) Date plan was prepared.
(7) Plan should be stamped by a registered land surveyor.
(8) Reserved spaces for:
(a) (name of street) is part of the (name) subdivision approved by the Planning Board on (date) and recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds book _________ page _________.
(or)
(____name of street ____) is a way in existence which has been recommended by the Planning Board on (___date___) for acceptance as a public way.
(b) Planning Board Endorsement that Approval is Not Required.
(c) Laid out by Town Council (date and signature).
(d) Filed in Town Clerk's office (date and attest by Town Clerk).
(D) One copy of the petition and all required information shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Town Engineer at the time of submittal to the Town Council.
(E) The Town Council votes their intention to consider laying out the road as a public way. The vote becomes a public record and the Town Council refers the petition to the Planning Board for a non-binding recommendation and report.
(F) The Planning Board shall have forty-five (45) days after it receives the referral to make a report and recommendation to the Town Council. Failure by the Planning Board to make a recommendation will be construed as no opposition to acceptance of the road as a
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
29
public way. The petition shall also be referred to the Town Engineer for recommendation.
(G) After receipt of the Planning Board's recommendation or after 45 days has lapsed with no recommendation, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing and any viewings shall be published in a local newspaper and shall be sent by certified mail to all abutters, utility companies, banks holding mortgages, and the developer at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the notice shall also be sent to the Planning Board, Town Engineer, and Town Clerk. The notice shall include a description of the layout; the date, time and place of the hearing; and the location where the plans may be reviewed.
(H) After close of the public hearing, the Town Council may vote to accept the layout of the road as a public way. A majority vote of the Town Council is required for acceptance.
(I) The vote to accept the private road as a public way shall be presented to the Mayor for approval. If the Mayor does not act within 10 days following the date it was presented, the vote is approved. If the vote is disapproved by the Mayor, the Town Council shall consider the same measure within a time period from 10 to 30 days after the veto is returned to the Council. A 2/3rds vote of the Council is required to overturn the veto.
(J) If approved, the Town Council shall submit a report to the Town Clerk specifying the manner in which the way was laid out and shall include a description of the location and bounds of such way.
(K) The Town Clerk shall record the report in a book kept for that purpose within ten (10) days of receipt.
(L) If approved, the Town Council shall acquire the necessary land for the road layout by accepting a deed from the owner(s) of the fee simple in the way and by a taking of the land by eminent domain the fee simple in the way. The taking must be done by a 2/3rds vote of the Town Council.
(M) The plan and legal description shall be recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds by the Town Council once all other proceedings have been finalized.
Other Conditions:
(A) The developer or petitioner shall be responsible for the cost of preparing all plans, public hearing notice (mailings and legal advertisement), and recording of documents/plans at the Registry of Deeds.
(B) The Planning Board and Town Engineer will not recommend acceptance unless the land and the road are transferred to the Town at no cost to the Town.
Chapter 880 – Subdivision of Land
November 21, 2008
30
§ 880-40. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part of these regulations which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 880-41. When effective.
These regulations and the Subdivision Control Law shall become effective in Greenfield when, following their adoption by the Planning Board, certified copies of these regulations have been transmitted to the Registry of Deeds and to the Recorder of the Land Court.
§ 880-42. Administrative forms.
Attached, as part of these regulations, are certain administrative forms, applications, and other documents associated with subdivisions. These forms may be changed from time to time by majority vote of the Board without notice to reflect changes in procedures or laws.




