Part I: General Bylaws
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 1-1. General penalty.
Whoever shall breach or violate any provision of the General Bylaws, the
Zoning Bylaw, the Building Code, the Electrical Code and/or any of the rules
and regulations duly adopted by any board, committee or commission of the
Town of Harwich, as the same may have been amended from time to time,
shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $300 for each offense or for
each day of a continued offense, in the absence of an express provision of
another penalty.
§ 1-2. Noncriminal disposition of violations.
Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws, the violation of which
is subject to a specific penalty, may, in the discretion of the enforcing
person, be penalized in a noncriminal proceeding as provided by MGL
c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal method of disposition may also be used
by the enforcing person for violations of any rule or regulation adopted
by any municipal officer, board, department or commissioner which
violation is subject to a specific penalty.
A.
Any enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of a specific
ordinance, bylaw, rule or regulation which he or she is empowered to
enforce, as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, may give to
the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District
Court having jurisdiction thereof, at any time during office hours, not
later than 21 days after the date of such notice. Said notice shall comply
with and be processed in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40,
§ 21D.
B.
For the purpose of this section, the term "enforcing person" shall
include officers of the Town of Harwich having police powers and
any other officer, board or commission who or which under applicable
provisions of law or regulations is given powers of enforcement over
such bylaws, rules and regulations as come within his or its jurisdiction.
C.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[At the Special Town Meeting held on May 5, 2009, under Articles 1 and
2, it was voted to accept the codification of the General Bylaws and Zoning
Bylaw of the Town of Harwich as set forth in Part I and Part II of this Code.]
Article 1: To see if the Town shall accept the renumbering and
reorganization of the various bylaws of the Town from their original
numbering or their numbering in the General Bylaws, as amended through
May 2006, to the numbering or codification, arrangement, sequence and
captions and the comprehensive reorganization to the text of the General
Bylaws as set forth in the Final Draft of the code of the Town of Harwich,
dated January 2009 said codification having been done under the direction
of the Board of Selectmen and Town Attorney, and said Code being a
compilation and comprehensive reorganization of the present bylaws of
the Town. All bylaws of a general and permanent nature, as amended,
heretofore in force and not included in the Code shall be repealed, except
any such repeal shall not affect any suit or proceeding pending as the
result of an existing law, except that such repeal shall not apply to or
affect any bylaw, order or article heretofore adopted accepting or adopting
the provisions of any statute of the Commonwealth. These bylaws shall be
referred to as the "Code of the Town of Harwich, Massachusetts" and on
file with the Town Clerk.
Motion: That this article be accepted and adopted, and further that limited
substantive amendments to the General Bylaws be adopted as set forth in
the document entitled "Town of Harwich Changes to General Bylaws" and
as reflected in the Final Draft of the code of the Town of Harwich, dated
January 2009, as on file with the Town Clerk. Unanimous vote. Approved
by Attorney General August 31, 2009.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
Article 2: To see if the Town shall accept the renumbering and
reorganization/revision of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town from its original
numbering, as amended through May 16, 2006, to the numbering or
codification, arrangement, sequence and captions and the comprehensive
reorganization/revisions to the text of the Zoning Bylaws as set forth in the
Final Draft of the Code of the Town of Harwich, dated May 2006 (sic), said
codification of the Zoning Bylaws having been done under the direction
of the Planning Board, and being a compilation and comprehensive
reorganization/revision of the present Zoning Bylaws, including
amendments thereto. All Zoning Bylaws, as amended, heretofore in force
and not included in the Code shall be repealed, except that such repeal
shall not affect any suit or proceeding pending as the result of an existing
law. The Zoning Bylaws shall be codified as Part II Chapter 325 of the
"Code of the Town of Harwich, Massachusetts" and on file with the Town
Clerk.
Motion: That this article be accepted and adopted, and further that limited
substantive amendments to the Zoning Bylaws be adopted as set forth in
the document entitled "Town of Harwich Changes to Zoning Bylaws" and
as reflected in the Final Draft of the code of the Town of Harwich, dated
January 2009, as on file with the Town Clerk. Unanimous vote. Approved
by Attorney General October 1, 2009.
§ 1-2 HARWICH CODE § 1-2
1:6
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District Commission — See Ch. 131. Town Meeting — See Ch. 271.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:7

ARTICLE I
Selectmen
§ 7-1. Authority to settle claims or suits against Town.
The Selectmen shall have full authority as agents of the Town, acting upon
the advice and consent of Town Counsel, to settle any claims or suits against
the Town which, in their judgment, cannot be successfully defended. Unless
otherwise provided by law, such settlement shall require Town Meeting
approval unless the amount thereof is $10,000 or less or unless insurance
coverage is available in an amount sufficient to reduce the Town's monetary
contribution to the settlement to $10,000 or less.
§ 7-2. Report of financial condition; warrant.
The Selectmen shall report to the Annual Town Meeting the financial
condition of the Town at the close of the fiscal year preceding such meeting.
Said report shall state what expenditures have been made and what balance
of appropriations, if any, remains unexpended and shall contain the warrant
for the next Annual Town Meeting.
§ 7-3. Representation of Town in certain cases.
The Selectmen may appear in the interest of the Town, either personally
or by Town Counsel, before any court, committee of the legislature, or
any state or county board or commission. They shall have full authority as
agents of the Town, acting upon the advice of the Town Counsel, to institute
and prosecute any or all necessary suits and proceedings in favor of the
Town and to appear and defend any and all suits and legal proceedings
against or involving the Town's interest.
§ 7-4. Disposition of tax title land.
Property the Town may acquire or has acquired by tax taking or through tax
title may be disposed of at auction by the Board of Selectmen as follows:
said auction must be advertised in a newspaper published in Barnstable
County and circulated in the Town of Harwich three consecutive days at
least 14 days before said sale setting forth the date, place, time and terms
of the sale.
§ 7-5. Disposal of surplus Town property.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to dispose of any and all tangible
personal property of the Town of Harwich which has been determined
by the department having jurisdiction thereof to be surplus or no longer
serviceable for the intended purpose. The Selectmen shall have authority to
determine the best method of disposing thereof.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:9

ARTICLE II
Officers and Employees
§ 7-6. Town Clerk.1
§ 7-7. Town Treasurer.
§ 7-8. Town Counsel.
The Town Clerk shall promptly notify in writing all individuals
appointed to Town office of their appointment.
A.
After every Town Meeting at which any money is voted to be raised, the
Clerk shall make a list of the sums voted and the purposes thereof and
deliver said list promptly to the Town Administrator.
B.
The Town Clerk shall make an annual report which shall include a
record of the doings of all Town Meetings which occurred during the
year for which the report is made.
C.
The Town Clerk shall keep and cause to be permanently bound one or
more copies of the Town reports.
D.
Custody of Town documents. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all
deeds, bonds and insurance policies belonging to the Town, except that
the bond of the Treasurer shall be in the custody of the Selectmen.
A.
Annual report. The Treasurer shall make an annual report which shall
contain a statement of the amount of money received and paid out by
him during the year.
B.
Appointment. The Selectmen shall annually appoint a Town Counsel,
who shall be an attorney and counselor at law and who shall hold office
for the term of one year from the first day of July until his successor
is appointed and qualified. He shall receive such compensation as the
Selectmen may determine, subject to the appropriation of the Town
therefor.
A.
Employment and compensation of other attorneys. The Selectmen may
engage the service of attorneys other than the appointed Town Counsel
to act as counsel for the Town or any of its departments in any
particular matter as the Selectmen may deem advisable, and they shall
receive such compensation as the Selectmen may determine, subject to
the appropriation of the Town therefor.
B.
Duties. The Town Counsel shall act as legal advisor and counselor to
the Town and all its departments.
C.
1. Editor's Note: For the fees charged by the Town Clerk's office see § 7-14 of this chapter.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:11

ARTICLE III
Boards and Committees
§ 7-9. Building Code Board of Appeals.
There is hereby established a Building Code Board of Appeals for the
purpose of hearing and deciding appeals pertaining to the Building Official's
actions in administering the provisions contained in the State Building
Code, Section 126.8 and other pertinent provisions, which code became
effective January 1, 1975, said Board to consist of five members, one
member to be appointed for five years, one member for four years, one
member for three years, one member for two years, and one member to
serve for one year, and thereafter each new member is to serve for five
years or until his successor has been appointed and qualified.
§ 7-10. Composition of appointed Town agencies. [Amended
5-8-2012 STM by Art. 4; 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 39]
Pursuant to Chapter 7 of the Town Charter, the following appointed
boards and committees shall be comprised as follows:
Board Membership
Charter
Reference
1 Board of Health Five full members § 7-4-1
2 Planning Board Seven members, two
alternates
§ 7-5-1
3 Board of Assessors Three full members § 7-6-1
4 Conservation
Commission
Seven full members § 7-7-1
5 Council on Aging Nine full members § 7-8-1
6 Historic District/
Historical
Commission
Seven full members -
one alternate
§ 7-9-1
7 Recreation and
Youth
Seven full members § 7-10-1
8 Cultural Council Nine full members § 7-11-1
9 Zoning Board of
Appeals
Five full members -
five associate
§ 7-12-1
10 Golf Committee Seven full members § 7-13-1
11 Waterways
Committee
Seven full members -
two alternate
§ 7-14-1
12 Cemetery
Commission
Three full members § 7-15-1
13 By-Law/Charter
Review Committee
Five full members § 7-16-1
A.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:13
§ 7-11. Community Preservation Committee.
Members of the appointed boards and committees listed in the
preceding section shall be appointed for the term set forth in the
Charter. If the Charter is silent as to the term, members shall be
appointed for three-year staggered terms.
B.
Establishment.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee,
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to MGL c. 44B. The
composition of the Committee, the designating authority and the
term of office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by
the Commission for a term of three years.
(a)
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by
the Commission for a term of three years.
(b)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board
for a term of three years.
(c)
One member of the Recreation and Youth Commission as
designated by the Commission for an initial term of one year
and thereafter for a term of three years.
(d)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(e)
One member of the Real Estate and Open Space Committee as
designated by the Committee for an initial term of one year and
thereafter for a term of three years.
(f)
One member of the Housing Committee as designated by the
Committee for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(g)
Two members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, one
member to be appointed for a term of one year and thereafter
for a term of three years, and one member to be appointed for
a term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(h)
(1)
After the above-named commissions, boards and committees have
designated their members, the Board of Selectmen shall confirm
their appointment as members of the Community Preservation
Committee. Membership on the Community Preservation
Committee of those members designated by any of the abovenamed
Town agencies is contingent on the member's continued
service on the designating body.
(2)
A.
§ 7-10 HARWICH CODE § 7-11
1:14
Should any of the commissions, boards or committees who have
designating authority under this section be no longer in existence
for whatever reason, the designating authority for that commission,
board or committee shall become the responsibility of the Board of
Selectmen.
(3)
Duties.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities, and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing municipal
boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical
Commission, the Planning Board, the Recreation and Youth
Commission, the Real Estate and Open Space Committee, and the
Housing Authority, or the persons acting in those capacities or
performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its
studies, the Committee shall hold one or more public informational
hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town
regarding community preservation possibilities and resources,
notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each
of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town.
(1)
The Community Preservation Committee shall make
recommendations to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation
and preservation of open space; for the acquisition, preservation,
rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; for the
acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use;
for the creation, preservation and support of community housing;
and for the rehabilitation or restoration of open space, land for
recreational use and community housing that is acquired or
created as provided in this section. With respect to community
housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
(2)
The Community Preservation Committee may include, in its
recommendation to the Town Meeting, a recommendation to set
aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are
consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient
revenues are not then available in the Community Preservation
Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set aside for later
spending for general purposes that are consistent with community
preservation. The Community Preservation Committee may
recommend the issuance of general obligation bonds or notes in
anticipation of revenues to be deposited in the Community
Preservation Fund. Bonds or notes so issued may be at such rates
of interest as shall be necessary and shall be repaid as soon after
such revenues are collected as is expedient. The Town shall make
every effort to limit the administrative costs of issuing such bonds
by cooperating with other cities and towns using methods
(3)
B.
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:15
including, but not limited to, common issuance of bonds or common
retention of bond counsel. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, bonds or notes issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of MGL c. 44B. The maturities
of each issue of bonds or notes issued under this section may be
arranged so that for each issue the amounts payable in the several
years for principal and interest combined shall be as nearly equal
as practicable in the opinion of the officers authorized to issue
bonds or notes or, in the alternative, in accordance with a schedule
providing for a more rapid amortization of principal.
As provided in the Massachusetts Community Preservation Act,2
no expenditures shall be made from the Community Preservation
Fund without the approval of Town Meeting.
(4)
The Community Preservation Committee may submit an annual
administrative and operating budget for the Community
Preservation Committee, which cannot exceed 5% of the annual
revenues in the Community Preservation Fund, to Town Meeting
for approval.
(5)
Requirement for a quorum and cost estimates. The Community
Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the
presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Community
Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Community
Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote.
Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated
costs.
C.
Amendments. This section may be amended from time to time by a
majority vote of the Town Meeting, provided that the amendments
would not cause a conflict to occur with MGL c. 44B.
D.
Severability. In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw is
for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last
resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
E.
Effective date. This bylaw shall take effect upon approval by the
Attorney General of the commonwealth, after all requirements of MGL
c. 40, § 32 have been met, and after the modified Community
Preservation Act has been approved at a regular Town election. Each
designating authority shall have 30 days after approval of the modified
Community Preservation Act to make its initial designations.
F.
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 44B.
§ 7-11 HARWICH CODE § 7-11
1:16
ARTICLE IV
Reports and Fees
§ 7-12. Reports of officers and committees.
All elective and appointive officers and committees shall make a written
report to the Town and such report shall be embodied in the Annual Town
Report. Such a report shall be itemized to the extent of showing at least the
amount of money, goods, refunds, credits or real estate abatements received
by such persons from the Town, excepting such amounts as are prohibited
by law to be published.
§ 7-13. Payment of fees.
All elective and appointed officers shall surrender and pay to the Town
treasury all fees received by them by virtue of their office.
§ 7-14. Town Clerk fees.
The following fees may be charged by the Town Clerk, effective July 1,
2006:
(1) For filing and indexing assignment for the benefit of creditors: $10.
For entering amendments of a record of the birth of a child born
out of wedlock, subsequently legitimized: $10.
(2)
(3) For correcting errors in a record of birth: $10.
(4) For furnishing certificate of birth: $10.
(5) For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of birth: $5.
(6) For entering delayed record of birth: $10.
For filing certificate of a person conducting business under any title
other than his real name: $40.
(7)
For filing by a person conducting business under any title other
than his real name of a statement of change of his residence or
of his discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal from or change of
location of such business: $10.
(8)
For furnishing certified copy of certificate of person conducting
business under any title other than his real name or a statement by
such person of his discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal from
such business: $5.
(9)
For recording the name and address, the date and number of
the certificate issued to a person registered from the practice of
podiatry in the commonwealth: $20.
(10)
(11)For correcting errors in a record of death: $10.
A.
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:17
(12)For furnishing a certificate of death: $10.
(13)For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of death: $5.
For entering notice of intention of marriage and issuing certificate
thereof: $30.
(14)
For entering certificate of marriage filed by persons married out of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: $5.
(15)
(16)For issuing a certificate of marriage: $10.
(17)For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of marriage: $5.
(18)For correcting errors in a record of marriage: $10.
(19)For recording power of attorney: $10.
For recording certificate of registration granted to a person
engaged in the practice of optometry or issuing a certified copy
thereof: $20.
(20)
For recording order granting locations of poles, piers, abutments,
or conduits, alterations or transfers thereof, an increase in number
of wires and cable or attachments under the provisions of MGL c.
166, § 22: flat rate of $40; $10 for additional streets.
(21)
For examining records or papers relating to birth, marriage or
death upon the application of any person: the actual expense
thereof, but not less than $10.
(22)
For copying any manuscript or record pertaining to a birth,
marriage or death: $5 per page.
(23)
For receiving and filing a complete inventory of all items to be
included in a closing-out sale, etc.: $10 for first page, $2 per
additional page.
(24)
For filing a copy of written instrument or declaration of trust by
trustees of an association or trust, or any amendment thereof as
provided by MGL c. 182, § 2: $20.
(25)
B. Other fees to be charged by the Town Clerk shall be established by law.
§ 7-14 HARWICH CODE § 7-14
1:18
Chapter 8
DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 8-1. Funds established.
There are hereby established in the Town of Harwich pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, the following revolving funds:
Revolving Fund
Authorize to
Spend Fund Revenue Source Use of Fund
Golf Director, Golf
Committee and
ATA
Golf lessons and
Pro Shop sales
Pro Shop
expenses,
clubhouse and
kitchen
maintenance,
modernization,
and lessons
instructor
Golf
Infrastructure
Fund
Director, Golf
Committee
New surcharge
on all green fees
and cart fees
CVGC
infrastructure,
including Club
House facilities,
maintenance
facilities
Council on Aging Director and
Council on Aging
Fees from health,
recreation,
nutrition and
education
programs
Health,
recreation,
nutrition and
education
programs
Cemetery Administrator
and Cemetery
Commission
90% of lot sales,
100% of all
cemetery services
and fees
Maintenance of
Town cemeteries
Community
Center
Director and
Facilities
Committee
Fees from use of
the weight room
Weight room
equipment (and
repair)
Recreation Director and
Recreation and
Youth
Commission
Fees from
recreation and
youth programs
Recreation and
youth programs
Albro House Town Planner and
Historic District/
Historical
Commission
Fees from
receipts of lease
or fees for shortterm
rooms use
and rental
Restorations,
maintenance,
care and support
of Town-owned
property
§ 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:19
Revolving Fund
Authorize to
Spend Fund Revenue Source Use of Fund
ADA Town
Administrator
Receipts of
parking penalty
fees
Interpreter
services or
accommodations
required under
ADA
Wetlands Conservation
Commission
Notice of intent
filing fees
Consultants and
wetland and
buffer zone
management and
restoration
projects
§ 8-2. Expenditures limited.
Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject to
the limitation established annually by Town Meeting or any increase therein
as may be authorized in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
Chapter 14
ALARMS
§ 14-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or a single
device, such as a solid-state unit which plugs directly into a one-hundredten-
volt AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard or emergency
requiring urgent attention and to which police, emergency medical
personnel or firefighters are expected to respond. Fire alarm systems and
alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any other
conditions not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion
into a premises or an attempted break-in at a premises are included.
FALSE ALARM —
The activation of an alarm system by an agency for other than a bona
fide hazard or emergency of a type which the system is designed
to warn against. For purpose of this definition, activation of alarm
systems by acts of vandals, by acts of God, including but not limited to
hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar weather or atmospheric
disturbances, or by power failure shall not be deemed to be a false
alarm.
A.
Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the Police or Fire
Department requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part
B.
§ 8-1 HARWICH CODE § 14-1
1:20
MECHANICAL PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated
instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a prerecorded voice alarm upon receipt of a stimulus from the
sensory apparatus that has detected a condition inherently characteristic of
a fire.
USER — The owner and occupant, and their agents, of the premises
containing the alarm system, whether residential, commercial or otherwise.
§ 14-2. Mechanical protection devices.
It shall be unlawful to install a mechanical protection device that is
automatically keyed to and/or activates the telephone (numbers) lines
controlled by and/or listed to the Harwich Fire Department. All such devices
installed before the enactment of this bylaw shall be removed within 60
days thereafter.
§ 14-3. Permit and key box required.
§ 14-4. Persons authorized to respond to alarms.
Every user shall submit to the Police and/or Fire Chief the names and
telephone numbers of at least two other persons who are authorized to
respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who
can open the premises wherein the alarm system is installed.
§ 14-5. Duration of audible alarms.
of the Police or Fire Department in the absence of any bona fide hazard
or emergency.
The owner of any building which has a fire alarm system or other fire
protection system or medical alarm which transmits an alarm off the
premises shall be required to:
(1) Have a permit to install or alter the system.
Provide a secure key box installed in a location accessible to the
Fire Department in case of emergency. The key box shall contain
keys to the door(s) and fire alarm control panel and any other keys
necessary to operate or service fire protection or medical systems.
The key box shall be a type approved by the Chief of the Harwich
Fire Department and shall be located and installed as approved by
the Chief.
(2)
A.
Any building owner violating this bylaw after receiving due notice by
the Fire Department shall be subject to a fine of $100. Owners of
existing systems will have six months after adoption of this bylaw to
bring their premises up to code.
B.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5
1:21
§ 14-6. False alarms.
§ 14-7. False fire or medical emergency alarms.
All alarm systems except fire alarm systems installed after the effective
date of this bylaw which use an audible horn or bell shall be equipped
with a device that will shut off such horn or bell within 10 minutes after
activation of the system.
A.
Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for
more than 15 minutes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. which cannot
be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability
of the alarm user or those persons designated by him under § 14-4
of this chapter and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a
community, a neighborhood or a considerable number of inhabitants of
the area where the alarm system is located shall constitute a public
nuisance and be subject to the penalties described in § 14-6 below.
Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and
uninterrupted signal, the Police or Fire Chief shall endeavor to contact
the alarm user or members of the alarm user's family or those persons
designated by the alarm user under § 14-4 of this chapter in an effort
to abate the nuisance. The Police and/or Fire Chief shall cause to be
recorded the names and addresses of all complainants and the time
each complaint was made.
B.
Upon receipt of three or more false alarms from the same system within
a calendar year, the Police or Fire Chief may, in writing, order:
(1) The user to discontinue the use of the alarm.
That any direct connections to the Police or Fire Department be
discontinued.
(2)
That any further connection to the communications console in the
police or fire station be contingent upon the user equipping any
alarm system with a device that will shut off any audible horn or
bell within 10 minutes after activation of the system.
(3)
A.
The user shall be assessed a fee as established annually by the Board of
Selectmen, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief as a false alarm service
fee for each false alarm in excess of three occurring within a calendar
year. All fees assessed and collected hereunder shall be paid to the
Town Treasurer for deposit in the general fund.
B.
Whoever violates a written order of the Police or Fire Chief as set forth
in Subsection A shall be punished by a fine of $50 for each offense, and
each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally call in or cause to be
called in or in any way reported a false fire or medical emergency alarm
knowing the same to be false, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
intentionally tamper with any device designed to give or transmit a fire
A.
§ 14-5 HARWICH CODE § 14-7
1:22
Chapter 18
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
or medical emergency alarm with the intention of disabling said device
or causing said device to transmit a false alarm.
Any parent or legal guardian having by law responsibility for the care
and supervision of a minor child under the age of 18 years shall be
liable for violation of Subsection A committed by such minor child,
provided that such violation is the second or subsequent offense
committed by said child and provided further that said person has
received written notice of the previous violation from the Fire
Department or other responsible public officer or official; provided,
however, that such parental liability shall be enforced only through the
noncriminal enforcement procedures established under this bylaw.
B.
Whoever violates any provision of Subsection A or B shall be punished
by a fine of $200 for each offense. Said provisions of this bylaw may be
enforced by the Fire Chief or his duly authorized designee as well as all
officers of the Town of Harwich having police powers.
C.
§ 14-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-7
1:23

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 18-1. Public highways and parking places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages on public
highways or in public parking places, including vehicles thereon, within the
Town of Harwich.
§ 18-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this bylaw shall be fined $50 for each
offense.
§ 18-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2
1:25
Chapter 26
ANIMALS
§ 26-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ADOPTION — The delivery of a cat or dog to any person 18 years of age or
older for the purpose of harboring as a pet.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — A kennel maintained as a business established
for or to include the boarding or grooming of dogs.
DANGEROUS DOG —
DOG FUND — The fees, fines, and reimbursements collected in connection
with the licensing of dogs and the enforcement of these rules and
regulations.
DOG OFFICER or ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any officer appointed by
the Board of Selectmen to enforce the laws relating to dogs.
KEEPER — Any person, corporation or society, other than the owner,
harboring or having in his possession any dog.
LICENSE PERIOD — The time between January 1 and December 31, both
dates inclusive.
LIVESTOCK or FOWLS — Animals or fowls kept or propagated by the
owner for food or as a means of livelihood; also deer, elk, cottontail rabbits
and northern hares, pheasants, quail, partridge, and those birds and
quadrupeds determined by the Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and
environmental law enforcement to be wild and kept by or under a permit
from said Department in proper houses or suitably enclosed yards. Such
term shall not include dogs, cats and other pets.
MULTIPLE PET HOUSEHOLD — More than three dogs over the age of six
months of age at a single private residence.
RESEARCH INSTITUTION — Any institution operated by the United States
or by the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof or any school or
college of medicine, public health, dentistry, pharmacy, veterinary medicine
or agriculture, medical diagnostic laboratory or biological laboratory,
hospital or other educational or scientific establishment within the
commonwealth above the rank of secondary school which, in connection
with any of its activities, investigates or gives instructions concerning the
Any dog which, according to the records of the Animal Control Officer
or other appropriate authority, has inflicted severe injury on a human
being without provocation on public or private property; or
A.
Any dog which, according to the records of the Animal Control Officer
or other appropriate authority, has killed a domestic animal without
provocation while off the owner's or keeper's property.
B.
§ 18-2 HARWICH CODE § 26-1
1:26
structure or functions of living organisms or the causes, prevention, control
or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human beings or animals.
SHELTER — An animal control facility or any other facility which is
operated by any organization or individual for the purpose of protecting
animals from cruelty, neglect, or abuse.
§ 26-2. Dog licenses.
§ 26-3. Vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies.
Licenses and tags. A person residing in the Town of Harwich who, at
the beginning of a license period, is or who, during a license period,
becomes the owner or keeper of a dog six months old or older shall
cause the dog to be licensed within 30 days. The Clerk of the Town shall
issue dog licenses and tags on a form prescribed and furnished by the
Town. Subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, the Town may
permit licensing to be conducted through the mail.
On the license form the Clerk shall record the name, address, and
phone number of the owner or keeper of the dog, as well as the
name and description of the dog and the license number. Each tag
shall include the license number, the name of the Town and the
year of issue.
(1)
The owner or keeper of the dog shall cause the dog to wear around
its neck or body a collar or harness to which the license tag shall be
securely attached. In the event that any tag becomes lost, defaced,
or destroyed, substitute tags shall be obtained by the owner or
keeper from the Town Clerk at the cost of $5.
(2)
The Town Clerk shall not issue a license for any dog unless the
owner or keeper provides the Clerk with a veterinarian's certificate
verifying that the dog is currently vaccinated against rabies.
(3)
The fee for each dog license shall be determined annually by a
committee of the Town Administrator, the Town Clerk, and the
Animal Control Officer and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
No fee shall be charged for a dog specially trained to lead the blind
or serve a blind or deaf person upon presentation to the Town Clerk
of a certificate of such training.
(4)
The Clerk may collect a late fee of $25 for every dog license issued
after the thirty-day period.
(5)
License fees shall not be refunded because of the subsequent
death, loss, transfer of ownership, spaying or neutering, or removal
from Town of the dog.
(6)
A.
Violations and penalties. Whoever, as owner or keeper of a dog, fails to
license such dog within 30 days after a license period begins shall be
subject to a fine of $25.
B.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-3
1:27
§ 26-4. Impounded dogs.
§ 26-5. Barking dogs.
The owner or keeper of a dog or cat which has reached the age of
six months shall cause such dog or cat to be kept currently vaccinated
against rabies. Such vaccinations can only be given by a licensed
veterinarian. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall provide a tag
which the owner or keeper shall secure to the collar or harness of the
dog or cat. The tag shall show the year the vaccination was given, a
rabies tag number, and the name of the veterinary clinic or hospital.
The veterinarian shall prepare three copies of a rabies certificate,
which shall specify the name and address of the owner or keeper of the
dog or cat, the name and description of the dog or cat, the rabies tag
number, and the expiration date of the vaccine. The veterinarian shall
present one copy of the certificate to the owner or keeper of the dog or
cat and one copy to the Town Clerk and shall keep one copy for his/her
files.
A.
Unvaccinated dogs or cats acquired or brought into the Town of
Harwich shall be vaccinated within 30 days or upon reaching the age of
six months, whichever comes first.
B.
Whoever as owner or keeper fails to vaccinate a dog or cat six months
old or older shall be subject to a fine of $50.
C.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer
to apprehend any dog found running at large and to impound such dog
in a holding facility designated by the Town of Harwich for holding
such dogs. The Animal Control Officer shall keep a record of each dog
impounded which shall contain the breed, description and sex of the
dog, where the dog was apprehended and whether the dog was wearing
a collar and whether or not the dog was licensed. If licensed, the license
number and the name and address of the owner or keeper are to be
included.
A.
The owner or keeper shall claim the impounded dog if:
(1) The owner or keeper presents a valid dog license;
(2) The owner or keeper pays all impoundment fees; and
(3) The owner or keeper provides his/her name and address.
B.
No person owning or keeping a dog shall allow or permit said dog
to annoy another person's reasonable right to peace and/or privacy
by making loud and/or continuous noise where such noise is plainly
audible at 150 feet from the building, structure, vehicle or premises
in which or from which such noise is produced and/or such noise is
continuous in excess of 10 minutes regardless of the time of day or
night. The fact that such noise is plainly audible at said distance and/or
A.
§ 26-3 HARWICH CODE § 26-5
1:28
§ 26-6. Kennel licenses. [Amended 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 3]
§ 26-7. Dogs and horses in cemeteries.
§ 26-8. Emergency treatment or disposal.
Any veterinarian who renders emergency care or treatment to or disposes
of a dog or a cat that has been injured on any way within the Town of
Harwich shall receive payment from the owner or keeper of such dog or
cat, if known, or if not known from the Town of Harwich in the amount of
$20 for such care, treatment or disposal. Treatment shall be for the purpose
of maintaining life, stabilizing, or alleviating suffering until the owner or
keeper of such dog or cat is identified or for any period of 24 hours,
whichever is sooner. Any veterinarian who renders such emergency care or
continuous in excess of 10 minutes shall constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation of this bylaw.
Whoever as owner or keeper of a dog violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of $50.
B.
A kennel maintained as a business for the boarding and/or grooming
of dogs shall obtain a commercial kennel license. The fee for each
commercial kennel license shall be determined annually by a committee
of the Town Administrator, the Town Clerk, and the Animal Control
Officer and approved by the Board of Selectmen. Each kennel shall be
available for inspection during normal business hours by the Animal
Control Officer, a police officer, or the Board of Health.
A.
Any owner or keeper of more than three dogs but fewer than seven
dogs shall obtain a kennel license for a multiple pet household upon
written application and payment of the current license fee for each dog.
The owner or keeper shall present to the Town Clerk verification that
all dogs six months or older have been immunized against rabies. A
veterinary hospital within the Town of Harwich shall not be considered
a kennel unless it contains an area for grooming and/or boarding, in
which case it shall obtain a commercial kennel license.
B.
The Clerk shall issue without a charge a kennel license to any domestic
charitable corporation incorporated exclusively for the purpose of
protecting animals from cruelty, neglect, or abuse.
C.
Whoever as the owner or keeper fails to obtain an appropriate kennel
license shall be subject to a fine of $100.
D.
No dog or horse shall be allowed in any cemetery within the Town of
Harwich, whether it is accompanied by the owner or keeper, on or off
leash, or while running at large.
A.
Whoever as the owner or keeper of a dog or horse knowingly or
unknowingly allows a dog or horse to be in a cemetery shall be subject
to a fine of $50.
B.
§ 26-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-8
1:29
treatment to or disposes of such dog or cat shall notify the Animal Control
Officer, and upon notification the Animal Control Officer shall assume
control of such dog or cat.
§ 26-9. Exposure to rabies.
The Board of Health of the Town of Harwich shall furnish free of charge
upon application of any resident thereof who has been or may have been
exposed to rabies anti-rabid vaccine and treatment in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Department of Public Health and accepted
medical practice. Such person shall have the right to select his/her own
physician who shall be paid by the Town of Harwich at a rate established by
the Board of Health.
§ 26-10. Cruelty to animals.
§ 26-11. Damage to livestock or fowl.
Any person or persons found guilty of a violation of any provisions of
MGL c. 272, § 77, 80A, 94 or 95 shall forfeit the right to own or keep
any animal within the Town of Harwich and must immediately, upon
conviction, surrender all animals in his/her possession.
A.
Whoever upon conviction of violating MGL c. 272, § 77, 80A, 94 or 95
fails to surrender his/her animals shall be subject to a fine of $100. Each
day shall constitute a separate violation.
B.
Whoever suffers loss by the worrying, killing or maiming of livestock
or fowl by dogs shall inform the Animal Control Officer, who shall
forthwith proceed to the scene to view the damage and determine if the
damage was done, in fact, by dogs and, if so, appraise the amount of the
damage if it does not exceed $50. If in the opinion of the Animal Control
Officer the damage exceeds $50, the damage shall be appraised on oath
by three persons, one of whom shall be the Animal Control Officer, one
of whom shall be appointed by the person alleged to have suffered the
damage, and the third to be appointed by the other two.
A.
Said appraisers shall consider and include in such damages the number
and kind of animals damaged, the extent of the damage and the
appropriate weight of the damaged animals. The appraisers will also
note in their report whether or not any animals were sent for veterinary
treatment in an effort to save them and the number and kind of such
animals. Such report will be filed in the office of the Town Clerk within
10 days of said appraisal. The Clerk shall submit said appraisal reports
to the Board of Selectmen for payment. The Board of Selectmen may
require the appraisers to provide additional information that it may
deem appropriate in accordance with the reports of the appraisers.
B.
No owner of livestock or fowl shall be reimbursed for damages inflicted
by his/her own dog or dogs, nor shall he/she be reimbursed if the
owner or keeper of the dog inflicting the damage is known to him/
C.
§ 26-8 HARWICH CODE § 26-11
1:30
§ 26-12. Dogs to be restrained.
Chapter 40
BEACHES
§ 40-1. Beach parking.
her or to the Animal Control Officer. No reimbursement shall be made
in the case of damage to deer, elk, cottontail rabbits, northern hares,
pheasants, quail, partridge and other livestock or fowl determined by
the Department of Fisheries and Wildlife to be wild. No reimbursement
shall be made for damages unless the livestock or fowl are kept in
proper housing or enclosed areas. No reimbursement shall be made for
damage done by a dog to dogs, cats and other pets. Awards for damages
in no case shall exceed the fair cash market value of such livestock or
fowl.
Liability of owner.
The owner or keeper of a dog which has done damage to livestock
or fowl shall be liable for such damage, and the Selectmen may
order the owner or keeper of said dog to pay such damages after
an investigation by the Animal Control Officer of the facts of the
matter and an appraisal by the Animal Control Officer, one person
chosen by the person sustaining the damage, and a third person
chosen by the other two. The appraisers will submit a report to
the Selectmen stating the type of damage, the number and kind
of animals damaged and whether any animals required medical
treatment by a veterinarian to save them.
(1)
In the event that the owner or keeper of such dog known to have
done damage to livestock or fowl refuses to pay upon the order of
the Selectmen, the Selectmen shall enter or cause to be entered a
complaint in the District Court for the enforcement of the order.
(2)
D.
All dogs owned or kept within the Town of Harwich shall at all times
be kept securely restrained by means of a suitable leash, rope or chain
which effectively confines the dog to the property owned, occupied
or controlled by the dog's owner or keeper; provided, however, that
a dog in the presence of its owner or keeper or responsible person
having charge thereof and under the control of said person need not
be restrained by means of a rope, leash or chain or confined to the
property of such person so long as such control is effective in
preventing the dog from damaging property or harassing persons.
A.
Whoever as owner or keeper fails to restrain his/her dog shall be
subject to a fine of $50.
B.
§ 26-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:31
§ 40-2. Violation of beach regulations.
Whoever violates any beach regulations duly adopted by the Board of
Selectmen shall be punished by a fine of $50.
Chapter 43
BETTERMENTS
Beach parking fees for year-round and seasonal residents shall be
established through beach regulations proposed by the Recreation and
Youth Commission and adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
A.
Daily, weekly, full season or other less than full season beach parking
fees shall be established for residents and temporary residents at such
beaches to be determined by the Recreation and Youth Commission
and at rates established through beach regulations proposed by the
Recreation and Youth Commission and adopted by the Board of
Selectmen.
B.
Notwithstanding the above language, the Board of Selectmen shall be
authorized to permit residents or property owners of another town to
park at designated Town-owned beaches, provided that the other town
provides reciprocal beach parking privileges to residents and property
owners of the Town of Harwich and provided further that such beach
parking shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Board of
Selectmen, including the payment of fees to be determined by the
Board of Selectmen.
C.
§ 40-1 HARWICH CODE § 40-2
1:32
ARTICLE I
Harbor or River Dredging
[Adopted 11-12-2009 STM by Art. 13]
§ 43-1. Assessment of costs.
Pursuant to Chapter 80 of the General Laws of Massachusetts, the Board of
Selectmen may establish a betterment program whereby those properties
that benefit directly from the dredging of inner harbors or rivers in the
Town of Harwich shall be assessed their proportionate share of the project's
total cost. Once the Board of Selectmen has declared that it is prepared
to begin the permitting process for the particular dredging operation, the
betterment program may be initiated by a petition signed by the direct
abutters that are entitled to the dredging permits that cover a majority of
the area to be dredged. The Town will be considered a direct abutter for any
Town-owned dock space or mooring fields as well as for the channels. The
Board of Selectmen will determine the appropriate cost for each abutter,
including the Town, based on the percentage of the total dredged volume
(not area) covered by the specific abutter's dredging permit and/or volume
covered by the Town's permit and will cause the appropriate assessment
based upon the actual volumes dredged to be applied to individual tax bills
annually pursuant to said Chapter 80. The Board of Selectmen is hereby
authorized to enact regulations to carry out the purposes of this bylaw.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-1
1:33
Chapter 47
BOATING AND WATERWAYS
§ 43-1 HARWICH CODE § 43-1
1:34
ARTICLE I
Use of Town Ponds
§ 47-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
HORSEPOWER — The aggregate rated horsepower of all propellant
machinery at maximum operating revolutions per minute.
MOTORBOAT — Any vessel propelled by machinery whether or not such
machinery is the principal source of propulsion.
§ 47-2. Buck's Pond and John Joseph's Pond.
§ 47-3. Sand Pond, Andrew's Pond, Skinequit Pond and Long Pond.
§ 47-4. Hinckley's Pond, Seymour's Pond and Walker's Pond.
In either Buck's Pond or in John Joseph's Pond, no motorboat shall
operate at a speed in excess of six miles per hour.
A.
No person shall engage in waterskiing in either Buck's Pond or in John
Joseph's Pond.
B.
All violations of Subsections A and B shall be subject to the provisions
of MGL c. 90B, § 14 (Chapter 275 of the Acts of 1960).
C.
The use of all boats propelled by motor, either inboard or outboard,
shall be prohibited on Sand Pond, North Harwich, and Andrew's Pond
(also known as "Katie's Pond"), Harwich Center.
A.
The use of all boats propelled by motor, whether inboard or outboard,
and waterskiing shall be prohibited on Skinequit Pond, South Harwich.
B.
No motorboat of more than 10 horsepower or used for waterskiing may
be launched or operated from the boat ramp at Cahoon Road Landing
at the east end of Long Pond.
C.
Any violations of Subsections A, B and C shall be punishable by a fine
of $20.
D.
No motorboat of more than six horsepower shall be operated on
Hinckley's Pond. No motorboat of more than three horsepower shall be
operated on Seymour's Pond.
A.
No motorboats shall exceed the speed limit as defined in this section on
various ponds in Harwich. All ponds shall be posted as follows:
(1) Hinckley's Pond: five statute miles per hour.
(2) Seymour's Pond: five statute miles per hour.
B.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:35
§ 47-5. Use of soap or detergent.
The use of soap or detergent of any type is prohibited in the waters of any
of the great ponds located in whole or in part within the Town of Harwich.
Any violation of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $50.
No motorboats shall be operated on Walker's Pond; provided, however,
that a small electric motor of the type used for fishing may be used as
propulsion therefor.
C.
Any violations of Subsections A, B and C of this bylaw shall be
punishable by a fine of $50.
D.
§ 47-4 HARWICH CODE § 47-5
1:36
ARTICLE II
Launching, Operation and Beaching of Boats
§ 47-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT — The same meaning as the term "vessel" as defined in MGL c. 90B,
§ 1.
§ 47-7. Launching and beaching of boats.
It shall be unlawful to launch or beach boats at any Town-owned or Townoperated
location except in areas designated and posted therefor by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 47-8. Restrictions on anchoring in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful to anchor any boat closer than 75 feet to the mean lowwater
mark at any Town-owned or Town-operated bathing beach.
§ 47-9. Restrictions on operating in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful to operate any boat shoreward of any markers or floats
stationed by the Harbormaster off a public bathing beach for the purpose of
designating the swimming area thereat; provided, however, that in any area
where such markers or floats are placed at a distance greater than 75 feet
seaward of mean low water, a boat may enter the swimming area to within
75 feet of mean low water at a speed no greater than five miles per hour for
the purpose of coming to anchor.
§ 47-10. Personal watercraft.
For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel, usually less than 16 feet in
length (measured from end to end over the deck excluding shear),
which uses an inboard, internal combustion engine powering a water
jet pump as its primary source of propulsion. The vessel is intended to
be operated by a person or persons sitting, standing or kneeling on the
vessel rather than within the confines of the hull. Personal watercraft
are high performance vessels designed for speed and maneuverability
and are often used to perform stunt-like maneuvers. "Personal
watercraft" includes vessels commonly referred to as jet ski,
waverunner, wavejammer, wetjet, sea-doo, wet bike, and surf jet.
WATER BODY — The tidal waters of Pleasant Bay, including but not
limited to Round Cove, Muddy Creek (Monomoy River), and any
adjoining river, inlet, cove, embayment, pond or harbor.
A.
§ 47-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-10
1:37
§ 47-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to arrest.
The fine for such violation shall be a fine of $200.
Personal motorized watercraft, such as jet skis, shall be prohibited from
operating on Herring River and shall be prohibited from launching
from any Town-owned property abutting freshwater ponds. Personal
watercraft, such as jet skis, shall be prohibited from operating and/or
launching at Round Cove.
B.
No person shall operate any personal watercraft within any coastal
waters or inland waters of the Town which waters are within the
boundaries of the Cape Cod National Seashore or are waters which
form a portion of a water body which is located in part within the
boundaries of the Cape Cod National Seashore. The boundaries of the
Cape Cod National Seashore referred to in this section shall be the
boundaries as set forth in Public Law 87-126 which created the Cape
Cod National Seashore in 1961.
C.
Specifically excluded from the provisions of Subsection B are all waters
of Nantucket Sound located in the Town of Harwich, which waters are
outside the boundaries of the Cape Cod National Seashore.
D.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not
invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
E.
§ 47-10 HARWICH CODE § 47-11
1:38
Chapter 53
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 53-1. Posting of street number.
§ 53-2. Violations and penalties.
An owner or occupant who fails to post on his premises the street number
assigned thereto within six months after being given notice as hereinafter
provided of the number which has been assigned or receiving actual notice
thereof, whichever occurs earlier, or any owner or occupant who fails to
keep said number posted and maintained in a legible condition or any
person who unlawfully removes, defaces or conceals said number shall
be subject to a fine of $50 for each offense. In case of a failure to post,
keep posted or maintain said number in a legible condition, each day such
number is not so posted, kept posted or maintained in a legible condition
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 53-3. Notice of assignment.
Street numbers shall be assigned from time to time by the Selectmen who
shall, as soon after the assignment as practical, cause notice of the number
assigned to be mailed to the party or any one of the parties listed as an
owner of the premises on the tax records of the Town as of January 1 of
the year in which the number was assigned or notice mailed, whichever
occurs later. Such notice may, at the option of the Selectmen, be sent with
an annual tax bill covering the premises.
Chapter 89
FARMING
Every dwelling house, dwelling unit, and building housing a business
or businesses located in whole or in part in the Town of Harwich shall
have affixed thereto or otherwise posted on the premises in a location
approved by the Selectmen the street number which has been assigned
to said building by the Selectmen. Said number may be in numerical or
word form.
A.
Said number shall be four inches minimum height, of high contrast and
affixed in a location to be readily readable from the private or public
way on which such dwelling or building is located. If the street number
cannot be read as so located, in addition, such number shall be affixed
to a sign (less than one square foot) at the intersection of the private or
public way on which such dwelling or building is located (same size and
contrast as number affixed to dwelling or building). Four-inch numbers
attached to both sides of a mailbox shall be considered an acceptable
alternative to a sign, when said mailbox is located on the same side of
the private or public way as the dwelling or building.
B.
§ 47-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:39

ARTICLE I
Right to Farm
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 89-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw are to state with emphasis the
right to farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts under Article 97 of the Constitution and all state
statutes and regulations thereunder, including but not limited to MGL
c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1, MGL c. 90, § 9, MGL c. 111, § 125A and MGL
c. 128, § 1A. We, the citizens of Harwich, restate and republish these
rights pursuant to the Town's authority conferred by Article 89 of the
Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule
Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities and protects farmlands
within the Town of Harwich by allowing agricultural uses and related
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town
agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land
or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial agriculture
or accessory thereto.
A.
The words "farming" and "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include
but not be limited to the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural,
aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural or horticultural
commodities;
(3)
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land and any
other forestry or lumbering operations;
(4)
(5) Keeping and raising of livestock, including horses;
(6) Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels)
and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
(7)
B.
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:41
§ 89-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Harwich.
The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays,
weekdays and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant
incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may
be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more
than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community and
society in general. The benefits and protections of this bylaw are intended to
apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations
and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural
practices. Moreover, nothing in this right to farm bylaw shall be deemed as
acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which
is properly the subject of state statute, regulation or local zoning law.
§ 89-4. Disclosure notification.
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective, the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Harwich shall prominently post in the Town Hall and make
available for distribution the following disclosure: "It is the policy of this
community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and
improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other
agricultural products and also for its natural and ecological value. This
"Farming" shall encompass activities including but not limited to the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
(1)
Control of pests, including but not limited to insects, weeds,
predators and disease organisms of plants and animals;
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agri-tourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
(4)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, including
signage therefor;
(5)
Maintenance, repair or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus
owned or leased by the farm owner or manager expressly for the
purpose of propagation, processing, management, or sale of the
agricultural products; and
(6)
On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of trees, brush and
ground for farming operations.
(7)
C.
§ 89-2 HARWICH CODE § 89-4
1:42
disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property
they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming
activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to,
activities that cause noise, dust and odors."
§ 89-5. Resolution of disputes.
§ 89-6. Severability.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The Town
of Harwich hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be severable.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file grievance
with the Board of Selectmen, the Building Official or the Board of
Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of the
grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other
available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Building Official
or the Board of Selectmen shall forward a copy of the grievance to the
Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate
the resolution of the grievance involving all concerned parties and
report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an
agreed upon time frame.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance involving all concerned parties and report its
recommendations to the Board of Health within an agreed upon time
frame.
B.
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-6
1:43
Chapter 100
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 14.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 110.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 122.
§ 100-1. Adoption of state regulations.
In order to protect and enhance public safety by reducing the risk of fire
hazard, the provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations, 527 CMR
1.00 to 50.00, as from time to time amended, are hereby incorporated in
and made a part of this bylaw, and any violation of any provision thereof
shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Whoever violates any provision of § 100-1 shall be punished by a fine of
$50 for each offense. In the case of any continuing violation, each day said
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Said section shall be
enforceable by the head of the Fire Department or his authorized designee
as well as by Town officers having police powers.
§ 100-3. Abatement of fire hazards.
The Fire Chief or his authorized designee, upon complaint of a person
having an interest in any building or premises or property adjacent
thereto, shall at any reasonable hour enter into said building and upon
said premises, or adjacent property, within the jurisdiction of said Town
and make an investigation as to the existence of conditions likely to
cause fire. He shall in writing order such conditions to be remedied,
and whenever such officers or persons find in any building or upon
any premises any accumulation of combustible rubbish, including but
not limited to wastepaper, rags, cardboard, string, packing material,
sawdust, shavings, sticks, waste leather or rubber products, broken
boxes or barrels or any refuse or unusable material that is or may
become dangerous as a fire hazard or as an obstacle to easy ingress into
or egress from such buildings or premises, they shall, in writing, order
the same to be removed or such conditions to be remedied. Notice of
such order shall be served upon the owner, occupant, or his authorized
agent by a member of the Fire or Police Department.
A.
If said order is not complied with within 24 hours or such additional
time as the enforcing person determines reasonable as stated in said
notice, the person making such order, or any person designated so to
do, may enter into such building or upon such premises and remove
B.
§ 89-6 HARWICH CODE § 100-3
1:44
Chapter 110
GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
§ 110-1. Permit required for gas appliances.
Whoever desires to install or alter gas appliances shall first make
application to the Gas Inspector and obtain a permit therefor. Each
application shall be made in the name of the owner or occupant of the
building or structure by the person or persons who propose to make the
installation of such equipment. The Gas Inspector shall grant a permit
authorizing such installation or alteration provided that such proposed
installation or alteration complies with the laws of the commonwealth and
the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of State Examiners of
Plumbers and Gas Fitters. Such fee as the Selectmen shall, from time to
time, determine shall be charged for each permit.
Chapter 115
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 115-1. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA3 is to provide a more energy-efficient
alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant sections of
the building code for new buildings.
§ 115-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — The
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code
created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted
such refuse or any unusable materials or abate such conditions, and
the owner or occupant of said premises shall be liable for reasonable
expenses incurred in doing so. Any expense so incurred shall be a
lien upon such building or premises, effective upon the filing in the
appropriate Registry of Deeds of a statement of claim therefor signed
by the enforcing person and setting forth the amount of said lien. The
lien shall be enforced within the time and in the manner provided for
the collection of taxes upon real estate.
Any such owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with said
order shall be punished by a fine of $75. Each day noncompliance
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
3. Editor's Note: See 780 CMR 115 Appendix AA.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:45
by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the
establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy
efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy
conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code are the IECC
with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of Building
Regulations and Standards.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the Massachusetts building
code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts building
code, based on further amendments to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings
built to this code.
§ 115-3. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 115.AA, as indicated.
§ 115-4. Authority.
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries is
designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR
may mandate adherence to this appendix. 780 CMR 115.AA may be adopted
or rescinded by any municipality in the commonwealth in the manner
prescribed by law.
§ 115-5. Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the
Code of the Town of Harwich under the General Bylaws, Chapter 115.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the inspector of buildings or building
commissioner and effective as of January 1, 2019.
Chapter 122
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 100. Solid waste — See Ch. 247.
§ 115-2 HARWICH CODE § 115-5
1:46
ARTICLE I
Materials Containing Percholate
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 122-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 122-2. Prohibited acts.
The storage, use, handling, igniting, or disposal of any materials, including
without limitation explosives or fireworks, containing perchlorate within
1,500 feet of the boundary of the Zone II protective area around any
public water supply as approved by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, including drinking water wells owned and
operated by the Town, is hereby prohibited. The limit of the protective
radius of 1,500 feet for each Town-owned well field is shown on the map
included as Appendix A to this bylaw.4 In the event that the delineation of a
Zone II changes, the Board of Water Commissioners ("Board") shall revise
Appendix A and shall keep a copy of the revised map on file with the Town
Clerk and the Water Department.
§ 122-3. Administration.
Perchlorate is an inorganic chemical commonly used in the
manufacturing of rockets, missiles, fireworks and explosives. It may be
found in surface water and groundwater around military operations,
defense contracting, manufacturing facilities, and areas where blasting
agents have been used.
A.
Perchlorate is highly mobile in water and can persist for many years
in groundwater and surface water. It can cause adverse health effects
at even low concentrations, and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) have made it a priority to implement
regulations to protect drinking water supplies and public health from
perchlorate impacts. Accordingly, the DEP is promulgating a drinking
water standard of two parts per billion (ppb) that comes into effect
during 2007.
B.
Given the potential for adverse effects on groundwater resources from
perchlorate, the purpose of this bylaw is to protect the Town's drinking
water supplies from contamination.
C.
The Board shall administer, implement, and enforce this bylaw. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board may be delegated
in writing by the Board to its employees or agents.
A.
The Board may adopt, and periodically amend, rules and regulations
relating to the administration of this bylaw. Failure by the Board to
promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their
B.
4. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file with the Town Clerk and the Water Department.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:47
§ 122-4. Enforcement.
invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of
this bylaw.
The Board or an authorized agent may issue a written order to enforce
the provisions of this bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may
include requirements to cease and desist from any specified activity
until there is compliance with this bylaw.
A.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, or regulation,
order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of $300.
Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 122-3 HARWICH CODE § 122-4
1:48
ARTICLE II
Single-Use Plastic Bags
[Adopted 5-4-2015 ATM by Art. 40]
§ 122-5. Purpose and intent.
§ 122-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business selling goods, articles, food or personal
services to the public, including takeout restaurants.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is specifically designed for multiple use and
is made of cloth, fabric or other durable materials.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS — Bags made of plastic with integral handles,
and of a thickness less than 2.5 mils, that are intended to be used for the
transport of products purchased at an establishment as defined herein.
§ 122-7. Use regulations.
The production and use of single-purpose plastic bags has significant
impacts on the marine and land environment of communities, including
coastal communities, including but not limited to deaths of marine and
terrestrial animals through ingestion, entanglement, the pollution of
land resources through litter requiring significant expense to remove,
the clogging of storm drainage systems, interference with singlestream
resource recovery systems, which are generally not equipped to
handle plastic bags, and using millions of gallons of fossil fuels in the
U.S. in connection with their manufacture.
A.
Therefore, the Town of Harwich seeks to phase out the single-use
plastic bags by all retail establishments over the period of 12 months
from the effective date of this bylaw. The purpose of this legislation
is to phase out the usage of single-use checkout bags by retail
establishments and restaurants in the Town of Harwich.
B.
Single-use plastic bags shall not be distributed or sold at any
establishment within the Town of Harwich. Existing stock of single-use
bags shall be phased out within 12 months of adoption of this bylaw;
any remaining stock shall be disposed of properly by the establishment.
A.
Customers are encouraged, in the meantime, to bring their own
reusable shopping bags to stores. Establishments may provide reusable
bags at no charge or charge a fee for paper or other reusable bag, as
they choose. Establishments are strongly encouraged to make reusable
bags available to customers at a reasonable price.
B.
Thin-film plastic bags used by establishments to contain dry-cleaning,
newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items and other similar
C.
§ 122-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-7
1:49
§ 122-8. Administration and enforcement.
merchandise, typically without handles, are exempt from the provisions
of this bylaw.
This bylaw may be enforced by any Town police officer, enforcement
officers or agents of the Board of Health.
A.
This bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, noncriminal disposition pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 21D, and the appropriate chapter of the General Bylaws
of the Town of Harwich. If noncriminal disposition is elected, then any
establishment which violates any provision this bylaw shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(1) First offense: $50 fine.
(2) Second offense: $100 fine.
(3) Third and subsequent offense: $200 fine.
B.
Subsequent offenses shall be determined as offenses occurring within
two years of the date of the first noticed offense. Each day or portion
thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
§ 122-7 HARWICH CODE § 122-8
1:50

Chapter 125
HAZARDS, ENVIRONMENTAL
125:1

ARTICLE I
Procurement or Sale of Beverages in Plastic Bottles by Town
[Adopted 5-6-2019 ATM by Art. 50
§ 125-1. Prohibitions; exemptions.
A. The procurement by the Town of Harwich of either water or any other
beverage in single-use plastic bottles of any size is prohibited, and the
sale of water or any beverage in single-use plastic containers of any size
prohibited on Town property.
B. Any Town Department when engaged in public health and safety
operations shall be exempt from this bylaw effective January 1, 2020.
§ 125-1 HAZARDS, ENVIRONMENTAL § 125-1
125:3

Chapter 131
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 122-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:51

ARTICLE I
Historic District
§ 131-1. Historic District and Historical Commission. [Amended
5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 66]
There is hereby established an Historic District and Historical Commission
under the provisions of the Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, consisting of
seven members and five alternate members, appointed by the Selectmen,
including one member, where possible, from two nominees submitted by
the Harwich Historic District and Historical Commission, one member,
where possible, from two nominees, one of whom shall be submitted by
the Massachusetts state chapter of the American Institute of Architects
and one member, where possible, from two nominees of the Board of
Realtors covering the Town of Harwich. One or more of the foregoing shall
be a resident of an historic district established in Harwich pursuant to
the Historic Districts Act. When the Commission is first established, three
members shall be appointed for a term of one year, two shall be appointed
for a term of two years, and two shall be appointed in like manner for three
years, and their successors shall be appointed in like manner for terms
of three years. When the Commission is first established, one alternate
member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two alternate members
shall be appointed for a term of two years, and two alternate members
shall be appointed for a term of three years, and their successors shall be
appointed in like manner for terms of three years.
§ 131-2. Establishment of historic district.
There is hereby established an Historic District under the provisions of the
Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, which district is shown on a plan titled
"Town of Harwich Existing and Proposed Addition to the Historic District,"
dated November 1972, scale one inch equals 100 feet, Martin E. Moran,
Town Engineer, a copy of which is on file at the Town Clerk's office.
§ 131-3. Powers and duties of Commission. [Amended 5-3-2010
ATM by Art. 66]
The Historic District and Historical Commission shall have all the powers
and duties of historic district commissions as provided by the Historic
Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, and subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 131-4. Certificate of appropriateness. [Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by
Art. 66]
When taking action under the provisions of the second paragraph of Section
7 of the Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, the Historic District and
Historical Commission shall make a determination within 30 days after the
filing of the application for a certificate of appropriateness, or such further
time as the applicant may, in writing, allow.
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-5
1:53
§ 131-5. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw is, for any reason,
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other
section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 131-5 HARWICH CODE § 131-5
1:54
ARTICLE II
Historically Significant Buildings
§ 131-6. Purpose. [Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 66]
It is the purpose of this bylaw to promote protection of the historical,
cultural and architectural heritage of the Town by preserving from
demolition whenever possible historically significant buildings by affording
the Historic District and Historical Commission established by the Charter,
Chapter 7, Section 9, and other interested parties an opportunity to explore
and develop with the owners of such buildings acceptable alternatives to
demolition.
§ 131-7. Determination of historical significance.
For the purpose of this bylaw, historically significant buildings are buildings
constructed prior to 100 years before the present calendar year which:
§ 131-8. Notice of intent to demolish.
§ 131-9. Public hearing.
Are listed either on the National Registry of Historic Places or the
Massachusetts Register of Historic Places;
A.
Are directly associated with one or more historically noteworthy
persons or events or with the political, cultural, economic or social
history of the Town;
B.
Possess particular architectural value or significance as representative
of a recognized architectural style or period or due to the method
of construction or materials used or by virtue of association with an
historically noteworthy architect; or
C.
Are listed on a register of historically significant buildings developed
in accordance with these standards and maintained by the Historic
District and Historical Commission. [Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by Art.
66]
D.
Before any building constructed prior to 100 years before the present
calendar year is demolished in whole or in part, a notice of intent to do
so will be filed with the Commission.
A.
The notice of intent will be in the form provided by the Commission
and shall be deemed filed when the completed form with the required
number of copies and filing fee established by the Commission has been
deposited both in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the
Building Official.
B.
Within 45 days of said filing, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
to determine the degree of historical significance, if any, of the subject
A.
§ 131-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-9
1:55
§ 131-10. Determination of nonsignificance.
If after hearing the Commission determines the building in question is not
historically significant, or if the Commission determines in a case where
less than complete demolition is proposed that the proposed work will not
destroy or substantially diminish the historical significance of the structure,
it shall within seven days of said hearing so notify the owner or applicant
and the Building Official and shall also file a record of its findings with
the Town Clerk in a form suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds.
Thereafter, necessary permits to authorize work may be applied for. A
finding of nonsignificance hereunder shall be conclusive on all parties.
§ 131-11. Determination of significance; demolition delay.
[Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 42]
If after hearing the Commission determines that the building in question
is historically significant and the proposed work would destroy or
substantially diminish its historic value, it is empowered to impose a
demolition delay of up to one year from the date of said determination and
may schedule additional hearings during any such delay period to allow an
opportunity to develop alternatives to demolition and the ability to reduce
or rescind the delay period if such alternatives are considered not feasible.
§ 131-12. Alternatives to demolition.
If as a result of the Commission's review acceptable alternatives to
demolition are developed, the Commission is empowered to enter into an
agreement with the owner of the building in question which reflects the
alternatives which have been agreed to and where appropriate establishes
a time period for implementation of said alternatives. A copy of said
agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk and Building Official.
Thereafter, no work in connection with the building shall be done except in
accordance with the terms of said agreement unless and until a new notice
of intent is filed and processed hereunder.
building and, if deemed to be historically significant, explore
alternatives to demolition.
Notice of the time, place and subject matter of hearings hereunder
shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town once each week for two successive weeks, the first notice
to appear 14 days at least before the day of the hearing (including
the day of publication and excluding the day of the hearing), and by
mailing a notice of hearing to the owner or applicant, all abuttors
to the subject property, the Planning Board of the Town, the Historic
District and Historical Commission, the Harwich Historical Society, the
Conservation Commission and the Selectmen and such other persons
as the Commission may determine. [Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by Art.
66]
B.
§ 131-9 HARWICH CODE § 131-13
1:56
§ 131-13. Right to demolish.
If at the end of a Commission-mandated delay no alternatives have been
agreed to by the applicant, the Commission shall within seven days so notify
the Town Clerk and the Building Official and the applicant shall be entitled
to apply for all necessary permits to allow the work as described in the
notice of intent.
§ 131-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person legal or natural who demolishes in whole or in part any building
constructed prior to 100 years before the present calendar year without
first complying with the terms and provisions of this bylaw shall be subject
to a fine of $300. Each day any work continues in violation hereof shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition to said penalty, the enforcing
official shall be entitled to pursue appropriate action seeking injunctive
relief to enjoin and restrain violation hereof.
§ 131-15. Enforcing authority.
The Building Official shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this
bylaw.
§ 131-16. Exception for demolition of unsafe buildings.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to the Building Official if
pursuant to other applicable provisions of law said Inspector orders the
demolition of an unsafe building to abate a threat to the public safety, nor
shall it apply to persons acting pursuant to such an order.
§ 131-17. Severability.
If any provision of this bylaw is determined to be invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, said determination shall not affect
the validity of any other section hereof.
§ 131-18. Conflicts with other laws.
If any provision hereof conflicts with any provision of the General Laws of
the commonwealth, the provisions of the General Laws shall prevail.
§ 131-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-18
1:57
Chapter 140
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST
§ 140-1. Appointments.
As authorized by Chapter 44, § 55C,5 the Board of Selectmen shall appoint
five Trustees, one of whom shall be the Town Administrator or designee, and
one of whom shall be a member of the Board of Selectmen; the remaining
three Trustees shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for two-year
staggered terms.
§ 140-2. Duties and responsibilities.
§ 140-3. Removal.
A member may be removed from the Trust by the Board of Selectmen by a
majority vote for cause after a public meeting or by failure to reappoint.
Chapter 164
LICENSES, PERMITS AND FEES
§ 164-1. Secondhand dealers and collectors.6 [Amended 5-2-2011
ATM by Art. 43]
The Trust shall possess all of the powers and authority set forth in
M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C. The Selectman member of the Trust shall report to
the full Board of Selectmen on purchases or sales of real property.
A.
In addition, the Affordable Housing Trust shall work with the Harwich
Housing Committee to develop an affordable housing plan, which shall
be updated each year and a copy presented to the Board of Selectmen.
B.
If an individual, business, or company is in the business of buying:
Precious metals, including gold, silver, copper, platinum, or other
metals valued for their character, rarity, beauty or quality,
(1)
Precious gems, including diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires,
pearls or other precious stones valued for their character, rarity,
beauty or quality,
(2)
Watches and jewelry, including rings, necklaces, pendants,
earrings, brooches, chains and pocket watches, and coins,
(3)
Sterling silver flatware, including knives, forks, spoons,
candlesticks, coffee and tea sets and ornamental objects,
(4)
A.
5. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 44, § 55C.
6. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 241, Secondhand Dealers and Collectors.
§ 131-18 HARWICH CODE § 164-1
1:58
Electronic equipment, including TVs, DVD players, VCRs
computers, cell phones, video games, audio, video and
photographic equipment,
the individual, business, or company must have a valid
secondhand dealer and collector license (junk dealer's license)
issued by the licensing authority of the Town of Harwich in
addition to any license or permit required by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts if any.
(5)
All secondhand dealers and collectors shall keep detailed records of
their purchases of the above listed items, including identification of the
seller, and these records will be maintained on the licensed premises
and will be made available for inspection by the Police Chief or his
designee during regular business hours or at such other times as may
be mutually agreed upon.
B.
The secondhand dealer or collector shall hold all items regulated by this
section for seven days from the date of purchase.
C.
If the Police Department has probable cause to believe that any items
purchased by the secondhand dealer or collector are stolen, the items
will be confiscated by the Police Department. A receipt will be issued
for the items confiscated.
D.
Transient metals dealers/buyers must obtain a secondhand dealer and
collectors license in compliance with Subsection A of this section and
register with the Harwich Police Department at least 14 days prior to
any event soliciting the purchase within the Town of Harwich of any of
the items outlined in this section.
This shall include, but not be limited to, home parties, hotel/motel
venues and any other similar event.
(1)
All such purchases shall be subject to the same rules as licensed
secondhand dealers and collectors (junk dealers) with the
additional requirement that itemized documentation of all
purchased items shall be submitted to the Harwich Police
Department within 24 hours after the conclusion of the event.
(2)
"Transient metals dealers/buyers" are defined as any individual,
business, or company that does not have a permanent facility
within the Town of Harwich where purchase and sales records are
held and available for inspection by the Harwich Police Department
in compliance with this By-law.
(3)
E.
Any violation of this section may be prosecuted as a criminal matter
or in an administrative procedure. Whoever violates the provisions of
this section shall be fined not more than $300. The licensing authority
may suspend or revoke any license issued by them whenever they
have reasonable cause to believe the licensee has violated the terms,
conditions or regulations pertaining to this license.
F.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-2
1:59
§ 164-2. Garbage collectors.7
No person shall engage in the collection of garbage, rubbish or offal without
first obtaining a license from the Board of Health of the Town, and all such
licenses shall comply with all the rules and regulations of the Board of
Health, and any violation thereof shall be punished as hereinafter provided
or as may be provided by regulations of the Board of Health for any violation
of its regulations.
§ 164-3. Amusements.
Upon application for a license or permit to build, maintain and/or operate
an amusement, the Selectmen shall hold a public hearing upon such
application and publish notice in a newspaper having circulation in the
Town of Harwich at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 164-4. License fee for camps, cabins, motels or mobile home
parks.
The fee for original or renewed licenses for recreational camps, overnight
camps or cabins, motels or mobile home parks located within the Town of
Harwich shall be as established by the Board of Selectmen from time to
time.
§ 164-5. Class IV vehicle repairman's licenses.
No person shall engage in the retail business of repairing of vehicles
within the Town without first obtaining a Class IV vehicle repairman license
from the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall make such
rules and regulations governing Class IV vehicle repairman's licenses as
may be reasonable and proper, and any licensee so licensed by the Board
of Selectmen under this section, who shall violate any of the rules or
regulations made by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to this section, shall
be subject to such penalties as are hereinafter provided. Also the Selectmen
may revoke such license for any violation at their pleasure.
§ 164-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by Art.
65; 5-7-2012 ATM by Art. 22]
Any violations of §§ 164-2, 164-3, 164-4 and 164-5 shall be punishable by a
fine of $100.
§ 164-7. Revocation and suspension of licenses and permits for
nonpayment. [Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 51]
Purpose. Pursuant to the authority conferred upon the Town by MGL
c. 40, § 57, adopted at the April 6, 1987, Annual Town Meeting as
Article 78, the following is adopted for the regulation of application
for, revocation, suspension, renewal or transfer of local licenses and
A.
7. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 247, Solid Waste.
§ 164-2 HARWICH CODE § 164-7
1:60
permits issued by any board, officer, department or commission of
the Town for any person, corporation or business enterprise who has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or any other municipal charges, with the exceptions listed
in Subsection B of this bylaw.
Applicability. This chapter shall not apply to the following licenses and
permits: Open Burning, MGL c. 48, § 13; Bicycle Permits, MGL c. 85,
§ 11A; Laws; Sales of Articles for Charitable Purposes, MGL c. 101,
§ 33; Children Work Permits, MGL c. 149, § 69; Associations Dispensing
Food or Beverage Licenses, MGL c. 140, § 21E; Dog Licenses, MGL
c. 140, § 137; Fishing, Hunting, Trapping Licenses, MGL c. 131, § 12;
Marriage Licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28; Theatrical Events, Public
Exhibition Permits, MGL c. 140, § 181.
B.
List of persons delinquent in payment of municipal charges. The Town
Treasurer/Collector shall annually furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing
authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and
transfers, a list of any person, corporation, business enterprise
(hereinafter referred to as the "party"), that has neglected or refused to
pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
charges for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such party
has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of
such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
C.
Denial, revocation or suspension of license or permit for nonpayment of
municipal charges. The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend
any license or permit under their jurisdiction, including renewals and
transfers, of any party whose name appears on such list furnished to
the licensing authority by the Treasurer/Collector, or with respect to
any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license
or permit and which activity, event or other matter is carried out or
exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate
owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority by the Treasurer/Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Treasurer/Collector, as
required by applicable provisions of the law, and the party is given a
hearing, to be held not earlier than 14 days after such notice. Such
list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension
of such license or permit to any party. The Treasurer/Collector shall
have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by
the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation
or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding
and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding
at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation
or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked
under this bylaw shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing
authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer/Collector that
D.
§ 164-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:61
§ 164-8. Civil fingerprinting - criminal history check authorization
for certain licenses. [Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 56]
the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to
the municipality as of the date of issuance of such certificate.
Payment agreement - conditional permit or license issuance. Any party
shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
such limitations to the license or permit and the validity of such license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with such
agreement. Failure to comply with such agreement shall be grounds
for the suspension or revocation of such license or permit; provided,
however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by
applicable provisions of law.
E.
Waiver of denial, suspension or revocation when: The Board of
Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation of any
license or permit if it finds there is no direct or indirect business
interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or
members of his/her immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268, § 1, in
the business or activity conducted in or on such property.
F.
The Police Department shall, as authorized by MGL c. 6, § 172 B 1/2,
conduct state and federal fingerprint-based criminal history checks for
individuals and entities applying for the following licenses:
(1) Hawking and peddling or other door-to-door salespeople.
(2) Manager of alcoholic beverage license.
(3) Owner or operator of public conveyance.
(4) Dealer of secondhand articles.
(5) Pawn dealers.
(6) Junk metal dealers.
(7) Hackney drivers.
(8) Ice cream truck vendors.
A.
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify the
individual fingerprinted that the fingerprints will be used to check
the individual's criminal history records and obtain the individual's
consent.
The Police Chief shall periodically check with the Executive Office
of Public Safety and Security ("EOPSS"), which has issued an
informational bulletin, which explains the requirements for Town
bylaws and the procedures for obtaining criminal history
(1)
B.
§ 164-7 HARWICH CODE § 164-8
1:62
information, to see if there have been any updates to be sure the
Town remains in compliance.
Upon receipt of the fingerprints, the individual's consent and the
appropriate fee, the Police Department shall transmit the fingerprints it
has obtained pursuant to this bylaw to the Identification Section of the
Massachusetts State Police, the Massachusetts Department of Criminal
Justice Information Services (DCJIS), and/or the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), or the successors of such agencies as may be
necessary for the purpose of conducting fingerprint-based state and
national criminal records background checks of license applicants
specified in this bylaw.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the
Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information
Systems (DCJIS), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
and their successors, as may be applicable, to conduct fingerprintbased
state and national criminal record background checks,
including FBI records, consistent with this bylaw.
(1)
The Town authorizes the Police Department to receive and utilize
state and FBI records in connection with such background checks,
consistent with this bylaw. The state and FBI criminal history will
not be disseminated to unauthorized entities.
(2)
Use of criminal record by licensing authorities licensing of the
Town shall utilize the results of fingerprint-based criminal record
background checks for the sole purpose of determining the
suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection with the
license applications specified in this bylaw.
(3)
C.
A Town licensing authority may deny an application for a license on the
basis of the results of a fingerprint-based criminal record background
check if it determines that the results of the check render the subject
unsuitable for the proposed occupational activity. The licensing
authority shall consider all applicable laws, regulations and Town
policies bearing on an applicant's suitability in making this
determination. Factors that shall be considered in making a
determination of fitness shall include, but not be limited to, whether the
record subject has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment
for a crime, that bears upon the subject's ability or fitness to serve in
that capacity, including any felony or a misdemeanor that involved force
or threat of force, possession of a controlled substance, or sex-related
offense.
Licensing authorities of the Town are hereby authorized to deny
any application, including renewals and transfers thereof, for any
person who is determined unfit for the license, as determined by
the licensing authority, due to information obtained pursuant to
this bylaw.
(1)
D.
§ 164-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-8
1:63
Chapter 171
MARIJUANA
§ 171-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall display, roll, smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume
marijuana or any form of tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C,
§ 1, as amended) while in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway,
passage, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat
landing, public building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking
lot, or any area owned or under the control of the Town, or in or upon any
bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier, or in any
place accessible to the public.
§ 171-2. Violations and penalties.
This bylaw may be enforced through noncriminal disposition pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 21D, by any police officer with enforcement authority in the
Town. The fine for violation of this bylaw shall be $300 for each offense. Any
penalty imposed under this bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty
imposed under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
§ 171-3. Prohibition of nonmedical marijuana establishments.
[Added 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 35]
Consistent with M.G.L. c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of nonmedical "marijuana
establishments" as defined in M.G.L. c. 94G, § 1, including marijuana
cultivators, independent testing laboratory, marijuana product
manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed
The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of
conducting fingerprint-based criminal record background checks shall
be established by a vote of the Board of Selectmen. A portion of the
fee, as specified in MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2, shall be deposited into
the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the
remainder of the fee may be retained by the Town for its costs
associated with the administration of the fingerprinting program.
E.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to promulgate regulations for the
implementation of this bylaw, but in doing so it is recommended that it
consult with the Chief of Police, Town Counsel, and the Massachusetts
Executive Office of Public Safety and Security (or its successor agency)
to ensure that such regulations are consistent with the statute, the
FBI's requirements for access to the national database, and other
applicable state and federal requirements.
F.
This bylaw shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General, so
long as the requirements of MGL c. 40, § 32, are satisfied.
G.
§ 164-8 HARWICH CODE § 171-3
1:64
marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of
Harwich.
Chapter 176
MINORS
§ 171-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:65

ARTICLE I
Smoking in Schools
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 176-1. Smoking prohibited; violations and penalties.
No student registered in the Harwich public schools shall smoke in school,
on school grounds, on school buses, or at school activities. Any student
violating this bylaw shall be subject to fines of $50 for the first offense, $100
for the second offense and $200 for the third and each subsequent offense.
In the case of a Harwich student offender, these fines shall continue and
be cumulative over the student's years of education in the Harwich schools.
These fines will be in addition to penalties the school may apply to violators.
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-1
1:67
Chapter 189
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 214.
§ 189-1. Definitions; regulations; exemptions; special permits;
violations and penalties. [Amended 5-7-2012 ATM by Art. 23]
Definitions. As used by this bylaw, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound from a source regulated by this bylaw
that can be detected above routine or normal ambient background
noise by unaided human hearing.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM — Any fixed or portable system to
operate or amplify sound, including, but not limited to, phonograph,
radio, television, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette player,
compact disk player, digital music player, "boom box," or loud speaker.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or allow any
noise which emanates from any building, boat, structure, vehicle,
premises, or any sound amplification system, which is plainly audible at
a distance of 150 feet from any such building, boat, structure, vehicle,
premises or sound amplification system. The fact that the noise is
plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building, structure,
vehicle, boat, premises or sound amplification system in which or from
which it originates shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. Each such act, which constitutes a violation of this
section, which either continues or is reported more than 30 minutes
after the issuance of a warning or citation to cease said activities, shall
be considered a separate offense and shall be prosecuted as a separate
offense in accordance with § 189-1E.
B.
Sounding horns excessively. It shall be unlawful to sound or use
automobile, truck or other motor vehicle horns or similar signaling
devices upon the public streets, alleys, parking lots, or thoroughfares
of the Town in excess of those signals necessary for the preservation of
safety and is a violation of this bylaw at anytime.
C.
For the purposes of this bylaw, noises which disturb the reasonable
quiet, comfort, repose, or health of others shall include loading or
unloading activities, use of power tools and equipment, use of lawn
or landscaping equipment, loud outcries, and other loud or boisterous
noises which are not specifically exempted by § 189-1F and which are
plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from their source between
D.
§ 176-1 HARWICH CODE § 189-1
1:68
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as otherwise indicated as outlined in
§ 189-1B.
Procedure upon violation. It shall be the duty of any police officer of
this town to order any person or persons so acting as to violate the
provisions of this bylaw to cease any prohibited activities which are
specified in this bylaw, and if the person or persons so ordered does not
forthwith obey, the officer may issue a noncriminal citation with a fine
of $150 for the first violation and $300 for each subsequent violation.
If the person or persons responsible for violation(s) of this bylaw
cannot be determined, then the person in lawful custody and/or
control of the premises where the violation(s) occurred, including
but not limited to the owner, lessee, manager, or occupant of the
property, may be deemed responsible for the violation(s).
(1)
Any person or persons who commit, in the presence of a police
officer, a violation of this article, which amounts to a breach of the
peace or anticipatory breach of the peace, may be arrested without
a warrant.
(2)
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by
indictment or on complaint brought in the District Court. Except as
may be otherwise provided by law and as the District Court may
see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense
shall be $300.
(3)
The Town may enforce this bylaw or enjoin violations thereof
through any lawful process, and the election of one remedy by
the Town shall not preclude enforcement through any other lawful
means.
(4)
E.
Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the
noise level regulations:
Any law enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any
communication or signaling device necessary in the performance of
law enforcement duties.
(1)
Any fire apparatus, ambulance, rescue, or emergency response
vehicle in performance of their public safety responsibilities.
(2)
Any emergency vehicle equipped with any communication device
necessary in the performance of any emergency procedures.
(3)
Any highway maintenance, water department, or public utilities
vehicle utilizing an amplified communications system in the
performance of their responsibilities.
(4)
Announcing systems at sanctioned sporting or other authorized
public events.
(5)
F.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-1
1:69
Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves during public emergencies.
(6)
Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle(s) responding to an
emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
(7)
Noises resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted
by law and/or for which a license or permit has been granted by the
Town.
(8)
Parades, music festivals, public gatherings, and events for which
the Selectmen have issued a permit.
(9)
Bells, chimes or carillons, or their amplified, recorded, or other
electronic substitution while being used for religious purposes,
in conjunction with religious services or to denote time intervals
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(10)
Snow removal from private parking lots, drives, roadways, and
other vehicle- or pedestrian-traveled surfaces.
(11)
Noises for which the Board of Selectmen has granted a special
permit.
(12)
(13)Noise resulting from activities of any agricultural operation.
Application for special permit.
Application for a permit for relief from the noise level designated
in this chapter on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the
Board of Selectmen.
(1)
Any permit granted by the Selectmen shall set forth all conditions
pertaining to the specified noise and a reasonable time limit for its
abatement.
(2)
The holders of licenses to provide alcoholic beverages and/or
entertainment shall comply with any noise allowances and/or
restrictions imposed upon such licenses, and in the case of a
conflict between individual license allowances or restrictions and
this bylaw, the terms of the license shall apply, and a violation of
any such allowances or restrictions shall also constitute a violation
of this bylaw.
(3)
G.
Severability clause. If any part of this bylaw is deemed to be contrary to
state or federal law by the Attorney General, that part can be severed
without affecting any other part of this bylaw.
H.
§ 189-1 HARWICH CODE § 189-1
1:70
Chapter 208
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach parking — See Ch. 40.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-1
1:71

ARTICLE I
Parking for People with Disabilities
[Adopted 5-5-2009 STM by Art. 1]
§ 208-1. Unauthorized parking. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 3]
No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or like means of
transportation in a designated parking space that is reserved for vehicles
owned and operated by disabled veterans or by handicapped persons unless
said vehicle bears the distinctive license plates, placards, or for vehicles
transporting a handicapped person, displaying the special identification
plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, or for any vehicle bearing the official
identification of a handicapped person issued by any other state or other
legitimate governmental entity.
§ 208-2. Required parking spaces.
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way
or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for
businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational
facilities, cultural centers, multifamily residential dwellings, or for any
other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees
shall be required to reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas
for any vehicle owned and operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped
person whose vehicle bears the distinctive license plates, placards, or for
vehicles transporting a handicapped person, displaying the special
identification plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, or for any vehicle bearing
the official identification of a handicapped person issued by any other state
or other legitimate governmental entity, according to the following formula:
Total Parking Spaces
Minimum Required Accessible
Spaces (see Note 1)
1 to 25 1 space (see Note 2)
26 to 50 2 spaces
51 to 75 3 spaces
76 to 100 4 spaces
101 to 150 5 spaces
151 to 200 6 spaces
201 to 300 7 spaces
301 to 400 8 spaces
401 to 500 9 spaces
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20 spaces plus 1 space for each 100
over 1,000 spaces
§ 208-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-2
1:73
Note 1: One or more adjacent establishments may use the combined
parking areas of each establishment to provide the required number of
universal accessible spaces (11 feet wide with adjacent five-foot-wide
crosshatch) for all participating establishments, provided that no such
spaces shall be farther than 100 feet from any of the accessible entrances
of the participating establishments, and further provided that a safe and
accessible path to each participating establishment is provided and
maintained, except as provided under an approved accommodation plan
under § 208-3.
Note 2: For parking areas, new or existing, containing from one to 15
spaces and not subject to other provisions of this bylaw relative to a
renovation or expansion project, compliance with this table may be
satisfied pursuant to the requirements of § 208-3 below.
Note 3: Parking spaces shall be level with surface. Any slopes shall not
exceed a ratio of 1:50 in all directions.
§ 208-3. Accommodation plans.
§ 208-4. Sign requirements; location and size of parking spaces.
Parking areas, new or existing, which contain fewer than 16 parking
spaces and are subject to the provisions of this bylaw may provide for
alternate ways of accommodating parking access by individuals with
disabilities by implementing an accommodation plan approved by the
Board of Selectmen or its designee which incorporates one or more of
the following measures:
A plan for accommodation which provides for reasonable and safe
means for unloading, loading, and parking a wheelchair-liftequipped
passenger van. In addition to other approaches, such
plan may provide for a system in which employees of a subject
establishment are trained, able, and reasonably available to assist
disabled people in accessing the establishment and returning to
their vehicles. This may include designating a marked and signed
area on the site or an adjacent property in which a lift-equipped van
may temporarily be unloaded and loaded and parked in a standard
parking space and retrieved by an employee of the establishment.
(1)
A plan for accommodation that provides for a system in which
disabled individuals may be served in their vehicles and/or homes
by a representative of a subject establishment. This option shall not
be available to restaurants.
(2)
A.
Approval of accommodation plans will be subject to such procedures,
rules and/or regulations as may from time to time be adopted by
the Board of Selectmen, subject to public hearing in accordance with
established policy.
B.
Each parking space designated as reserved under the provisions of
§ 208-2 of this article or each pair of such spaces shall be identified
A.
§ 208-2 HARWICH CODE § 208-4
1:74
§ 208-5. (Reserved)8
§ 208-6. Applicability.
This bylaw shall apply to any existing or future parking area to which the
public has a right to access as invitees or licensees.
§ 208-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
by a permanently installed above-grade sign located at a height of not
less that five feet and not more than eight feet to the top of the sign
with white lettering against a blue background and which shall bear
the words "Parking for People with Disabilities, Special Plate Required,
Unauthorized Parking Subject to Fine and Towing at Owner's Expense"
and must also contain the international symbol of accessibility which is
a person in a wheelchair.
Such parking spaces shall be as near as possible to a building entrance
or walkway and adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods
which permit sidewalk access to a person with a disability, shall be 11
feet wide with five feet of crosshatch and shall contain the international
symbol of accessibility on their surface. However, on unpaved lots,
parking spaces shall be designated only by the sign as defined in
this section. Where the designated parking space cannot be located
within 200 feet of an entrance accessible to the physically handicapped,
a dropoff area, accessible to the physically handicapped, shall be
provided within 100 feet of such entrance. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM
by Art. 3]
B.
The penalty for parking in violation of § 208-1 shall be $200, and any
vehicle parked in violation thereof may be towed according to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D. The Police Department shall enforce the
provisions of the bylaw.
A.
The penalty for failure to establish and/or maintain the parking spaces
and signs required by §§ 208-2 and 208-4 of this bylaw shall be a fine of
$200 for each day failure continues. The Building Official shall enforce
the provisions of the bylaw.9
B.
8. Editor’s Note: Former § § 208-5, Universal accessible space, was repealed 5-8-2012 STM by
Art. 3.
9. Editor’s Note: Former § 208-8, Effective date, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 3.
§ 208-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-7
1:75
Chapter 214
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 14.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 18.
Animals — See Ch. 26.
Noise — See Ch. 189.
§ 214-1. Disorderly conduct and loitering.
No person shall behave in a rude, indecent or disorderly manner, or use
profane, indecent or insulting language, or shout, scream and/or utter loud
outcries without reasonable cause in any public place in the Town to the
annoyance or disturbance of any person there being or passing, or loiter
on any sidewalk or street or about doorways or places of business to the
annoyance or disturbance of any person. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this bylaw shall be fined $50 for each offense.
§ 214-2. Peeping toms.
No person, except any officer of the law in performance of his duties, shall
enter upon or remain upon the premises of another with the intention of
peeking, spying or looking into the window, door or other aperture of a
house or other structure in any manner or upon any person or persons
therein. Any person convicted of this offense shall be punished by a fine of
$50.
§ 214-3. Overnight camping.
No person shall, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., set up on
any property, public or private, without permission of the owner thereof,
a camp, tent, trailer or vehicle adapted to habitation, self-propelled or
capable of being towed by any other motor vehicle, or sleep in the open
on any property, public or private, without permission of the owner thereof
within the territorial limits of the Town of Harwich. Any person violating
this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of $50 for each offense.
§ 214-4. Temporary transient business: door-to-door canvassing and
solicitation. [Added 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 45]
Title. This bylaw shall be known as the "Door-to-Door Canvassing and
Solicitation By-Law Law of the Town of Harwich."
A.
Purpose. This bylaw, adopted pursuant to Article 89 of the Amendments
to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, establishes
registration requirements and specific operational requirements for
persons intending to engage in door-to-door canvassing or solicitation
in the Town of Harwich in order to protect its citizens from disruption
B.
§ 208-7 HARWICH CODE § 214-4
1:76
of the peaceful enjoyment of their residences and from the perpetration
of fraud or other crimes, and to allow for reasonable access to residents
in their homes by persons or organizations who wish to communicate
either commercial or noncommercial messages.
Definitions. For the purpose of this bylaw, the following definitions shall
apply:
CANVASSING — Shall mean and include any one or more of the
following door-to-door activities:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION, PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR and
COMMERCIAL CO-VENTURER — Shall be defined as set forth in
Chapter 68, § 18, of the General Laws.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration from the Town as required by this bylaw.
RESIDENCE — Shall mean and include every individual dwelling unit
occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons.
SOLICITING — Shall mean and include any one or more of the following
door-to-door activities:
Person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals, or other
printed materials for commercial purposes, but shall not include
placing or dropping off printed materials on the premises;
(1)
Seeking to enlist membership in any organization for commercial
purposes; and
(2)
Seeking to present, in person, organizational information for
commercial purposes.
(3)
Selling, or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or
services, including advertising in any type of publication, for any
kind of consideration whatsoever;
(1)
Selling, or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application
for purchase of insurance of any kind;
(2)
Selling, or seeking to sell subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers or any other type of publication;
(3)
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, or any valuable
thing for the support or benefit of any association, organization,
corporation or project wholly or in part for commercial purposes
or by a professional solicitor or commercial co-venturer for a
charitable or other noncommercial organization; and
(4)
Seeking to obtain information on the background, occupation,
economic status, political affiliation, attitudes, viewpoints, or the
like of the occupants of a residence for the purpose of selling or
using such data, wholly, or in part, for commercial purposes.
(5)
C.
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-4
1:77
Registration. Every person or organization intending to engage in
soliciting or canvassing door-to-door in the Town of Harwich must apply
for a permit with the Chief of Police by filing a registration application
form with the Chief of Police. Applications for individual registration
shall be filed at least 10 business days in advance. Applications for
organizational registration shall be filed at least three business days in
advance.
Organization application forms shall include the following
information:
The name and address of the organization applying for
registration, and the names and addresses of the
organization's principal officers. If the organization is a
charitable organization, a certification that the most recent
annual registration statement required to be filed with the
Attorney General's Division of Public Charities has been so
filed.
If the organization is a professional solicitor or a commercial
co-venturer for a charitable organization, a copy of the
contract with the charitable organization must be provided
with this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract
with the charitable organization under such circumstances will
render the application incomplete and no action will be taken
thereon;
(a)
The name, title and phone number, IRS or social security
(optional) number and valid driver's license or other
government-issued photo identification of the persons filing
the application form;
(b)
The names and addresses of the person(s), if any, who will be
directly supervising the solicitation or canvassing operation in
the Town of Harwich;
(c)
A list of the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all
individuals who will be employed in solicitation or canvassing
by the applicant;
(d)
Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed
(Note: No certificate may be granted for longer than a sixtyday
period);
(e)
Names of the last three communities (if any) in which the
organization has conducted a solicitation or canvassing
operation, complete with the date issued and date expired; and
(f)
(g) Insurance information and license, if applicable.
(1)
Individual registration forms shall be required for all individuals,
including those who are affiliated with an organization registered
(2)
D.
§ 214-4 HARWICH CODE § 214-4
1:78
hereof. Individual registration forms shall contain the following
information:
Name and address of the present place of residence and length
of residence at that address; if less than three years residence
at present address, the address of residence(s) during the past
three years;
(a)
(b) Date of birth;
Name, address and telephone number of the person or
organizations whom the applicant represents and the length of
time the applicant has been associated with or employed by
that person or organization. If the individual is a professional
solicitor or a commercial co-venturer for a charitable
organization, a copy of the contract, if any, with the charitable
organization must be provided with this application. Failure to
include a copy of the contract with the charitable organization
under such circumstances will render the application
incomplete and no action will be taken thereon;
(c)
Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed
(Note: No certificate may be granted for longer than a sixtyday
period);
(d)
Name of the last three communities (if any) in which the
applicant has solicited or canvassed door-to-door, complete
with the date of issue and expiration date;
(e)
Valid driver's license or other government-issued photo
identification; and
(f)
Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used
by the applicant while soliciting or canvassing.
(g)
Registration fee. The registration fee shall be established and adjusted
from time to time by the Board of Selectmen, as necessary. The
registration fee shall accompany each application required by this
bylaw.
E.
Registration cards.
The Chief of Police, after a review, but in no event more than 10
business days after receipt of a fully-completed application, shall
furnish each person with a registration card which shall contain the
following information:
(a) The name of the person;
(b) A recent photograph of the person;
The name of the organization (if any) which the person
represents;
(c)
(1)
F.
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-4
1:79
A statement that the individual has been registered with the
Town of Harwich Police Department but that registration is not
an endorsement of any individual or organization; and
(d)
(e) Specific dates or period of time covered by the registration.
Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing as defined in this
bylaw must display their Town-issued registration card on the
outermost portion of their clothing at all times while soliciting or
canvassing and show such card to any person solicited or upon the
request of any police officer.
(2)
Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time
period specified thereon and in no case for longer than 60 days.
(3)
The Police Chief shall routinely grant registrations without further
inquiry but shall refuse registration to an organization or an
individual whose registration has been revoked for violation of
this bylaw within the previous two-year period or who has been
convicted of murder/manslaughter, rape, robbery, arson, burglary/
breaking and entering, felony assault, or larceny over $250, as
such persons pose a substantial degree of dangerousness to minors
and other persons vulnerable to becoming victims of the violent
crimes so listed. The Police Chief shall also refuse to register a
person who is a sex offender required to register with the Sex
Offenders Registry Board and who is finally classified as Level
2 or Level 3 sex offender, as such persons have been found to
have a moderate to high risk of re-offense and pose a substantial
degree of dangerousness to minors and other persons vulnerable
to becoming victims of sex crimes.
(4)
Exceptions.
Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of
the Town, county, state or federal governments when on official
business.
(1)
Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the
age of 18, except in connection with canvassing or soliciting on
behalf of a profit organization; newspaper carriers excepted.
(2)
Nothing in this bylaw shall be construed to impose any registration
requirement or otherwise restrict or in any way regulate any
activity for religious, political, newspaper distribution or public
policy purposes or other noncommercial purposes, regardless of
whether such activity includes acts that would otherwise constitute
soliciting or canvassing.
(3)
G.
H. No Solicitation List.
§ 214-4 HARWICH CODE § 214-4
1:80
A No Solicitation List shall be established and maintained by the
Harwich Police Department. Residents may submit their property
for inclusion on the list without charge.
(1)
Upon approval and issuance of a Town of Harwich registration card
required under this bylaw, each registered entity or individual shall
be provided with a copy of the No Solicitation List and may not
solicit or canvass at such premises.
(2)
Duties of persons going door-to-door.
Upon going into any residential premises in the Town of Harwich,
every solicitor, canvasser or other person must first examine any
notice that may be posted prohibiting solicitation or other
activities. If such a notice is posted, the solicitor, canvasser or other
person shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
(1)
Any solicitor, canvasser or other person who has gained entrance
to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by
the occupant.
(2)
Immediately upon gaining entrance to any residence, each solicitor
or canvasser as defined in this bylaw must do the following:
(a) Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant;
(b) Request that the occupant read the registration card; and
Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and
purpose of his business and, if he is representing an
organization, the name and nature of that organization.
(c)
(3)
I.
Restrictions on methods of solicitation, canvassing, or other door-todoor
activities. It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or other
person to do any of the following:
Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the solicitation,
canvassing or other activity is being done on behalf of a
governmental organization, or on behalf of any municipal employee
or elected official;
(1)
Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence
where there is a posted sign prohibiting the same, without express
prior permission of an occupant;
(2)
Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence
without express prior permission of an occupant, before 9:00 a.m.
or after 9:00 p.m. where there is no sign posted otherwise limiting
solicitation or the hours of solicitation or such other activities;
(3)
Utilize any form of endorsement from any department head
currently employed or serving the Town of Harwich; and
(4)
J.
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-4
1:81
Chapter 230
RENTAL DWELLINGS
§ 230-1. Registration required.
Any owner or agent who shall offer for rent or lease any building or portion
thereof to be used for habitation, other than duly authorized or licensed
premises, for a period of 90 days or less shall first register with the Building
Official, who shall determine the number of persons said building or portion
thereof can legally accommodate.
Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence in a
threatening, abusive or illegal fashion.
(5)
Penalty.
Any person or organization who shall violate any of the provisions
of this bylaw or any applicable state or federal laws governing
soliciting or canvassing, including, but not limited to Chapter 68 of
the General Laws, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 for
each offense. When enforced through the noncriminal disposition
procedures pursuant to Chapter 40, § 21D of the General Laws,
the penalty shall be $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second
offense, and $300 for the third offense and each subsequent
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
(1)
Any person or organization who for himself, herself, itself, or
through its agents, servants or employees is found after
investigation by a police officer to have: violated any provision
of this bylaw, or any applicable state or federal laws governing
soliciting or canvassing, including but not limited to Chapter 68
of the General Laws; or knowingly provided false information on
the registration application shall have his, her or its registration
revoked by the Chief of Police by written notice delivered to the
holder of the registration in person, or sent to the holder by
certified mail at the address set forth in the application.
(2)
K.
Appeals. Any person or organization who is denied registration or
whose registration has been revoked may appeal by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be filed
within five days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The
Board of Selectmen shall hear the appeal at its next scheduled meeting
after the filing of the written notice of appeal; provided, however, that
if the Board of Selectmen fails to make a determination within 30 days
after the filing of the appeal, the registration shall be deemed granted
or reinstated as the case may be.
L.
Severability. Invalidity of any individual provision of this bylaw shall not
affect the validity of the bylaw as a whole.
M.
§ 214-4 HARWICH CODE § 230-2
1:82
§ 230-2. Violations and penalties.
Upon the arrest and conviction for violation of any statute of the
commonwealth reported to have taken place on any such rented or leased
premises as described in § 230-1, the tenant, holder of a lease, and anyone
found to be in violation of the preceding section shall be punished by a
fine of $20, if at the time of said violation it was found that the number of
occupants on or about any such premises exceeded 200% of the registered
occupancy as required by the provisions of § 230-1 of this bylaw or the
amount so to be determined by the Health Inspector if no such registration
shall be in effect.
§ 230-3. Certificate of registration.
Any building or portion thereof registered as required by this bylaw shall
have conspicuously posted therein a certificate of registration together with
a copy of this bylaw.
Chapter 241
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND COLLECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses, permits and fees — See Ch. 164.
§ 241-1. Definitions.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Either:
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Harwich.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Harwich or his/her
designee.
REGULATED PROPERTY — The following used property:
A current driver's license that includes the date of birth, photograph
and physical description of the person offering the identification; or
A.
Two other pieces of current identification, at least one of which is
issued by a governmental agency or subdivision and includes the date
of birth, photograph and physical description of the person offering the
identification.
B.
Precious metals, including but not limited to any metal valued for
its character, rarity, beauty or quality, including gold, silver, copper,
platinum or other metals, whether as a separate item or in combination
with other items.
A.
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-1
1:83
SECONDHAND COLLECTOR — Shall have the same meaning as the term
"junk collector" in MGL c. 140, § 56.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Shall have the same meaning as the term "junk
dealer" and keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old
metals or secondhand articles in MGL c. 140 § 54.
§ 241-2. Issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses.
Precious gems, including but not limited to any gem valued for its
character, rarity, beauty or quality, including diamonds, rubies,
emeralds, sapphires or pearls, or other precious or semi-precious gems
or stones, whether as a separate item or in combination with other
items or as a piece of jewelry.
B.
Watches and jewelry containing precious metals or precious gems,
including but not limited to rings, necklaces, pendants, earrings,
brooches, chains, pocket watches, wrist watches, or stop watches.
C.
Sterling silver flatware, including but not limited to knives, forks,
spoons, candlesticks, coffee and tea sets, or ornamental objects.
D.
Any electronic audio, video or photographic and optical equipment
along with computer or computer equipment or recordings in any form.
E.
F. Any power tools or equipment.
G. Musical instruments.
H. Sporting equipment.
Automobiles, boats, planes, motorcycles in whole or taken in parts, or
any other type of machinery.
I.
Collectibles; including objects of art, coins, currency and antique
objects, but not including those items identified in Subsection H.
J.
Secondhand collectors and secondhand dealers must obtain a license to
conduct said activities.
A.
The licensing authority of the Town of Harwich may after notice and a
public hearing deny an original or renewal application for a secondhand
dealer or a secondhand collector license or revoke an issued license if it
has probable cause to believe any of the following conditions exist after
a public hearing:
The applicant, or any person who in part or whole, owns, manages,
or operates the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector
business, has owned or operated a secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector business regulated under this regulation or
any substantially similar license and, within the five years prior to
the application date;
(1)
B.
§ 241-1 HARWICH CODE § 241-2
1:84
§ 241-3. Inspection of property and records.
Has had a secondhand dealer or secondhand collector license
revoked for a reason that would be grounds for a denial or
revocation pursuant to this chapter; or
(2)
The secondhand dealer or secondhand collector business has been
found to constitute a public nuisance.
(3)
The licensee applicant, or any person who in part or whole, owns,
manages or operates the secondhand dealer or secondhand
collector business, has been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving a false statement within 15 years prior to the application
date.
(4)
The applicant has:
(a) Knowingly made a false statement in the application.
Knowingly omitted information requested to be disclosed in
the application; or
(b)
Completed the application with reckless disregard for the truth
or accuracy of the statements made therein.
(c)
(5)
A lawful inspection of the secondhand dealer or secondhand
collector business premises by the Police Chief has been
unjustifiably refused by a person who in part or whole, manages or
operates the business.
(6)
The secondhand dealer or secondhand collector business, the
applicant or any person who in part or whole, owns, manages or
operates the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector business,
has more than five violations of these regulations, any state or
federal law, or any combination thereof within a two-year period,
including the two years prior to the application date.
(7)
The secondhand dealer or secondhand collector business, the
applicant or any person who in part or whole, owns, manages or
operates the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector business
has been convicted of any law of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts that is contrary to the type of secondhand business
to be conducted, such as, but not limited to: receiving stolen
property, any form of breaking and entering, larceny from a person,
or any other form of larceny, or any form of aggravated assault, as
verified by a CORI by the Police Chief.
(8)
Such other grounds as the licensing authority determines to be in
the public interest or in violation of the conditions of the license
or any law or regulation of the Commonwealth or the Town of
Harwich.
(9)
§ 241-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-3
1:85
§ 241-4. Recordkeeping.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, or when the Police Chief has reasonable grounds to believe
more likely than not that a specific item of regulated property held by a
secondhand dealer or secondhand collector is associated with criminal
conduct, the Police Chief may enter the premises of the secondhand
dealer or secondhand collector at any reasonable time, provided that
the premises are occupied at the time of entry and the Police Chief
presents proper official identification at or near the time of entry. If
entry is refused, the Police Chief shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry, including an administrative search
warrant or a criminal search warrant.
A.
Authority to inspect secondhand dealer or secondhand collector
premises under this regulation is in addition to and not in limitation to
the authority the Town or the Police Chief or any police officer would
otherwise have to enter the business premises.
B.
Once allowed to enter the premises of the secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector, the Police Chief may inspect property kept there.
The Police Chief may also inspect the business records associated with
regulated property and perform any duty imposed upon the Town or the
Police Chief by this regulation.
C.
The Police Chief shall design a purchase report form and make copies
available to all secondhand dealers or secondhand collectors.
secondhand dealers or secondhand collectors shall utilize these forms,
or any other substantially similar form approved by the Police Chief,
to record purchases of regulated property. The form may request any
information reasonably calculated to help the Police Chief identify the
purchaser, the seller and the property associated with the purchase of
regulated property.
A.
Whenever a secondhand dealer or secondhand collector purchases
regulated property for business purposes, the secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector shall obtain acceptable identification from the
seller along with the seller's current residential address. The
secondhand dealer or secondhand collector shall fill out a purchase
report form in all relevant aspects at the time of the purchase. A
purchase report form as required to be filled out by this section shall be
in legible English. The seller shall sign his or her name on the filled out
form.
B.
A digital photograph will be taken by the secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector of each item purchased as defined under the
regulated property section (§ 241-1). The photographs may be stored
electronically, but are subject to the same recordkeeping requirements
as listed in this chapter. Copies of the photographs will be made
available to the Police Chief in a timely manner, and are subject to the
same rights of inspection as listed in § 241-8.
C.
§ 241-3 HARWICH CODE § 241-4
1:86
§ 241-5. Posting of licenses and notices.
§ 241-6. Purchases by secondhand dealer or secondhand collector.
§ 241-7. Unauthorized sale of property.
The licensee shall cause to be delivered to the Harwich Police
Department on a weekly basis a copy of all transactions recorded in the
ledger on the form provided. Included with this report will be a digital
photograph of the item or items purchased. If, during the preceding
week such secondhand dealer or secondhand collector has taken no
articles in, he/she shall make out and deliver to the Police Department
a report of such fact.
D.
All licenses shall be conspicuously posted in an accessible place on the
licensed premises, available at all times to the proper authorities.
A.
A secondhand dealer shall post the following notice no smaller than 8 1/
2 inches by 11 inches, with lettering no smaller than 1/4 of an inch in
height outside each point of entry intended for patron use and at or
near each place where a secondhand dealer purchases used property in
the regular course of business.
NOTICE: The sale or attempted sale of property to a secondhand
dealer without the consent of the property's owner is punishable by a
civil penalty not to exceed $300 per item. Don't sell property without
consent of the property's owner. You will be held strictly liable for
violation of this law.
B.
If a significant number of the patrons of the regular secondhand dealer
use a language other than English as a primary language, the notice
shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages
of the patrons.
C.
A secondhand dealer or secondhand collector shall not make any cash
purchase in an amount that exceeds $50.
A.
A secondhand dealer must not carry on the business of buying or
selling secondhand property except at the premises designated in the
dealership license.
B.
A secondhand dealer must not purchase any property whose serial
number or other identifiable marking has been wholly or partially
tampered with or removed.
C.
A secondhand dealer or secondhand collector may not purchase any
items from any person under the age of 18.
D.
No secondhand dealer or secondhand collector may purchase or sell
property without the consent of the owner.
A.
B. No purchase will be made from anyone under the age of 18.
§ 241-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-8
1:87
§ 241-8. Holding periods.
A copy of every purchase report form filled out as required by this
chapter shall be kept on the premises of the secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector business during normal business hours for at
least three years from the date of purchase. The report form shall be
subject to inspection by the Police Chief.
A.
All regulated property in the categories of precious metals or precious
gems, defined in § 241-2, purchased by a secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector and required to be recorded on a purchase report
form shall be held by said secondhand dealer or secondhand collector
for at least 21 days from the date of purchase.
B.
All other regulated property purchased by a secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector and required to be recorded on a purchase report
form shall be held by said secondhand dealer or secondhand collector
for at least 15 days from the date of purchase.
C.
The secondhand dealer or secondhand collector shall maintain the
property in substantially the same form as when purchased and shall
not alter, exchange or commingle the property. During the holding
period, the regulated property shall be kept on the business premises
during normal business hours and shall be subject to inspection by the
Police Chief.
D.
The Police Chief may give written notice to a secondhand dealer or
secondhand collector holding regulated property that the Police Chief
has reasonable grounds to believe more likely than not, that a specific
item of regulated property is associated with criminal conduct. The
secondhand dealer or secondhand collector holding the regulated
property shall then continue to hold the property specified in the notice
in the same manner and place as required under Subsection B of this
section until released by the Police Chief.
E.
If the Police Department has probable cause to believe that an item or
items purchased by the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector is/
are stolen, the item or items will be confiscated by the Police Chief. A
receipt will be issued to the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector
for the item or items confiscated.
F.
The holding period for any item of regulated property shall not exceed
180 days from the date of purchase.
G.
A secondhand dealer or secondhand collector may from time to time
request in writing that the Police Chief shorten the length of the holding
period. If the Police Chief determines relief from the holding period
is appropriate due to unreasonable hardship, the Police Chief shall
provide the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector who requested
relief with a written authorization to sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose
of the regulated property. The request shall identify the property and
state the basis of the unreasonable hardship or hardships. The
H.
§ 241-8 HARWICH CODE § 241-8
1:88
§ 241-9. Testing of weighing and measuring devices.
All weighing or measuring devices used by a licensee in the conduct of
the licensed business shall be tested and sealed by the Town of Harwich
Weights and Measures Division prior to being placed in service.
§ 241-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 241-11. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate. If any part
of this chapter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 247
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 100.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 122.
Licensing of garbage collectors — See Ch.
164.
authorization shall be effective only upon delivery of the written
authorization to the secondhand dealer or secondhand collector.
Secondhand dealers, retailing or wholesaling used property limited to
the following, are exempt from Subsection B above:
Used clothing, furniture, costume jewelry, knick knacks, footwear,
and houseware items, such as dishes, pots, pans, cooking utensils,
and cutlery; or
(1)
Used clothing, furniture, costume jewelry, footwear and house
ware items, such as dishes, pots, pans, cooking utensils and cutlery,
obtained only from or through a registered charity or by donations;
or
(2)
(3) Used books, papers, or magazines.
I.
Violations of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as a
criminal matter or as an administrative procedure or by the method
provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each violation shall be considered
separately.
A.
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $300. The licensing authority may suspend, revoke or modify any
license issued by them whenever they have reasonable cause to believe
the licensee has violated the terms, conditions or regulations pertaining
to such license. Any violation of this chapter enforced by methods
provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D shall be subject to a fine of $250.
B.
§ 241-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-11
1:89
§ 247-1. Dumping of rubbish and refuse.
No person shall dump any rubbish, refuse or material of any kind on any
land within the Town unless said land is a duly designated and licensed
disposal area where the type of material being disposed of may lawfully be
discarded, nor shall such materials be discarded along any highway, street
or road within said Town. In any case where by law a particular type of
material may be disposed of at sites other than licensed disposal areas, no
such material will be disposed of without prior approval from the owner of
said land and without first giving notice to the Fire Department, Board of
Health and Building Department of said Town.
§ 247-2. Hazardous waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any
material classified as hazardous waste under applicable state or federal
regulations on any land within the Town of Harwich unless said land has
been duly designated and licensed as a disposal facility for such material.
Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of $300 and may
be enforced by the Fire Department acting through the Fire Chief or his
authorized designees, by the duly authorized health agent of said Town of
Harwich and by the Building Official in addition to any Town officers having
police powers. Restitution for the cost of mitigation and cleanup incurred by
the Town of Harwich may be assessed in addition to any fine. Prosecution
hereunder shall not bar any other action, civil or criminal, which by law may
be taken in such a case.
§ 247-3. Dumping of rubbish from outside Town.
No person shall dump or cause to be dumped in any dumping ground
maintained by the Town any rubbish or other material brought from without
the limits of the Town of Harwich.
§ 247-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of §§ 247-1 and 247-3 of this bylaw shall be punished by a
fine of $100 for the first violation, $200 for the second violation, and
$300 for the third and subsequent violations which may be enforced by
the Fire Department acting through the Fire Chief or his/her authorized
designees, the duly authorized health agent, Building Official, and any
officers having police powers of said Town of Harwich. Second, third, and
subsequent violations are determined through official records indicating
that the violator has paid a fine, had a judgment, or been found guilty for a
similar offense. Restitution for the cost of mitigation and cleanup incurred
by the Town of Harwich may be assessed in addition to any fine. Prosecution
hereunder shall not bar any other action, civil or criminal, which by law may
be taken in such a case.
§ 241-11 HARWICH CODE § 247-4
1:90
Chapter 255
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Visibility at intersections — See Ch. 95. Parking — See Ch. 208.
§ 255-1. Obstructions and excavations.
No person shall obstruct or excavate any public or private way (excepting
private driveways) without first obtaining a license therefor. The Director
of Highways and Maintenance or other official having charge of the streets
and highways of the Town may, upon written application therefor, grant
licenses in writing for the obstruction or excavation of any street or highway
or for such excavation as may be required for the purpose of erecting,
repairing, altering or removing any building or structure, for the laying
of drains, gas pipes, or electric conduits or for any purpose which to him
seems reasonable and proper, and such official in charge of the streets and
highways shall require any person, firm or corporation acting under such
license to make repair of any damage that may be done to any part of the
highway resulting therefrom, and such repair shall be at the expense of the
licensee, except that the Water Department of the Town of Harwich shall
not be required to obtain such license or make such repair in connection
with the installation of water services from its mains or in connection with
emergency repairs. The official having charge of the streets and highways
shall require every licensee under this section to execute such indemnity
bond and with sureties and in such sum which to him may seem reasonable
and proper, and all such bonds shall be approved as to form by Town
Counsel prior to execution.
§ 255-2. Width of Town ways.
No road of less than forty-foot width shall be accepted by the Town as a
Town way unless a road of lesser width is recommended by a majority vote
of the Planning Board in writing to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 255-3. Construction of Town ways.
No road shall be accepted by the Town as a Town way until it has been
cleared to a width of at least 20 feet, leveled and hardened with a suitable
material to a depth of six inches, all to the satisfaction of both the Director
of Highways and Maintenance and the Board of Selectmen.
§ 255-4. Improvements to private ways.
In the event that a group of property owners who own property on a
private road which has been open for public use for at least five years
wish the Town of Harwich to finance the repair of their private way, they
A.
§ 247-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-4
1:91
shall engage an engineer experienced in road construction and repair
who shall survey the road in question to develop a plan for the repair
of that private road which shall take into consideration the need for
additional drainage, new berms, driveway aprons to protect the edges
of the repaired road, the filling of existing cracks and the application of
one or more layers of bituminous concrete. The repair shall be designed
to bring the road up to Town standards or as close as possible within
the physical constraints of the right-of-way.
The plan shall specify the projected useful life of the repaired private
way, and in no event shall the projected useful life be less than 15 years.
All costs of preparing the plan, obtaining cost estimates and preparing
the petition described below shall be the exclusive responsibility of the
petitioners.
B.
The property owners shall prepare a petition to the Board of Selectmen
for the Town of Harwich to finance the work in an amount certain,
including a ten-percent contingency amount. The petition shall list the
parcels by lot number and map number together with the owners'
names of record with a space for each owner to place his or her
signature. The petition must state that each signature represents an
irrevocable agreement by each signatory to repay to the Town of
Harwich, through the mechanism of a betterment added to each
owner's real estate tax bill, his or her pro rata share of the total
amount to be financed plus interest and administrative costs, which
Town administrative costs shall not exceed 10% of the project. The
petition shall not be presented to the Selectmen unless 50% of all
the abutters to the road plus one more abutter shall have agreed to
the project and its financial commitment by having signed it. Once
approved by the Board, all abutters shall be assessed for a pro rata
share of the cost of the betterment.
C.
The petition, accompanied by the engineer's plan, a map of the private
way to be repaired and backup for the cost estimates, shall be
submitted to the Selectmen's office on or before August 31. The
Selectmen shall refer every such petition to the Assessor's office for
verification of signatures and confirmation that more than 50% of the
abutters have signed. The Selectmen shall consider all submitted
petitions that pass the Assessor's examination prior to September 30.
If the Selectmen determine that the proposed repairs are in the public
interest and if the Selectmen determine that these repairs are within
the financial capabilities of the Town, the Board of Selectmen shall
refer each petition so determined to the Planning Board which shall
conduct a public hearing on each petition on or before November
15 to evaluate the plan, examine the cost estimates and hear from
both the abutters and the general public. The Planning Board shall
either endorse the plan by a simple majority vote and return it to
the Selectmen, recommend changes in costs or scope of the plan or
disapprove the plan by a simple majority vote.
D.
§ 255-4 HARWICH CODE § 255-4
1:92
Chapter 271
TOWN MEETING
If the Planning Board approves any such plan, the Board of Selectmen
may place the plan on the warrant for the next Annual Town Meeting.
If the Planning Board suggests modifications or changes in scope of
costs, the Board of Selectmen may, as its option, send out proxies to
the abutters noting scope and cost changes or it may return the project
to the petitioners. If proxies are sent out, they must be returned by
December 31; the Selectmen may place the project on the Annual Town
Meeting warrant, provided that more than 50% of the abutters approve
the revisions.
E.
If the Annual Town Meeting votes to endorse and finance the project,
the engineer who did the original plan shall be named "Project
Manager." He shall prepare a new set of bid specifications with the
bids to be directed to the Town Administrator. The Project Manager and
the Town Administrator shall select the best bid to do the work. The
Project Manager shall advise the Director of the Division of Highways
and Maintenance 48 hours in advance of each phase of the project
and certify, in writing, to the Director of the Division of Highways
and Maintenance that each phase of the project has been completed
to the Project Manager's satisfaction. The Director of the Division
of Highways and Maintenance shall inspect the completed work and
certify to the Town Accountant that the work is completed so that
payment may be made.
F.
For a group of private roads within a subdivision in which membership
in a neighborhood property owners' association is automatic or
mandatory, the same procedure shall be used:
So long as a majority of the owners of the lots abutting the group
of private ways to be repaired signs the petition required by
Subsection C above; and
(1)
So long as the group of private ways to be repaired is owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by the neighborhood association
or its members.
(2)
G.
The Town of Harwich shall incur no liability for any damages of any
nature whatsoever arising from the project by virtue of the Town's
agreeing to finance any repair of a private subdivision way. The
abutters who accept Town financing shall be deemed to have
indemnified and held the Town harmless against any and all such
claims.
H.
Any private way improved under the provisions of this bylaw need not
be brought up to full Town road standards. Any private way improved
under the provisions of this bylaw shall continue to remain a private
way.
I.
§ 255-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-4
1:93

ARTICLE I
Date and Time
§ 271-1. Submission of articles.
§ 271-2. Quorum.
A quorum for an Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be not fewer than
150 registered voters.
All articles to be inserted in the May Town Meeting shall be submitted
in final form, in writing to the Selectmen no later than 12:00 noon on
the second Friday in February. All articles for a Special Town Meeting
shall be presented as aforesaid at least 40 days before the Special Town
Meeting. [Amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 39]
A.
A copy of all articles to be inserted in the warrant for any Town Meeting
shall be submitted by the Board of Selectmen to the Finance Committee
not later than 14 days after the deadline for the submission of articles
set forth in Subsection A above.
B.
§ 271-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-2
1:95

ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 271-3. Admittance to Town Meeting floor.
During the legislative session of Town Meeting the floor shall be occupied
solely by registered voters, and it shall be the duty of the Moderator to clear
the floor of all nonvoters. Nonvoters shall not address the Meeting without
majority consent thereof; provided, however, that the Moderator may allow
a nonresident department head to speak on any article the subject matter
of which might affect that department or in response to questions from the
floor.
§ 271-4. Motions and amendments.
All motions and amendments shall be in writing when required by the
Moderator.
§ 271-5. Interruptions.
No one but the Moderator shall interrupt another while speaking, except to
call him to order.
§ 271-6. Withdrawal of motions.
No motion moved, seconded and stated can be withdrawn except by the
maker of the motion.
§ 271-7. Time limitation on speakers.
No one shall speak on the same question more than twice, not longer than
10 minutes, without leave of the Meeting.
§ 271-8. Method of confirming doubted votes.
When a vote decided by the Moderator is questioned by seven or more
voters, it shall be made certain by the voters of either side rising and
standing to be counted by the Moderator or tellers appointed by him.
§ 271-9. Reconsideration of motions.
The vote on a motion to reconsider a previous vote shall be made before the
next adjournment of the Meeting.
§ 271-10. Order of action on articles.
Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order, unless otherwise
ordered by a three-fourths vote of the Meeting.
§ 271-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-11
1:97
§ 271-11. Motion chart.
The motions contained in this section and no others shall be acceptable by
the Moderator at Town Meetings (see Motion Chart).10
§ 271-12. Questioning presence of quorum.
The quorum at any Special or Annual Town Meeting shall not be questioned
after a motion duly made, seconded and accepted by the Moderator has
been placed on the floor for debate until such motion has been put to a vote
and the vote thereon decided by the Moderator.
§ 271-13. Rules of order.
Rules of procedure not specifically provided by law or by these bylaws shall
be determined by Town Meeting Time: Handbook of Parliamentary Law.
§ 271-14. Finance Committee recommendations.
When the Finance Committee recommends passage of an article in the
warrant for a Town Meeting, the Chairman or other member of the Finance
Committee shall move for adoption of the article. When the Finance
Committee's recommendation is that the article not be adopted, a
proponent of the article shall move for adoption of the article. In the event
that a motion for adoption of the article is not made, the Chairman of the
Finance Committee shall move for indefinite postponement.
§ 271-15. Votes requiring two-thirds majority.
The Moderator may conduct all votes requiring a two-thirds majority by
statute in the same manner in which the Moderator conducts the vote when
a majority vote is required.
§ 271-16. Recommendations regarding articles.
Votes of the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee establishing
recommendations regarding Town Meeting articles shall be made available
upon the request of any registered voter at a Regular or Special Town
Meeting.
10.Editor's Note: The Motion Chart is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 271-11 HARWICH CODE § 271-16
1:98
Chapter 293
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED
§ 293-1. Outdoor storage.
No person shall have more than one unregistered motor vehicle or trailer
that can be seen on his premises from a public or private way or from
abutting property in any district of the Town at any time. This bylaw shall
not apply to a licensed new or used car dealer or licensed gasoline service
station at such regularly authorized and established place of business.
Whoever violates this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.
Chapter 295
SEWER USE
§ 295-1. Establishment; applicability; violations and penalties.
§ 295-2. Purpose; use of rules and regulations.
The Town of Harwich hereby establishes the following sewer use bylaw
(Bylaw) governing the use of the wastewater collection system in
Harwich, County of Barnstable, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
While this Bylaw will apply to the wastewater collection system
throughout the Town, it has been specifically developed herein for the
wastewater collection system to be implemented in the Pleasant Bay
Watershed area of Harwich. Wastewater collected in this area will be
conveyed to the Town of Chatham wastewater treatment facility. As part
of this Bylaw, the Sewer Governance Board shall establish rules and
regulations and from time to time modify said rules and regulations as
authorized by MGL c. 83, § 10.
B.
In addition to the civil penalties set forth in MGL c. 83, § 10, any
violation of the rules and regulations hereinafter enacted by the Sewer
Governance Board, as they may be amended from time to time, may
be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1, Article I, Violations and Penalties,
of the Code of the Town of Harwich. When enforced through the
noncriminal disposition procedures set forth in § 1-2 of said Code, the
penalty for each violation of the rules and regulations shall be $300.
C.
The purpose of this Bylaw, and the subsequent rules and regulations, is:
To establish the technical and administrative procedures for
making connections to the sanitary sewer system, including
standards of materials and design;
(1)
To establish requirements, restrictions, and controls on the
quantities and quality of what may be discharged to the sanitary
sewer system, such as discharges that may:
(2)
A.
§ 271-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-2
1:99
Chapter 300
WATER
Interfere with the operation of the sewer system, pumping
station or publicly owned treatment works (POTW) in any way;
(a)
Pass through the POTW, to the groundwaters, inadequately
treated effluent that may cause contravention of standards
for these waters or surface waters or cause violation of the
POTW's groundwater discharge permit (GWDP) or negatively
impact the watershed into which treated effluent is
discharged;
(b)
Reduce the opportunity to reclaim or recycle treated
wastewater and/or sludge from the system;
(c)
Increase the cost or otherwise hamper or limit the disposal of
sludges and other residuals;
(d)
(e) Endanger municipal employees or the public;
(f) Cause, directly or indirectly, any public nuisance conditions;
To prevent new sources of inflow and infiltration (I/I) and eliminate
private source inflow;
(3)
To provide for equitable distribution to all uses of the POTW, all
costs associated with the collection, transmission, treatment, and
residuals disposal, and to provide for the collection of such costs;
and
(4)
To provide for the orderly planning of sewer systems' and
treatment systems' components to improve the health and
environmental quality of the Town of Harwich and its people and
resources while discharging wastewater in the Chatham Sewer
System.
(5)
The established rules and regulations will be part of the contract with
every person who discharges wastewater into the Town of Chatham
Sewer System from the East Harwich area, and governs the
relationship between the Town of Harwich and its consumers,
contractors and/or developers, and all other persons who install sewers,
discharge wastewater, are connected into the sewer system or apply for
a connection to the sewer system.
B.
§ 295-2 HARWICH CODE § 295-2
1:100
ARTICLE I
Water Supply Emergency
§ 300-1. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted pursuant to the police and home rule powers of the
Town and also pursuant to the authority conferred by MGL c. 40, § 21.
§ 300-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare by protecting the Town's water supply whenever there is in force
a state of water supply emergency by providing for enforcement of any
restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions duly imposed by the
Town of Harwich with the approval of the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).
§ 300-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Town of Harwich's Board of Water
Commissioners or its designee or other department or board having
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the water supply, the
health agent, the Town police, and the Fire Chief or his authorized designee.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared on petition of the Town by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to MGL c. 21G, §§ 15 through 17 or MGL
c. 111, § 160 or by the Governor.
§ 300-4. Requirements.
The following shall apply to all users of water supplied by the Town of
Harwich: following notification by the Town of Harwich of the existence of
a state of water supply emergency, no person shall violate any provision,
condition, requirement or restriction included in a plan approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection which has as its purpose the
abatement of a water supply emergency. Notification of any provision,
restriction, requirement, or condition with which users of water supplied by
the Town of Harwich are required to comply to abate a situation of water
emergency shall be sufficient for the purposes of this bylaw if it is published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town of Harwich or by such
other notice as is reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of
Town of Harwich water.
§ 300-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity that violates this bylaw shall be liable to the Town
of Harwich in the amount of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each
subsequent violation. Fines shall be recovered by indictment or on
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:101
complaint before the District Court or by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each separate instance of
noncompliance following issuance of any warning or citation pursuant to
this section or each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 300-6. Right of entry.
Agents of the enforcement authority may enter by owner permission or by
warrant only any property for the purpose of inspecting or investigating any
violation of this bylaw or for the purpose of enforcing the same.
§ 300-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion, provision or section hereof.
§ 300-5 HARWICH CODE § 300-7
1:102
ARTICLE II
Water Use Restriction
§ 300-8. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted by the Town under its police powers to protect public
health and welfare and its powers under MGL c. 40, § 21 et seq. and
implements the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to MGL c.
41, § 69B. This bylaw also implements the Town's authority under MGL c.
40, § 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued
by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 300-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 300-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING PERSON — The Board of Water Commissioners, the Board of
Health and health agent, police officers of the Town and any other persons
designated by the Board of Water Commissioners to enforce this bylaw.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the Town pursuant to § 300-11 of this bylaw.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection under
MGL c. 21G, §§ 15 to 17.
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — All public and private users of
the Town's public water system, irrespective of any person's responsibility
for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility.
§ 300-11. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
The Town, through its Board of Water Commissioners, may declare a state
of water supply conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of
the Board that a shortage of water exists and conservation measures are
appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers.
Public notice of a state of water supply conservation shall be given under
§ 300-13 of this bylaw before it may be enforced.
§ 300-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12
1:103
§ 300-12. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one
or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting
the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable
restrictions, conditions, or requirements shall be included in the public
notice required under § 300-13.
§ 300-13. Notice.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed
by the Town as part of a state of water supply conservation shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by
such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of
water of the state of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed
under § 300-12 shall not be effective until such notification is provided.
Notification of the state of water supply conservation shall also be
simultaneously provided to the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 300-14. Termination of state of water supply conservation.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by a majority vote
of the Board of Water Commissioners upon a determination that the water
supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of
a state of water supply conservation shall be given in the same manner
required by § 300-13.
§ 300-15. Water supply emergencies.
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, or condition
of any order approved or issued by the Department intended to bring about
an end to the state of emergency.
Odd/even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with
odd-numbered addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days. Outdoor
watering by water users with even-numbered addresses is restricted to
even-numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a state
of water supply conservation and public notice thereof.
C.
D. Filling swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is
prohibited.
E.
§ 300-12 HARWICH CODE § 300-16
1:104
§ 300-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this bylaw shall be liable to the Town in the amount
of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent violation, which
shall inure to the Town. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on
complaint before the District Court, or by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 300-17. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
§ 300-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17
1:105
Chapter 304
WATER-DEPENDENT STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 310.
§ 304-1. Purpose.
Any water-dependent structure, such as a wharf, float, pier, dock, or similar
structure, as hereinafter defined, constructed seaward of mean high water
in any tidal waters of the Town after the effective date of this bylaw shall
be subject to the provisions hereof and be in conformity herewith. Any
water-dependent structure constructed within areas of Pleasant Bay where
structures are allowed shall also be subject to the provisions of the Pleasant
Bay Management Plan's Guidelines and Performance Standards for Docks
and Piers.
§ 304-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw the following words shall have the following
meanings:
DECK — The surface of a water-dependent structure designed as the
walkway for persons using the same.
DEEP WATER CHANNEL — The area of a water body wherein the depth of
water is three feet or more at mean low water.
FLOAT — A floating structure anchored in position by pilings, chain or
otherwise which is designed to rise and fall with the tide and used in
conjunction with a wharf, pier or dock to moor and give access to a vessel.
GANGWAY — A ramp or platform used to provide access between a float or
vessel and a pier, dock or wharf.
MEAN HIGH WATER — The elevation in feet above National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) established by the present arithmetic mean of the
water heights observed at high tide over a specific nineteen-year Metonic
cycle (the National Tidal Datum Epoch) as shown on the New England
Coastline Tidal Flood Survey - Tidal Flood Profile No. 9 Barnstable to
Chatham, MA by the New England Division, Corps of Engineers. Where
salt marsh occurs, the mean high tide will be that point where spartina
alternaflora gives way to spartina patents. Walkways over salt marshes that
extend beyond this intersection will be regulated under the provisions of
this bylaw.
PILING — A column constructed from any material used to support the deck
or other structural member of a wharf, pier or dock or to serve as a mooring
spar or dolphin for vessels or floats.
§ 300-17 HARWICH CODE § 304-2
1:106
WATER-DEPENDENT STRUCTURE — Any structure or combination of
structures built adjacent to or at an angle from the shore and extending
seaward beyond the mean high-water mark so that vessels may lie alongside
to receive and discharge passengers or cargo or for use as a promenade
and shall include structures commonly referred to as floats, docks, piers, or
wharves.
§ 304-3. Permits required.
No water-dependent structure shall hereafter be constructed without a
permit to do so issued by the Harwich Conservation Commission
(hereinafter "the Commission") and a permit approving structural
components from the Building Department.
§ 304-4. Restricted areas.
No permit shall be issued for construction of a new, private, waterdependent
structure in the area of Round Cove of Pleasant Bay. This area
includes all contiguous parcels beginning with the northerly boundary of
the property (Map and Parcel Number 115-S1-3) and extending southerly
along the shore to the southerly boundary of the property (Map and Parcel
Number 109-B1-5), and all shore front parcels between these two
properties, including Round Cove. This prohibition does not apply to
existing, licensed structures or to the maintenance of existing, licensed
structures.
§ 304-5. Application for permit.
§ 304-6. Review of application.
Upon receipt of the application, the Conservation Commission shall date
stamp the application and plans and shall forward copies of the plans to the
No permit shall be issued to construct a water-dependent structure
until a completed permit application has been received and approved.
A.
An application for a permit to construct a water-dependent structure
shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission and shall include
the following:
Fourteen copies of plans of the proposed work, which shall include
all information required by the Conservation Commission under the
regulations applicable to plans to be filed with a notice of intent
under MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended and 310 CMR 9.0 (Chapter 91,
Licensing).
(1)
Two copies of the notice of intent filed for the project with the
Conservation Commission under MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended.
(2)
An application fee as set from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen payable to the Town of Harwich in addition to filing fees
required under MGL c. 131, § 40.
(3)
B.
§ 304-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-6
1:107
Waterways Commission, the Harbormaster, the Shellfish Warden and the
Building Official who shall review the same and within 28 days of receipt
thereof advise the Conservation Commission of any areas of noncompliance
with this bylaw, standards for structural integrity, and other comments
relative to its or his review. Such comments shall be included in the review
of the application by the Commission.
§ 304-7. Hearing and determination.
The Conservation Commission shall hold a hearing within 21 days of receipt
of the application; however, the Commission may request a continuation if
it has not received comments by other reviewing entities. The provisions for
a continuation under Chapter 310, Wetlands Protection, § 310-5F shall also
apply. Upon review of all information the Commission shall then determine
whether it can issue a permit authorizing the work in compliance with
the conditions stated herein or issue a written denial stating in detail the
reasons therefor.
§ 304-8. Standards to be met.
No permit to construct a water-dependent structure shall be issued unless
the following standards are complied with:
No structure or its related appurtenances, including floats, shall extend
more than 80 feet seaward of the mean high-water mark nor farther
than 50 feet into the deep water channel nor be allowed to encroach
upon the deep water channel so as to reduce the usable width thereof
to less than 50 feet, and no vessel shall be moored thereto so as
to encroach upon the fifty-foot minimum, nor shall it extend so as
to interfere with any designated vessel mooring areas or established
shellfish beds. In areas of Pleasant Bay where structures are allowed,
all water-dependent structures shall meet the recommended fifty-foot
setback from navigational channels and mooring areas.
A.
No new structure, or any vessel moored thereto, shall be allowed closer
than 65 feet to an adjacent structure. In areas of Pleasant Bay where
structures are allowed, the separation between structures shall be no
less than 250 feet. Additionally, shared use proposals (i.e., a single
structure to be jointly owned and used by two or more shore front
property owners) are encouraged to preserve access by shore front
property owners while reducing the number of structures that might
otherwise be permitted.
B.
Structures shall be constructed as closely as possible to the
perpendicular from the shoreline, excepting shared docks located on a
property line. In areas of Pleasant Bay where structures are allowed,
all water-dependent structures shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
property lines and associated riparian lines unless the structure will
be owned and used by two or more contiguous shore front property
owners. In such cases, the fifty-foot setback requirement shall apply to
C.
§ 304-6 HARWICH CODE § 304-8
1:108
the outermost boundaries of the two or more contiguous properties so
that the structure may be placed on a shared property line.
D. No structure (except floats) shall exceed four feet of walkway width.
No float or combinations thereof shall exceed 200 square feet of surface
area nor shall any float be allowed landward of mean low water.
Preferred float configuration shall be "T" shaped in order to encourage
use of the float at its deepest end. No permanent "T" or "L" shaped
docks or piers are allowed.
E.
In order to protect the foreshore, all structures (except floats) shall
be supported by pilings. Decks shall have a minimum 1/2 inch spacing
between deck planks and shall be at an elevation equal to the width
of the deck above mean high water or, in areas of marsh, above the
marsh vegetation, whichever is higher. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
in all areas where the foreshore is passable on foot, a flight of stairs on
either side of the deck shall be provided to allow persons to lawfully use
the foreshore. A directional sign in compliance with the Zoning Bylaw,
Chapter 325, Article VII, shall be placed indicating permission to cross
the structure.
F.
Any structure proposed for siting in a salt marsh, or in a body of water
adjacent to a salt marsh, shall not destroy any portion of the salt marsh
or its substratum, nor have any adverse impact on the productivity
of the salt marsh. Additionally, the structure should be oriented to
minimize the effect of vessels using the structure on the adjacent salt
marsh and in its substratum.
G.
No structure shall be located within 50 feet of an existing eelgrass bed
or within a shellfish area defined by the Town bylaws or Town Shellfish
Warden. The presence or absence of shellfish at a proposed site must
be determined by a shellfish survey submitted by the applicant. The
survey shall include existing populations of all sizes of commercially
important species of shellfish (clams, quahogs, scallops, and mussels)
and shall also include other species of mollusks which may indicate the
capacity of the area to support commercially important species. The
survey shall also include a description of shell fragments, if feasible,
and references, if available, to historical information regarding the
presence or absence of shellfish species. Within the Pleasant Bay ACEC,
relocation of shellfish encountered during construction of a project is
not acceptable mitigation (except when the project is part of a Townor
state-sponsored shellfish relay program, and then only if it can be
clearly shown that the productivity of that shellfish bed would not be
diminished by its relocation).
H.
Any structure proposed for siting within a fish run or within 100 feet of
a fish run shall not have any adverse impact on the fish run by impeding
or obstructing the migration of fish or by impairing the capacity of
spawning or nursery habitats necessary to sustain the life stages of the
fish. Construction or maintenance of structures shall not occur between
I.
§ 304-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-8
1:109
§ 304-9. Denial of permit.
The Commission shall deny a permit in any case where a proposed structure
or combination of structures, otherwise complying herewith, would not
extend to a point where at mean low water a water depth of at least 2 1/2
feet is maintained; no vessel shall be aground at mean low water.
Chapter 310
WETLANDS PROTECTION
§ 310-1. Purpose.
March 15 and June 15 without specific written permission from the
Division of Marine Fisheries.
In order to provide the underlying seabed full exposure to sunlight
during six months of the year, all proposed structures shall be seasonal,
with seven months' maximum use. Off-season storage plans shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Conservation Commission.
J.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect the wetlands, water resources
and adjoining land areas in the Town of Harwich by controlling
activities deemed by the Conservation Commission likely to have a
significant or cumulative adverse effect on the values of resource areas,
as hereafter defined, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Protection of public or private water supply.
(2) Protection of groundwater.
(3) Flood control.
(4) Storm damage prevention (including coastal storm flowage).
(5) Prevention of pollution.
(6) Protection of land containing shellfish.
(7) Protection of fisheries.
(8) Protection of wildlife habitat.
(9) Protection of rare species habitat including rare plant species.
(10)Protection of water quality.
(11)Erosion and sedimentation control.
(12)Agriculture.
(13)Aquaculture.
(14)Recreation.
A.
§ 304-8 HARWICH CODE § 310-1
1:110
§ 310-2. Definitions. [Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 5711]
These values are deemed important to the community (collectively the
"resource area values protected by this bylaw"). This bylaw is intended
to utilize the home rule authority of this municipality to protect
additional resource areas for their additional values, with additional
standards and procedures stricter than those of the Wetland Protection
Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations thereunder (310 CMR 10.00).
B.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw:
AGRICULTURE — Any work which produces food or other products
for commerce or subsistence which occurs in, on, or within 100 feet
of a resource area or which is directly or indirectly dependent upon
wetlands values for proper agricultural functions, such as prevention
of pollution or maintenance of adequate water flow for irrigation.
Agriculture includes, but is not limited to the growing of crops,
including cranberries, and the raising of livestock. Nonagricultural
activities in or within 100 feet of resource areas shall not have a
significant effect on existing agriculture.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by
this bylaw:
Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind.
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns, or flood retention characteristics.
(2)
(3) Drainage, or other disturbance of water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality.
(4)
(5) Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation.
Driving of piles, construction, or repair of buildings or structures of
any kind.
(6)
(7) Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
(8) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees.
Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other
physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters.
(9)
A.
11.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former §§ 310-2 through 310-8 as §§ 310-3
through 310-9, respectively.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:111
AQUACULTURE — The growing, raising, breeding, storing, or
producing of specified aquatic or marine organisms at specified
locations for commercial, municipal, or scientific purposes as approved
by appropriate agencies. Organisms in aquacultural use include, but
are not limited to: shellfish, such as oysters, quahogs, clams, lobsters,
mussels, scallops and crabs; finfish, such as trout, eel, herring, salmon,
smelt and bass; amphibians, such as frogs; reptiles, such as turtles;
seaweeds, such as Irish moss and dulse; edible freshwater plants,
such as watercress; and plankton grown as a food source for other
organisms. Activities in or within 100 feet of a resource area shall not
have a significant effect on existing permitted aquaculture.
COASTAL BANK — The seaward face or side of any elevated landform,
other than coastal dune, which lies at the landward edge of a coastal
beach, land subject to coastal storm flowage, or other wetland. A
coastal bank may serve one of two functions:
DIADROMOUS FISH — Diadromous fish are species of fish that must
migrate between fresh and marine waters to complete essential stages
of their life history. In Harwich, spring spawning runs (river herring,
white perch and Atlantic tomcod) and juvenile migrations (American
eel) occur in Muddy Creek, Red River and Herring River. Juvenile eel
migrations also occur in Cold Brook and the Andrews River. The coastal
rivers serve as migratory habitat, and the freshwater ponds in these
watersheds serve as spawning and nursery habitat. Activities in or
within 200 feet of a river supporting a diadromous fish run shall not
have a significant adverse effect on the fish run.
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater.
(10)
Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative
adverse impact on the resource areas protected by this bylaw.
(11)
It may serve as a vertical buffer because of its height and stability
which protects upland areas from storm damage and flooding.
Activities shall not increase erosion of a coastal bank, either from
above (by stormwater runoff, brushcutting or other means) or from
below (by tidal action, wind and waves). Any project on such a
coastal bank shall have no adverse impact on the stability of the
coastal bank.
(1)
Coastal banks composed of unconsolidated sediment and exposed
to vigorous wave action serve as a source of sediment for dunes,
beaches, barrier beaches and other coastal landforms. Naturally
occurring wave action removes sediment from these banks to
replenish coastal landforms. These landforms protect coastal
wetlands and real property by reducing storm damage and flooding
by dissipating storm wave energy. Any project on or within a
coastal bank serving this function shall not have a significant effect
on that bank's ability to serve as a sediment source.
(2)
§ 310-2 HARWICH CODE § 310-2
1:112
FISHERIES and/or MARINE FISHERIES — Means:
FLOOD CONTROL — The ability of wetlands to absorb, store and slowly
release floodwaters to minimize peak flood levels. Flooding can be
caused by precipitation or a rising water table. Activities within 100
feet of resource areas shall not alter the flood control value of wetlands
significantly.
GROUNDWATER — All subsurface water contained in natural geologic
formations or artificial fill, including soil water in the zone of aeration.
Activities in or within 100 feet of resource areas shall not significantly
alter the existing quality or elevation of naturally occurring
groundwater.
INLAND BANK — Includes the land area which normally abuts and
confines a water body; the lower boundary being the mean annual low
flow level, and the upper boundary being the first observable break in
the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is lower.
NO-DISTURB ZONE — The land running 50 feet landward from an
abutting resource area. No substantial activity, that will result in the
building within or upon, filling, removing or altering of land, shall be
permitted, with the following exceptions:
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, state,
the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, this municipality, and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any source or volume of surface or ground
water demonstrated to be in private use or shown to have potential
for private use, including ground or surface water in the zone of
contribution around a private well. Activities in or within 100 feet of
a resource area shall not have a significant effect on the quality of a
private water supply.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any source or volume of surface or ground
water demonstrated to be in public use or approved for water supply
pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 160, by the Department of Environmental
The fish and shellfish resource itself, including all fish and shellfish
found in fresh, salt or brackish waters and any organisms including
plants that make up part of the food chain of such animals
regardless of their commercial value; and/or
(1)
The recreational or commercial catching of fish or shellfish from
the ocean or from freshwater bodies.
(2)
(1) Maintenance of an existing permitted structure
An activity that has been expressly allowed by a variance from the
Conservation Commission.
(2)
§ 310-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:113
Protection Division of Water Supply, or demonstrated to have a
potential for public use, in addition to all surface and ground water in
zones of contribution. Activities within 100 feet of resource areas shall
not have a significant effect on the quality of a public water supply.
RARE SPECIES HABITAT — Includes, without limitation, habitats for all
vertebrate and invertebrate animal species and plant species listed as
endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the Natural Heritage
and Endangered Species Program of the Massachusetts Division of
Fisheries and Wildlife, regardless of whether the site in which they
occur has been previously identified by the Division.
RECREATION — Any leisure activity or sport taking place in, on, or
within 100 feet of a resource area which is dependent on the resource
area and its values directly or indirectly for its conduct and enjoyment.
Recreational activities include, but are not limited to, the following:
noncommercial fishing and shellfishing, hunting, boating, swimming,
walking, painting, birdwatching and aesthetic enjoyment. Structures
and activities in or within 100 feet of a resource area shall not have a
significant effect on public recreational values.
STORM DAMAGE PREVENTION — The ability of wetland soils,
vegetation and physiography to prevent damage caused by water from
storms, including but not limited to: erosion and sedimentation;
damage to vegetation, property or buildings; or damage caused by
flooding, waterborne debris or waterborne ice. Activities in or within
100 feet of a resource area shall not have a significant effect on storm
damage protection.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Any area where water or ice stands or
flows over the surface of the ground for at least five months of any
calendar year except in times of severe, extended drought as defined
in appropriate section of 310 CMR. Drainage ditches, exclusive of fish
runs and intermittent streams, and impoundment areas which hold or
pass water only during or for short periods following storms and which,
owing to their relationship to groundwater, do not support wetland
vegetation, are excluded from this definition.
VERNAL POOL — Refers to a seasonal freshwater body contained in
a confined basin depression that holds water for a minimum of two
consecutive months in most years, is free of adult fish populations,
and provides breeding habitat for amphibians and invertebrates. The
boundary of vernal pool habitat shall extend outward 100 feet from
the mean annual high-water mark of such a depression. Vernal pools
include those areas mapped and certified by the Massachusetts Natural
Heritage and Endangered Species Program as well as those areas
identified in the field as eligible for certification by a professional
wildlife biologist or other expert.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Resource areas that provide breeding and
nesting habitats, shelter, food and water to all plant and animal species
dependent on wetlands for any portion of their life cycles. Includes
resource areas identified as containing rare, threatened or endangered
§ 310-2 HARWICH CODE § 310-2
1:114
§ 310-3. Jurisdiction. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided for
in this bylaw, no person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build
upon, degrade, discharge into, or otherwise alter any freshwater or coastal
wetland resource areas, including:
§ 310-4. Conditional exceptions.
species as listed by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage Program.
Structures and activities in or within 100 feet of any resource area shall
not have a significant effect on wildlife habitat.
Except as otherwise provided for in this bylaw or in regulations of the
Commission, the definitions of terms in this bylaw shall be set forth in
the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL. c. 131, § 40) and regulations 310
CMR 10.00.
B.
Freshwater wetland resource areas. Marshes; wet meadows; bogs;
swamps; vernal pools and vernal pool habitat; lands subject to flooding,
both bordering and isolated; isolated wetlands greater than 3,000
square feet; banks; reservoirs; lakes; ponds greater than 3,000 square
feet; rivers, including the two-hundred-foot riverfront area; streams
and creeks, including intermittent streams; and the lands underneath
lakes, ponds, streams and creeks.
A.
Coastal wetland resource areas. Land under the ocean; designated
port areas; coastal beaches; coastal dunes; barrier beaches; coastal
banks; rocky intertidal shores; salt marshes; land under salt ponds; land
containing shellfish and fish runs; lands subject to tidal action, coastal
storm flowage or flooding.
B.
Lands within 100 feet of any of the aforesaid resource areas, as set out
in this section, except for the riverfront area and vernal pool habitat.
C.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required
for maintaining, repairing or replacing, but not substantially changing
or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used
in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone,
telegraph or other telecommunication services, provided that written
notice has been given to the Commission prior to the commencement of
work. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
A.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to any mosquito control
work done under the provisions of MGL c. 252 or any special act, to
maintenance of drainage and flooding systems of cranberry bogs and
to work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural use or in aquacultural use, or to any project authorized by
special act prior to January 1, 1973.
B.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required
for emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health and
C.
§ 310-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4
1:115
§ 310-5. Application for permit and request for determination.
safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or
has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the commonwealth
or a political subdivision thereof; provided that advance notice, oral
or written, has been given to the Commission prior to commencement
of work or within 24 hours after commencement; provided that the
Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency project;
provided that the work is performed only for the time and place
certified by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate
the emergency; and provided that within 21 days of commencement
of an emergency project a permit application shall be filed with the
Commission. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the
Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public hearing,
revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration
and mitigation measures.
Conservation variance provision. In rare and unusual circumstances the
Commission, at its discretion, may grant a conservation variance from
the requirements of the fifty-foot no-disturb zone. Such a conservation
variance may be granted upon a clear and convincing showing of
evidence by the applicant that the proposed work will not adversely
affect the environmental values protected by this bylaw. [Added
5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
D.
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities affecting resource areas protected by this bylaw. [Amended
5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
The application shall include such information and plans that are
deemed necessary by the Commission to describe proposed
activities and their effects on the resource areas protected by this
bylaw.
(1)
No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with
a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
(2)
A.
If appropriate, the Commission may accept as the application and plans
under this bylaw the notice of intent and plans filed under the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and the Commission's regulations.
[Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
B.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an
area is subject to this bylaw may in writing request a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination shall include
information and plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission.
C.
At the time of application the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified
in the regulations of the Conservation Commission promulgated in
accordance with this chapter. [Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
D.
§ 310-4 HARWICH CODE § 310-6
1:116
§ 310-6. Notice and hearings.
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination
with the Commission shall at the same time give written notice thereof,
by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivered, to all
abutters at their mailing addresses shown on the most recent
applicable Assessor's tax list. Abutters include those immediately
adjacent, across a road or water body, and in another municipality
if within 100 feet of the boundary of the property where work is
proposed. The notice to abutters shall state where copies of the permit
application and plans may be obtained or examined by abutters. An
affidavit of the person giving such notice, with a copy of the notice
mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission. When the
person requesting a determination is other than the owner, a copy of
the request for determination shall be sent by the applicant to the
owner, and the notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall
be sent by the Commission to the owner as well as to the person making
the request.
A.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application or
request for determination, with written notice given at the expense of
the applicant, which notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Harwich at least five business days prior to
the hearing.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed permit application or request for
determination unless an extension is authorized in writing by the
applicant.
C.
The Commission shall issue its determination or permit in writing
within 21 days of the close of the public hearing or receipt of the
file number issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection, whichever is later, unless an extension is authorized in
writing by the applicant.
D.
If appropriate, the Commission may combine its hearing under this
bylaw with the hearing required under the Wetlands Protection Act
(MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
E.
Continuance of public hearing. The Commission has the authority to
continue a hearing to a date certain, which shall be announced at the
hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing. The reasons may include
receipt of additional information deemed necessary by the Commission,
for receipt of information offered by the applicant, or for the
Commission to be able to hear comments and recommendations of
other local or state boards and officials. In the event that the applicant
objects to the continuance, the hearing shall be closed and the
Commission shall take action based on the information available.
[Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
F.
§ 310-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7
1:117
§ 310-7. Coordination with other communities and boards.
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination with
the Commission shall provide a copy thereof at the same time, by certified
mail, to the Conservation Commission of the adjoining municipality, if the
application or request for determination pertains to property within 100
feet of that municipality. An affidavit of the person providing notice, with a
copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission.
The applicant, as well as the Commission, shall have the right to request any
comments and recommendations from other Town boards and departments,
and to respond to them at a hearing of the Commission, prior to final action.
§ 310-8. Permits and conditions. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
57]
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities
which are subject to the application or the land and water uses which
will result therefrom are likely to have a significant individual or
cumulative adverse effect upon the resource area values protected by
this bylaw, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the hearing
or receipt of the file number issued by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection, whichever is later, shall issue or deny a
permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit, the Commission
shall impose conditions which the Commission deems necessary or
desirable to protect the resource area values, and all activities shall be
done in accordance with those conditions.
A.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this bylaw; for failure to submit necessary information
and plans requested by the Commission; for failure to meet the design
specifications, performance standards, and other requirements in
regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent
unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the resource area
values protected by this bylaw; and where no conditions are adequate
to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as
presented at the public hearing.
B.
Permits for maintenance dredging shall expire 10 years from the date of
issuance. The applicant shall written notice of dredging at least 30 days
prior to each commencement. Such notice shall contain the location of
the project, permit number, name of applicant, and proposed start date.
C.
D. (Reserved)
To prevent wetlands loss, the Commission shall require applicants to:
(1) Avoid wetlands alteration wherever feasible;
Minimize wetlands alteration by using best management practices
(BMPs); and, where alteration is unavoidable,
(2)
E.
§ 310-7 HARWICH CODE § 310-8
1:118
§ 310-9. Rules and regulations.
Require full mitigation for disturbance to the wetland resource
area or to the buffer zone. The Commission may authorize or
require replication of wetlands or restoration of the buffer zone as
a form of mitigation, but only with adequate security, professional
design, and monitoring to assure success, because of the high
likelihood of failure of replication.
(3)
Except as provided in MGL c. 131, § 40, for maintenance dredging, a
permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance. A permit may
be extended for one or more periods of up to three years, provided that
a request for renewal is received in writing by the Commission 30 days
prior to the expiration of the permit. The Commission may deny the
request for an extension and require the filing of a new notice of intent
for the remaining work in the following circumstances:
Where no work has begun on the project, except where such failure
is due to an unavoidable delay, such as appeals, in the obtaining of
other necessary permits.
(1)
Where new information, not available at the time the order was
issued, has become available and indicates that the order is not
adequate to protect the interests identified in MGL c. 131, § 40;
(2)
Where work has been done in violation of the order or 310 CMR
10.00.
(3)
F.
Notwithstanding the above, a permit may contain requirements which
shall be enforceable for a stated number of years, indefinitely, or until
permanent protection is in place and shall apply to all owners of the
land, now and in the future. For good cause the Commission may revoke
or modify a permit or determination issued under this bylaw after
notice to the holder of the determination or permit, notice to the public
and abutters, and a public hearing.
G.
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine the permit or
determination issued under this bylaw with the order of conditions or
determination of applicability issued under the Wetlands Protection Act
(MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
H.
No activity proposed in any permit application shall be undertaken until
an appeal period of 10 business days under the Wetlands Protection Act
has elapsed and the permit issued by the Commission with respect to
such activity has been recorded in the Barnstable County Registry of
Deeds or, if the land affected is registered land, in the registry section
of the land court for Barnstable County, and until the holder of the
permit certifies in writing to the Commission that the permit has been
recorded.
I.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall
promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
A.
§ 310-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-9
1:119
§ 310-10. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this bylaw, in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board, agency, or official, the
Commission may require that the performance and observance of the
conditions imposed thereunder (including conditions requiring mitigation
work) be secured wholly or in part by one or more of the methods described
below:
§ 310-11. Enforcement.
bylaw effective when voted and filed with the Town Clerk. Failure by
the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effects of this bylaw.
At a minimum these regulations shall define key terms in this bylaw not
inconsistent with the bylaw and the procedures governing the amount
and filing of fees.12
B.
By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities in an
amount sufficient in opinion of the Commission and payable to the Town
of Harwich. Said security shall be released in whole or in part upon
issuance of a certificate of compliance upon completion of the work
performed pursuant to a permit. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
57]
A.
By accepting a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner
of record, running with the land to the benefit of this municipality
whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before
any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method
shall be used only with the consent of the applicant.
B.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade or otherwise
alter resource areas protected by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to
restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply
with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
A.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United
States and the commonwealth.
B.
Upon request of the Commission, the Selectmen and the Town Counsel
may take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request
C.
12.Editor’s Note: Former § 310-9, Definitions, which immediately followed, was repealed
5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57. See now § 310-2.
§ 310-9 HARWICH CODE § 310-11
1:120
§ 310-12. Burden of proof. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
§ 310-13. Appeals.
A decision of the Commission under this bylaw shall be reviewable in the
Superior Court in accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
§ 310-14. Relation to Wetlands Protection Act.
This bylaw is adopted under the home rule amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the home rule statutes, independent of
the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR
10.00) thereunder.
of the Commission, the Chief of Police may take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement of this bylaw.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of these bylaws or any
regulations promulgated hereunder, or permits or administrative
orders issued thereunder, may be punished by a fine of $300 per
violation. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation
continues, or unauthorized fill or other alterations remain in place, shall
constitute a separate offense, and each provision of the regulations,
permits or administrative orders violated shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
E.
In enforcing this section, the Commission may issue citations under the
noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, which
has been adopted by the Town.13 Members of the Commission, its agent
or any police officer are authorized to issue noncriminal disposition
citations.
F.
The Commission or its agent may also issue a stop work order and/or
an enforcement order, or have the offending party file an after-the-fact
notice of intent for the work. The Commission may order the offending
party to present a restoration plan that is acceptable to the Commission
and to complete the planting on-site during the next growing season.
[Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 57]
G.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
permit application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative
effect upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw.
A.
Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this
burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit.
B.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-2.
§ 310-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14
1:121
Part II: Zoning Bylaw
Chapter 325
ZONING
§ 310-14 HARWICH CODE § 310-14
1:122
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 325-1. Title and authority.
This bylaw shall be known and may be cited as the "Harwich Zoning Bylaw"
which herein is called "this bylaw" and is adopted by virtue of and pursuant
to the authority granted the Town by MGL c. 40A as now existing or
hereafter amended (herein called the "Zoning Act").
§ 325-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-1
1:123

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 325-2. Word usage and definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw certain terms and words shall have the
meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future;
the singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular; the word "building," "structure," "lot," "land" or "premises" shall
be construed as though followed by the words "or any portion thereof"; and
the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word
"person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, or
company as well as an individual. The word "used" or "occupied" includes
the words "intended or designed or arranged to be used." The word "lot"
includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
ACCESS — The point from which one enters a property.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — See "dwelling, single-family, with accessory
apartment."
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A detached building the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building and
which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL — A detached structure located
on the same lot with the principal residential structure to which it is
accessory and not used for seasonal or year-round living. Such structures
include, but are not limited to, toolshed, boathouse, playhouse, shelter for
domestic pets, private swimming pool and one private garage for not more
than three automobiles. See § 325-13, Table of Use Regulations, for more
information.[Amended 5-4-2010 STM by Art. 8; 5-6-2014 STM by Art.
1]
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of a structure or lot.
ADDITION/EXTENSION — Any construction, reconstruction, or other
action resulting in a change in the structural parts or height, number of
stories, size, use or location of a structure.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Refer to Article XIII.
AGRICULTURE USE — The commercial raising of agricultural crops and/
or livestock and horticultural and floricultural products on the same lot or
abutting lots in the same ownership. Necessary structures and storage of
equipment used on the premises are included.
ALTERATIONS — Changes in the interior or exterior of a building but
without changing the exterior dimensions.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical
or surgical treatment by or under the supervision of a veterinarian and
boarding is short-term care incidental to hospital use and care.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:125
ANIMAL KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — A commercial establishment for the
raising, boarding, breeding and/or training of small domestic animals (dogs,
cats, etc.).
ANIMAL KENNEL, RESIDENTIAL — The keeping of more than four small
domestic animals as pets and not for commercial purposes.
AQUACULTURE USE — The science, art, and business of cultivating marine
or freshwater food fish or shellfish, such as oysters, clams, salmon, and
trout, under controlled conditions.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A residential facility for the elderly or
disabled that provides rooms or individual apartments, meals, personal
care, and supervision of self-administered medication. It may also have
communal dining facilities and services such as housekeeping, organized
social and recreational activities, transportation service, and other support
services appropriate for the residents.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE AND REPAIR FACILITY — Any premises upon
which the business of maintenance, serving, repair, or painting of vehicles
is conducted or rendered, without the dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A residence where an owner/occupant in his
home provides lodging and a morning meal to no more than five transients
for compensation. A bed-and-breakfast shall not be considered a home
occupation.
BEDROOM — Any room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes.
For the purpose of determining the number of bedrooms in a proposed
multifamily dwelling unit, all rooms which meet the minimum size
requirements for habitable rooms under this bylaw other than a kitchen,
bathroom and living/dining room shall be considered as bedrooms.
BOARD — Where appropriate to the context, the term "Board" shall include
the Board of Appeals or Planning Board of the Town of Harwich.
BOAT STORAGE — The commercial storage of boats and watercraft. This
excludes repair and maintenance, sales and service. See "marine use."
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof or similar covering, to form a structure for the shelter of
persons, animals or property.
BUILDING/STRUCTURE HEIGHT —
The height of a building or structure shall be calculated by averaging
the distance between the lowest pre-existing grade point at the base of
the building/structure and the top of said structure, and the distance
between the highest pre-existing grade point at the base of the
structure and the top of said structure. A structure shall include such
elements as a rooftop deck, fence, railing, widow's walk, or other
rooftop structure, parapet, or other attached structure. A cupola not
larger than four feet in width and chimneys shall be exempt from
the above requirements if they do not extend more than four feet in
height above the roof. For developed lots, pre-existing grade shall be
A.
§ 325-2 HARWICH CODE § 325-2
1:126
CHURCH OR OTHER RELIGIOUS USE — Any structure or use entitled to
the religious exemption set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 3.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — Open space residential development as
defined herein.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Open space created within an open space
residential development which is designated to be held and maintained by
a homeowners' association, conveyed to the Town, or conveyed to a private
land conservation organization. "Common open space" shall not include
open space which may be established on individual building lots.
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY — A premises, other than a construction site
on which a building permit is issued, which is used by a building contractor
or any other tradesman or landscaper for the fabrication of subassemblies
or the storage of supplies or equipment.
DEMOLITION — The act or process of wrecking, destroying or removing,
temporarily or permanently, 50% or more of an existing structure.
Demolition of a structure requires a demolition permit from the Building
Department. Should the Building Official approve less than 50% of a
structure for removal, and should the remainder of the structure, following
an inspection by the Building Official, be found to not be structurally sound,
the Building Official may authorize the removal of the remainder of the
structure without issuance of a demolition permit. In no case, however,
should the rebuilt portion be built outside the footprint of the remainder of
the structure.
DORMITORY — A building or space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family
group in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint
occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories, fraternity
houses, military barracks and ski lodges, with or without meals, but without
individual cooking facilities.
DRIVE-UP OR DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW — Any use which provides
goods or services to customers at exterior stations, fixed or transient, roofed
or unroofed, that are accessible by motorized vehicles. This definition shall
not apply to food sales, which are defined separately.
determined by calculating the average of existing high and low grade
points at the base of the existing/original building or structure and top
of said structure, where the highest point is at a minimum of eight
inches below the top of foundation. [Amended 5-4-2010 STM by Art.
9; 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 46]
For a building or structure located in the special flood hazard area,
height shall be measured from the base flood elevation in AE Zones
rather than from pre-existing grade. In the AO or VE Zones, height shall
be measured from the base flood elevation in the closest AE Zone rather
than from pre-existing grade.
B.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:127
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached building containing three or
more dwelling units, including an apartment house, garden apartment
house, townhouse or row house.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A single, separate dwelling unit designed
for occupancy by one family only.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY WITH ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A singlefamily
dwelling containing a principal dwelling unit and a separate
accessory apartment, either attached or detached. The apartment shall
contain a kitchen and bathroom which are separate from and not used in
common with the principal dwelling unit.[Amended 5-4-2010 STM by
Art. 8; 5-7-2013 STM by Art. 12]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units,
whether side by side, over each other or in any other combination, provided
that there is a common roof or a series of roofs connecting the dwelling
units.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof consisting of one or more
rooms containing cooking and sanitary facilities and designed for human
habitation by one family independent of other facilities.
EDUCATIONAL USE, FOR-PROFIT — Any building or part thereof which is
designed, constructed or used for education or instruction in any branch of
knowledge.
EDUCATIONAL USE, NONPROFIT — Any structure or use entitled to the
education exemption set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 3.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services and appurtenant structures, facilities,
uses or equipment provided by governmental agencies, including the Town
of Harwich, or provided by public utility or public service companies,
including but not limited to water distribution systems, Town-owned
marinas, docking areas, fish piers, off-loading facilities, retaining walls,
jetties and similar structures, gas and electric distribution, systems for
telecommunications and sewerage systems.
FAMILY — One or more persons living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit.
FILLING STATION — Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion
thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels and oil.
FISH PROCESSING FACILITIES — Establishments engaged in the business
of cleaning, cutting, cooking, shucking, block freezing or packing sea foods
for sale primarily at wholesale, but not excluding retail, but not including
packing of fish in connection with off-loading of fishing vessels.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the walls, but not including
cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not used for human occupancy, or any
floor space in accessory buildings or in the principal building designed for
the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of
this bylaw.
§ 325-2 HARWICH CODE § 325-2
1:128
FOOD SALES WITH DRIVE-UP OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES — Any
use which provides food products to customers at exterior stations, fixed
or transient, roofed or unroofed, that are accessible by motorized vehicles.
This term shall not include food service establishments where customers
park their vehicles in designated parking spaces and access exterior food
service tables, stations, windows, or counters without their vehicles.
FRONTAGE — The boundary of a lot coinciding with a road, street or way
as defined in this bylaw.14
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, trade or profession, exclusive of real
estate offices, firms or establishments, conducted in the proprietor's legal
residence or within an accessory building.
HOSPICE — A facility designed to provide a caring environment for
supplying the physical and emotional needs of the terminally ill.
HOSPITAL — A building providing inpatient services used for diagnosis,
treatment or other care of human ailments, including a sanitarium,
sanatorium, rest home, nursing home and convalescent home. Not to be
interpreted to include a doctor's office (see "medical clinic").
HOTEL — A building or complex of buildings containing 13 or more units
providing transient lodging, food and other related services within which
access to the individual units is provided by common interior corridors. The
individual units do not have cooking facilities.
HOTEL OR MOTEL, INCIDENTAL USES TO — Uses, including but not
limited to stores selling dry goods, apparel and accessories, gifts, notions,
photo supplies, and personal and health care supplies, personal services,
travel agency, car rental office, tennis courts, swimming pools, restaurant,
private pool or beach club, which are incidental to a hotel or motel use.
INN — A building or complex of buildings containing at least five but no
more than 12 units providing transient lodging accommodations, and may
include food service. Rooms are primarily accessed from within a central
structure. The individual units do not have cooking facilities.
INSTITUTIONAL USE, OTHER — A public service use operated by a
nonprofit corporation or organization which is not entitled to exemption
from zoning requirements as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 3.
LODGING HOUSE — A building in which five to 10 units, with or without
cooking facilities, are let for compensation on a long-term transient basis,
but not including a hotel, inn or motel.
LOT — A parcel of land described in a deed or shown on a plan of land. For
the purpose of this bylaw, any lot hereafter laid out to be buildable must
contain contiguous upland area totaling at least 100% of the minimum lot
area requirement for the zoning district in which the land is situated as
established by this bylaw. The term "upland" shall mean any land area not
14.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “guesthouse,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 47.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:129
subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40,
as amended.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the intersection of two or more intersecting roads,
streets or ways, or abutting a curve in a road, street or way, provided that
the angle of the intersection is less than 135° or, in the case of a lot abutting
a curve in the road, street, or way, the radius of said curve is less than 150
feet.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
LOT, PANHANDLE — A lot approved by the Planning Board under the
Subdivision Control Law that is designed to provide adequate access even
though the lot has less than the required frontage on a public or private way.
Standards for panhandle lots are provided in § 325-18Q.[Added 5-7-2013
STM by Art. 13]
MANUFACTURING — A use involving the processing, assembling, or
packaging of previously prepared or refined materials.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS — Marijuana cultivators, independent
testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers
or any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, as defined in
M.G.L. c. 94G, § 1.[Added 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 34]
MARINE USE — A commercial or industrial activity serving or deriving
its nature from watercraft, including but not limited to boat repair or
maintenance, sales and service of watercraft, motors, electronics, and other
goods or services associated exclusively with watercraft. This may include
dispensing of marine fuels. See "boat storage."
MEDICAL CLINIC — A facility for providing medical treatment on an
outpatient basis.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A building used to house a nonprofit social, sports
or fraternal association or organization, not connected or associated with
any business, which is used exclusively by members and their guests and
usually contains bar facilities.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — See § 325-51M.
MOTEL — A building or complex of buildings providing transient lodging
accommodations with separate outside entrances for each unit. The
individual units do not have cooking facilities.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use, whether in a structure and/or on a parcel of land,
owned and/or operated by the Town of Harwich.
NONSANITARY WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY —
Any wastewater treatment or disposal works subject to 314 CMR 5.00
for wastewater other than sanitary sewage, except the following:
A.
§ 325-2 HARWICH CODE § 325-2
1:130
NURSING HOME — A privately or publicly operated establishment
providing maintenance and personal or nursing care for persons (as the
aged or the ill) who are unable to care for themselves.
OPEN SPACE — The area within an open space residential (or cluster)
development which shall not be developed for any purpose other than
recreational or agricultural use pursuant to other requirements of this
bylaw, provided that the natural or installed vegetation may be maintained
through mowing, trimming, and removal of dead or diseased specimens.
Open space may be designated on portions of building lots within an open
space residential development to achieve some of the design objectives of
this bylaw but shall be distinct from common open space.
OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An optional form of
development of single-family dwelling subdivisions that permits lots with
lesser area and frontage than conventional development, provided that
there is no increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under a
conventional development, as provided in § 325-51E(2), and the balance of
the land not included in single-family building lots is set aside as permanent
open space. Open space residential development is synonymous with the
concept of cluster development set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9. Open space
residential development shall require both a special permit and definitive
subdivision approval from the Planning Board.
OUTSIDE DISPLAY FOR RETAIL SALES — The outdoor display of goods
sold on the premises for retail sale, provided that the goods are not located
within required setbacks for the zoning district or in the public right-of-way.
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The open storage of construction, manufacturing,
service wholesale equipment, materials, junk or heavy motorized equipment
of any type or open storage of unregistered motor vehicles, automobiles or
other vehicles.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A specifically delineated area that overlays an
existing zoning district and provides for specific regulations and
requirements. Overlay districts in Harwich include:
The replacement or repair of an existing system(s) that will not
result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the
existing system(s).
(1)
Treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection and the Harwich Board of Health
designed for the treatment of contaminated groundwater or
surface water.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned treatment works.
Note: Readers are encouraged to contact the Harwich Water or Health
Department for the most current version of the above Code of
Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) section as such regulations are
subject to frequent amendment.
B.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:131
PARKING LOT/GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A structure or designated area
used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles that is operated as a
business and open to the public for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space, whether inside or outside a
structure, for exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle.
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Appeals established
hereunder shall be the permit granting authority.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or
her apparel. These uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops,
barbershops, shoe repair, etc.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — Facility for the provision
of personal wireless services, including antennas, telecommunication
equipment, communications towers, monopoles and/or other support
structures, including existing and proposed structures having personal
wireless services devices attached thereto as accessory uses, installed and
operated for the purpose of providing personal wireless services. Note:
Please refer to Article XI, Personal Wireless Service Facilities, of this bylaw
for additional definitions that are specific to personal wireless service
facilities.
PROFESSIONAL OR BUSINESS OFFICE — An office or place of business
where professional or business services are offered and do not involve the
sale of goods or the keeping of a stock-in-trade.
RECREATION AND AMUSEMENT SERVICES — Establishments engaged
in providing amusement, entertainment, sports or leisure time activities or
facilities for a fee or admission charge.
REPAIR SERVICE, MISCELLANEOUS — Any premises upon which the
business of maintenance, serving, repair, or painting of equipment or goods,
other than motorized vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD/TAKEOUT — An establishment offering
prepared food service in paper, plastic or other containers which can be
removed from the premises, whether or not seating is available to patrons.
This definition does not apply if such food is offered as wholly incidental to
a conventional restaurant operation or retail food service. All such uses that
preexist this bylaw will be required to file for a special use permit and a site
Drinking Water Resource Protection District. See § 325-51C.
[Amended 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
A.
B. Elderly Affordable Housing. See Article XII.
C. Harwich Center Overlay District. See § 325-51O.
D. Personal Wireless Service Overlay District. See Article XI.
E. Six Ponds Special District. See Article XVI.
F. Village Commercial Overlay District. See § 325-51L.
§ 325-2 HARWICH CODE § 325-2
1:132
plan special permit or waiver within 12 months of the effective date of this
bylaw.
RESTAURANT or LOUNGE — An establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed primarily on the premises.
RETAIL SALES — The selling of goods or merchandise to the general public
and providing services incidental to the sale of such goods.
ROAD, STREET or WAY —
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH OR DEVELOPMENT — An activity or accessory
activities that are necessary in connection with scientific research or
scientific development or related production.
SEASONAL USE — A temporary use or occupancy on an intermittent or
short-term basis, primarily during the summer months and/or weekends,
the total time of which use shall constitute less than six months during any
one calendar year.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or buildings made up of smaller
individual storage units for the keeping of goods and property for lease or
rent and does not include outside storage on the premises.
SHAPE NUMBER — The numerical value resulting from division of the
square of the perimeter of a lot by the area in square feet thereof.[Added
5-7-2013 STM by Art. 13]
For the purpose of subdivision control, a road, street or way is defined
as follows:
A public way or a way which the Clerk of the Town certifies is
maintained and used as a public way;
(1)
A way shown on a plan heretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law;15 or
(2)
A way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in the Town (June 6, 1951) having, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation
to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby
and for the installation of municipal services thereon.
(3)
A.
For the purposes of determining any building or other setback
requirements of this bylaw, "road," "street" or "way" is defined as
follows:
(1) As described (defined) in Subsection A above.
Any alley, right-of-way, lane, court, square, place or like area of
passage which is a matter of public record.
(2)
B.
15.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:133
SHARED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — A dwelling unit which contains
not more than six bedrooms and not more than six occupants who shall and
must be 65 years of age or older and may have separate sanitary facilities
but share common living space and kitchen facilities.
SIGN — Refer to Article VII.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF — Refer to Section VII.
SITE COVERAGE — The aggregate coverage of an individual site by
buildings, parking areas and driveways (regardless of surface material),
pools, decks and other permanent structures and all impervious surfaces.
For the purpose of this definition, the site shall be considered the portion
of the subject parcel which lies within the zoning district wherein the
proposed use is allowed.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Appeals
established hereunder shall be the special permit granting authority for
any application requiring such permit to change, alter, or extend a
nonconforming structure or use, or for certification of continuance of
existing dwellings. The Planning Board established pursuant to MGL c.
41, § 81A shall be the special permit granting authority for all other
applications requiring a special permit.[Amended 5-3-2011 STM by Art.
24]
STABLE OR RIDING RING, COMMERCIAL — The commercial housing of
four or more horses by means of rental of stalls and/or stables and/or
the use of property for the purposes of horseback riding lessons, horse
training and similar uses. It does not include the breeding of horses, which
is considered an agricultural use.
STORAGE TRAILER/CONTAINER — A structure standing, which may be on
wheels, that is towed or hauled by another vehicle and used for the storage
of goods and/or equipment.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower,
framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, pool, reviewing
stand, platform, bin or the like.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Include residual oil, hydrocarbon
products, including but not limited to gasoline, fuel and diesel oil, and
any other substances classified or controlled as toxic, caustic, corrosive,
radioactive or infectious pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 21C.
TRAILER — Any vehicle which was originally or is still immediately portable
or mobile and is arranged, intended, designed, or used for sleeping, eating,
or business, or is a place in which persons may congregate, including a
mobile home, house trailer, or camper. Such vehicle which is no longer
immediately portable by virtue of having its wheels removed or skirts
attached still shall be considered a trailer for the purpose of this bylaw.
UNIVERSAL ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE — A parking space 21 feet in
length and 11 feet wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet in width,
which is dedicated to parking for appropriately identified vehicles owned or
§ 325-2 HARWICH CODE § 325-2
1:134
operated by disabled people and so indicated by appropriate signage and
pavement markings.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged or intended or for which it may be used, occupied
or maintained under this bylaw.
WAREHOUSING — The storage of goods and materials by the owner of
the goods or operated for a specific commercial establishment or group
of establishments in a particular industrial or economic field, which shall
not include the bulk storage of nuclear or radioactive products and/or toxic
waste chemicals. Such use may include the transportation of such goods or
materials by motor freight.
WHOLESALE TRADE — A business or establishment primarily engaged in
selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or
professional business users, or to other wholesalers, or buying merchandise
for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
YARD, FRONT — Any yard abutting a road, street or way.
YARD, REAR — The yard abutting adjoining property opposite or
approximately opposite the front yard or yards.
YARDS — Those portions of a lot abutting adjoining lots, roads, streets or
ways which may not be built or encroached upon except as hereinafter
provided.
YARD SALE — A means of disposing of used personal property by a
householder or several householders who originally acquired the property
for personal household use and not for the purpose of sale or resale at a
profit.
YARD, SIDE — A yard other than a front or rear yard.
YEAR ROUND — For permanent use or occupancy, the total time of which
shall constitute more than six months during any one calendar year.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:135

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 325-3. Division of Town into districts. [Amended 5-7-2018ATM by
Art. 33]
The Town of Harwich, Massachusetts, is hereby divided into zoning
districts, designated as follows:
Residential - Rural Estate RR
Residential - Low Density RL
Residential - Medium Density RM
Residential - High Density 1 RH-1
Residential - High Density 2 RH-2
Residential - High Density 3 RH-3
Commercial - Highway 1 CH-1
Commercial - Highway 2 CH-2
Commercial - Village CV
Industrial - Limited IL
Multifamily Residential - Low
Density
MRL
Multifamily Residential - Low
Density 1
MRL-1
Elderly Affordable Housing EAH
Drinking Water Resource Protection
District
WR
Six Ponds Special District
Personal Wireless Service Overlay
District
PWS
Village Commercial Overlay District
Harwich Center Overlay District
Solar Farm Overlay District
§ 325-4. Maps.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on a map titled "Zoning Map of the Town of
Harwich, Massachusetts," dated August 1972, which accompanies and
is hereby declared to be a part of this bylaw. The authenticity of the
Zoning Map shall be certified by the signature of the Town Clerk and
imprinted Town Seal, together with the words: "This is to certify that
this is the Zoning Map referred to in Article III of the Zoning Bylaw of
the Town of Harwich, Massachusetts," together with the effective date
of this bylaw.
A.
§ 325-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-4
1:137
§ 325-5. Determining district boundaries.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules apply:
The Drinking Water Resource Protection Districts established
hereunder are shown on a map labeled "DEP Zone II, Apr 2009,"
prepared by Cape Cod Commission GIS Services, or its successor
showing the most recent Zone II boundaries as approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, which map(s)
are on file in the Office of the Town Clerk, the authenticity of said map
to be established in the same manner as provided above for establishing
the authenticity of the Zoning Map. [Amended 5-4-2010 STM by Art.
9]
B.
The Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts established hereunder
are shown on a map titled "Town of Harwich Personal Wireless Service
Facilities Overlay District Map," dated January 13, 1998, scale:
1:12,000, which map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk, the
authenticity of said map to be established in the same manner as
provided above for establishing the authenticity of the Zoning Map.
C.
The Zoning Map of the Town of Harwich is hereby amended to include
the EAH District as shown on a sketch plan, a copy of which is on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, dated February 25, 1999.
D.
The Solar Farm Overlay District established hereunder is shown on
a map labeled "Town of Harwich, Solar Farm Overlay District" dated
February 8, 2018, a copy of which can be found as an attachment to this
chapter in the town's online Code. [Added 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 33]
E.
Where a boundary is indicated as a road, street, alley, railroad,
watercourse or other body of water, it shall be construed to be the side
line thereof, or where such boundary approximates a Town boundary,
then to the limits of the Town boundary.
A.
Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or parallel to
a street, alley, railroad, watercourse, or other body of water, it shall be
construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance from the side line,
or mean high-water line, thereof as shown on the Zoning Map.
B.
Where any uncertainty exists concerning the location of the boundary
of the Drinking Water Resource Protection District, the precise location
of the boundary line on the ground shall be determined by on-site
inspection and testing by the Town or, at the option of the Town,
by a professional geologist or hydrologist approved by the Town. The
purpose of this testing will be to determine location and extent of an
aquifer or recharge area and to establish the boundary line of the
district accordingly. Any costs of inspecting, testing and surveying to
determine the boundary location shall be borne by the property owner,
C.
§ 325-4 HARWICH CODE § 325-5
1:138
who shall have the burden of establishing to the satisfaction of the Town
the precise district boundary location.
§ 325-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5
1:139

ARTICLE IV
Interpretation and Application
§ 325-6. Interpretation.
The provisions of this bylaw shall be interpreted to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, morals and
the general welfare of the Town of Harwich, Massachusetts, and, except
for the Zoning Bylaw approved by the Attorney General on June 6, 1951,
and all subsequent amendments thereto, the provisions of this bylaw are
not intended to repeal, amend, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or
interfere with any lawfully adopted bylaw, covenants, regulations or rules.
Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from
those prescribed by statute, bylaw or other regulation, that provision which
imposes the greater restrictions or the higher standard shall govern.
§ 325-7. Application.
Except as herein provided or as specifically exempted by the Zoning Act,
the provisions of this bylaw shall apply to the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings and structures and to the use
and creation of lots. As provided herein and in the Zoning Act, existing uses
and structures lawfully established or constructed which do not comply with
the provisions of this bylaw may continue as nonconforming.
Existing lots lawfully laid out by plan or deed which complied at the
time of layout with applicable provisions of zoning bylaws, if any, may
be built upon for single-family residential purposes, provided that:
(1) Said lots have 75 feet of frontage and 10,000 square feet of area;
The buildings to be located thereon are set back at least 10 feet
from side and rear lot lines and at least 25 feet from street lot
lines and the buildings to be constructed on said lot will not exceed
the maximum site coverage restrictions of the zoning bylaw in
effect when the lot was created or, if no such restrictions applied,
coverage of buildings shall not exceed 35% of said lot for lots
between 10,000 square feet and 15,000 square feet and 25% for
lots over 15,000 square feet;
(2)
Said lots are buildable under other applicable provisions of the law;
and
(3)
If said lots are shown on a subdivision plan as defined in the
Subdivision Control Law,16 which plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the roads shown on such plan have been installed
in accordance with Planning Board requirements, if any, in effect
at the time the plan was submitted to the Planning Board and a
release of the road covenant or release of other security, if any,
(4)
A.
16.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 325-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7
1:141
has been obtained from the Board prior to five years from the
date of endorsement of approval or prior to the lots becoming
nonconforming, whichever occurs later.
B. (Reserved)17
Existing lots in a CH-1 District which complied at the time of layout with
applicable provisions of zoning bylaws, if any, may be used for singlefamily
residential purposes as set forth above and may be used for twofamily
residential purposes and nonresidential purposes as established
in the Table of Use Regulations,18 provided that: [Amended 5-2-2016
ATM by Art. 47]
(1) Said lots have 100 feet of frontage and 10,000 square feet of area;
The buildings to be located thereon are set back at least 10 feet
from side and rear lot lines and at least 25 feet from street lot
lines and the buildings to be constructed on said lot will not exceed
the maximum site coverage restrictions of the zoning bylaw in
effect when the lot was created or, if no such restrictions applied,
coverage of buildings shall not exceed 35% of said lot for lots
between 10,000 square feet and 15,000 square feet and 25% for
lots over 15,000 square feet;
(2)
Said lots are buildable under other applicable provisions of the lot;
and
(3)
If said lots are shown on a subdivision plan as defined in the
Subdivision Control Law, which plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the roads shown on such plan have been installed
in accordance with Planning Board requirements, if any, in effect
at the time the plan was submitted to the Planning Board and a
release of the road covenant or release of other security, if any,
has been obtained from the Board prior to five years from the
date of endorsement of approval or prior to the lots becoming
nonconforming, whichever occurs later.
(4)
C.
Existing parking areas lawfully established as of the effective date
of this bylaw, whether conforming or nonconforming to the current
requirements of this bylaw, may be altered to accommodate the
inclusion of one or more universal accessible parking spaces without an
approved site plan, variance, or special permit, provided that:
Said accommodation does not reduce the conformity of any of the
following features with the respective requirements of this bylaw
by more than the amount indicated:
(1)
D.
17.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding conversion of single-family dwellings to
one-family dwellings with accessory apartments, as amended, was repealed 5-7-2013 STM
by Art. 12.
18.Editor's Note: See Table 1, which is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 325-7 HARWICH CODE § 325-7
1:142
Interior landscaping: 50% of minimum required as applicable
to subject property;
(a)
Front, side, or rear parking setback: 50% of required or
existing setback, whichever is the greater reduction;
(b)
Site coverage: 10% additional site coverage over the maximum
allowable site coverage or, if existing site coverage exceeds the
maximum allowed, an additional 5%; and
(c)
Required number of spaces:
Areas with one to 50 parking spaces: one space less than
the total required;
[1]
Areas with 51 to 200 parking spaces: two spaces less than
the total required; and
[2]
Areas with more than 200 parking spaces: three spaces
less than the total required; and
[3]
(d)
A detailed plan, which clearly depicts such accommodation, is
approved by the Building Official. Said plan shall be accurately
scaled at a size no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet and
shall show for the subject parcel or parcels all existing structures,
parking spaces, access aisles, landscape areas, driveways, loading
areas, and accommodation areas for disabled people (when
applicable) with legible dimensions for the above features.
(2)
Any lawfully nonconforming building or structure which has been
damaged or destroyed by fire or other accident or natural disaster may
be repaired or rebuilt to its original dimensions, either in its original
location or in a more conforming location, provided that the owner
shall apply for a building permit and start operations for restoring and
rebuilding of said premises within 18 months after such catastrophe.
Further, said reconstruction shall comply with all other applicable state
laws and regulations and such construction shall be completed within
30 months of the date of the catastrophe or such reconstruction must
comply with the current zoning bylaw.
E.
§ 325-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7
1:143

ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 325-8. Applicability of use regulations. [Amended 5-3-2011 STM
by Art. 23]
Except as provided by the Zoning Act or this bylaw, in each district no
building, structure, water body or lot shall be used or occupied except
for a purpose which is authorized by the Table of Use Regulations in
the zoning district wherein the land is located, and, if the land, building,
structure or water body is located in a Drinking Water Resource Protection
District, said land shall not be used or occupied except for a purpose
permitted in the underlying zoning district as well as the Drinking Water
Resource Protection District. Any use not listed shall be construed to be
prohibited. Personal wireless service facilities shall be exempt from the use
regulations contained in this bylaw when located on land owned by the
Town of Harwich.
§ 325-9. Permitted uses.
In the following Table of Use Regulations, the uses permitted by right in
the district shall be designated by the letter (P). Those uses that may be
permitted by special permit in the district, in accordance with §§ 325-51 and
325-53, shall be designated by the letter (S). Uses designated (-) shall not
be permitted in the district. Any use presently listed as a permitted use in
the Table of Use Regulations shall be designated as a special permit if the
use proposes a structure or structures having a gross floor area of more
than 7,500 square feet or 20 or more new parking spaces on the site, except
that single-family, religious and educational uses shall be exempt from this
provision. Some uses listed in the table as allowed as of right (P) or on
special permit (S) require a special permit under the site plan provisions of
this bylaw.
§ 325-10. Prohibited uses in all zoning districts.
The following uses are strictly prohibited in all zoning districts:
A. Trailers used for dwelling purposes, when occupied on said premises.
B. Food sales with drive-up or drive-through facilities.
Airport, landing strip and helicopter pad, except for emergency
purposes.
C.
D. Bituminous concrete or cement mixing plants or establishments.
E. Metal plating establishments.
F. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
§ 325-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-10
1:145
§ 325-11. Uses subject to other regulations.
Uses permitted by right or by special permit shall be subject to applicable
regulations set forth in this bylaw. Uses permitted by variance from the
Board, or changes or extensions of nonconforming uses on permit from
the Board, shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of
this bylaw not specifically and expressly varied by the Board. The grant of
one form of relief by the Board shall not constitute a finding that all other
elements of the project or proposal comply with applicable zoning bylaws.
§ 325-12. Road construction requirements for certificate of
occupancy.
No building designed and intended for residential or commercial use or
occupation shall be so occupied until any related road construction or
improvements have been completed in accordance with Planning Board
requirements and the Planning Board has released the road construction
covenant or other security provided to the Board pursuant to MGL c. 41,
§ 81U. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in the opinion of the Board actual
construction of the road or road improvements has been completed in a
manner sufficient to warrant occupancy of the building or buildings while
the balance of the work is completed, the Board may so certify to the
Building Official. Thereafter, the Inspector shall not withhold a certificate of
occupancy for said building based on noncompliance with this provision.
Uses involving the storage of commercial fertilizers as defined in MGL
c. 128, § 64 unless such storage is within a structure designed to
prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.
G.
Nonresidential uses involving the generation, storage, treatment or
disposal of hazardous materials as defined in MGL c. 21E unless such
storage is above ground level, on an impervious surface, and in an area
that has a containment system designed and operated to hold either
10% of total possible storage capacity of all containers or 110% of the
largest container's storage capacity, whichever is larger.
H.
Use involving the storage of animal manure unless said storage is in
a manner consistent with all applicable state and local regulations
relative thereto and as determined by the Board of Health.
I.
The commercial raising or keeping, for use or sale, of swine or furbearing
animals.
J.
Consistent with M.G.L. c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of nonmedical
"marijuana establishments" as defined in M.G.L. c. 94G, § 1, including
marijuana cultivators, independent testing laboratory, marijuana
product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of
licensed marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the
Town of Harwich. [Added 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 34]
K.
§ 325-10 HARWICH CODE § 325-13
1:146
§ 325-13. Table of Use Regulations.
The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this bylaw. The Table
of Use Regulations is divided into paragraphs as follows:
§ 325-14. Supplemental regulations.
A. Paragraph I, Residential Uses.
B. Paragraph II, Public and Quasi-Public Uses.
C. Paragraph III, Agricultural and Related Uses.
D. Paragraph IV, Commercial Uses.
A trailer, houseboat or other boat shall not be less than 25 feet from any
street lot line and shall not be used at any time for sleeping or living
purposes.
A.
Agricultural uses consistent with MGL c. 40A, § 3 are permitted by right
on lots containing a minimum of five acres. For lots less than five acres,
such agricultural uses shall be by special permit.
B.
Animal hospitals and/or kennels and their activities, including the
keeping of animals, shall be completely enclosed in pens or other
structures.
C.
The noncommercial raising and keeping of not more than two pigs. Pigs
and/or swine shall be kept in an enclosure approved by the Board of
Health. Said enclosure shall be not less than 50 feet from any bound,
boundary line or building used for human habitation in any residential
zone, and in no case shall the keeping and raising of pigs and/or swine
be permitted on any lot containing less than 40,000 square feet.
D.
Horses are allowable provided that they meet the necessary
requirements of the Board of Health. The horse(s) shall be owned by the
owner/occupant of the property. There shall be no commercial use of
the horse on site, including but not limited to riding lessons, except for
lots greater than five acres. Horses are allowable in the Water Resource
Protection District with a special permit pursuant to § 325-51C.
E.
Automotive service and repair facilities shall not include a junkyard of
any kind or open storage of unregistered vehicles.
F.
Construction industry, including suppliers, shall store all equipment
and materials within a building or buildings.
G.
The storage for resale of heating fuels includes but is not limited to oil,
coal and gas.
H.
Manufacturing is permitted per Table 1, provided that at no time will
such use result in or cause excessive dust, smoke, smog, observable
gas, fumes or odors, or other atmospheric pollution, objectionable
noise, glare, or vibration discernible beyond the property lines of the
I.
§ 325-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:147
industry, hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any
adjacent building or land, or to surface water or groundwater.
Outside storage of materials and supplies displayed for retail sales on
the premises does not require screening. All other outside storage,
including storage of construction, manufacturing, service wholesale
equipment, materials, junk or heavy motorized equipment of any type
or open storage of unregistered motor vehicles, automobiles or other
vehicles shall be completely enclosed by a solid fence or wall not less
than eight feet nor more than 12 feet in height or dense shrubbery
in which, when planted, the individual plants are at least three feet
in height, with the exception of vehicular entrances and exits not to
exceed 24 feet in width. Said fence shall be set back a minimum of 15
feet from abutting road side lines.
J.
Miscellaneous repair services shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed building.
K.
L. Storage trailers shall be screened from view at the lot frontage.
Yard sales shall not exceed three such sales in any calendar year per
property.
M.
In the IL District, retail sale of products is allowed subject to the
granting of a special use permit by the Planning Board. Retail sales
shall be prohibited in the IL District along Main Street (North Harwich)
from Depot Street west to the Dennis town line or any road off said
portion of Main Street, as there are existing traffic issues with this
dead-end road. In addition, a new retail use in an industrial zone will be
subject to site plan review pursuant to § 325-55. The following criteria
must be met for granting of the special use permit: the proposed
retail establishment or component must offer a product that is allied or
connected to a permitted or existing industrial use and the proposed
retail establishment or component must be able to coexist with other
permitted or existing industrial uses. All such uses that preexist this
bylaw will be required to file for a special use permit and a site plan
special permit or waiver within 12 months of the effective date of this
bylaw.
N.
Any new fast-food/takeout restaurant is subject to special permit review
pursuant to § 325-51 and site plan review pursuant to § 325-55. The
following criteria must be met for granting of the special use permit:
the proposed use will not adversely impact traffic flow and safety
and the proposed use will be compatible with surrounding land uses.
[Amended 5-3-2011 STM by Art. 24]
O.
A personal wireless service facility may locate on any existing guyed
tower or lattice tower, monopole, electric utility transmission tower,
fire tower or any other tower without a special permit, subject to the
requirements of § 325-59 and site plan approval.
P.
§ 325-14 HARWICH CODE § 325-14
1:148
A residential accessory building that contains bedrooms is subject to
special permit review pursuant to § 325-51. Residential accessory
buildings without bedrooms are not subject to special permit review.
[Added 5-7-2013 STM by Art. 12]
Q.
R. (Reserved)
Large-scale ground-mounted photovoltaic array shall be permitted by
right within the Solar Farm Overlay District pursuant to the provisions
of Article XXIII (§§ 325-138 through 325-148). [Added 5-7-2018 ATM
by Art. 33]
S.
§ 325-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-14
1:149

ARTICLE VI
Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
§ 325-15. Applicability of area, height and bulk regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum
lot frontage, maximum front yard depth, minimum side yard width,
minimum rear yard depth, and minimum residential net floor area shall be
as specified in this article and set forth in the Table of Area Regulations and
Table of Height and Bulk Regulations and subject to the further provisions
of this article. In the Drinking Water Resource Protection Districts, the
regulations as herein set forth for the underlying zoning district shall
apply. A fence, wall or other enclosure, unless otherwise regulated, shall be
regulated as provided in § 325-17 below.
§ 325-16. Tables of area and height and bulk regulations.
See tables on accompanying pages, plus attached notes, which are declared
to be a part of this bylaw.19
§ 325-17. Fences, walls or other enclosures.
A fence, hedge, wall or other enclosure may be maintained on any premises.
In order to preserve and promote the safety of the public, any fence, hedge
or shrub or other growth or enclosure wall on the corner lot or curb
obstructing the view of motorists and situated within 15 feet of a public
street or curb or side line thereof shall not be permitted by the owner or
occupant of the premises to exceed the height of three feet above road
grade, and any and all trees within said fifteen-foot area (shade trees to
be subject to the provisions of MGL c. 87, § 3) shall have limbs trimmed to
the height of six feet above road grade, provided that on a corner lot no
structure or vegetation shall be over three feet in height within the sight
triangle as hereafter defined. The sight triangle is defined as the area within
a triangle formed by two lines measured along the center of the nearest lane
of the traveled way of intersecting streets from the point of intersection for
a distance of 25 feet and a third line connecting the points on the two legs.
The height restrictions shall designate the distance above each point in the
plane of the sight triangle.
§ 325-18. Additional regulations.
The required minimum width of any lot hereafter laid out or created,
measured along the front yard setback line, shall not be less than
80% of the required minimum lot frontage. In order to comply with
the minimum square foot requirement, any lot hereafter created for
building purposes must be a closed plot of land having a definite area
and perimeter and having a shape number not exceeding the numerical
value of 22, except that a lot may have a shape number larger than
A.
19.Editor's Note: See Tables 2 and 3 at the end of this bylaw.
§ 325-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-18
1:151
22, provided that the site intended for building is contained within a
portion of said lot, which said portion meets the zoning requirements of
the area in which it is located and has a shape number not exceeding
22. The lot shape number shall be obtained by dividing the square of the
lot perimeter (P), measured in feet, by the area of the lot (A), measured
in square feet (i.e., P2 ÷ A<22). [Amended 5-7-2013 STM by Art. 13]
In all districts where single-family dwellings are permitted, no more
than one such dwelling shall be allowed on a lot.
B.
Any structure located on a corner lot shall be set back from all streets
a distance equal to the front yard setback requirement in the district.
C.
At each end of a through lot, there shall be a setback depth required
which is equal to the front yard depth required for the district in which
each street frontage is located.
D.
On a lot used for multifamily, hotel or motel purposes, parking lots,
roads, streets, tennis courts, swimming pools and like amenities and
facilities shall not cover more than 15% of the area of the lot. For
the purpose of this subsection, golf courses, putting greens, bowling
greens and similar amenities which do not involve covering the ground
with any impervious material shall not be included for the purpose of
computing the total ground coverage of a project.
E.
Projections into required yards or other required open spaces are
permitted, subject to the following:
Balcony or bay window, limited in total length to 1/2 the length of
the building: not more than two feet.
(1)
Open terrace or steps, stoop or similar structure, under four feet in
height: up to 1/2 the required yard setback.
(2)
Window sill, chimney, roof eave, fire escape, fire tower, storm
enclosure or similar architectural structures or steps or stoops over
four feet in height: not more than two feet.
(3)
F.
In any district, any permitted accessory building, use or structure shall
conform to the applicable setback for the principal structure or use,
except that any accessory building less than 100 square feet in area and
not exceeding 12 feet in height may be set back five feet from side or
rear lot lines. In all zoning districts, a shelter for persons awaiting the
arrival of public transportation may be erected without observing the
area of setback requirements of this bylaw.
G.
No building permit may be issued for a multifamily dwelling project
unless and until site plans showing the entire project to be constructed
are submitted to the Building Official with the application for a building
permit, and this requirement shall apply whether or not the project is
to be built in phases.
H.
§ 325-18 HARWICH CODE § 325-18
1:152
All ways intended for use by vehicular traffic within the perimeter
of a multifamily dwelling project shall be installed and constructed
in accordance with the requirements governing road construction set
forth in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, as adopted from time to
time by the Harwich Planning Board.20
I.
All multifamily dwellings must be connected to a municipal water
system.
J.
A habitable room in a multifamily dwelling unit shall not have a
minimum floor area of less than 120 square feet and shall have no major
width or length dimension less than 10 feet. Closets, storage spaces,
bathrooms and kitchens are not habitable rooms for the purpose of
these minimum area and dimension requirements.
All outside entrances to multifamily dwellings shall be designed
in such manner as to provide protection to the immediate area in
front of said entrance from the weather.
(1)
No outside staircase shall be used to furnish primary access to any
of the units in a multifamily dwelling, hotel or motel.
(2)
K.
No multifamily dwellings may be erected on any lot in the MRL or
MRL-1 District the geographical center of which is closer than 1,500
feet to the geographical center of any lot upon which multifamily
dwellings with more than four dwelling units are constructed, provided
that, for the purpose of this subsection, contiguous lots in common
ownership may be considered as a single parcel and developed for
multifamily use, provided further that lots separated by a road, street
or way will be considered contiguous for the purpose of this subsection
and, if commonly owned, may be treated as one parcel for the purpose
of multifamily construction.
L.
Whenever the land upon which a multifamily dwelling is to be erected is
located partially within a Drinking Water Resource Protection District,
maximum possible use of the area outside the Drinking Water Resource
Protection District will be made for the disposal of toxic or hazardous
materials and sewage.
M.
Whenever a use is established on a parcel in the IL District and such
parcel or parcels abut or face a parcel which is zoned or used for
residential purposes, the use in the IL District shall be effectively
screened and buffered from the adjoining residential parcel. Screening
shall consist of either a contiguous solid fence or wall not less than
six feet nor more than eight feet in height or a contiguous staggered
row of densely planted evergreen shrubs which, when planted, contains
individual plantings which are no less than five feet in height. In no
case shall any plantings used for compliance with this screening
requirement be planted less than five feet apart on center. Any
screening required by this subsection shall be installed at least 10 feet
N.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-18
1:153
from any side or rear lot line and 15 feet from any street lot line,
shall be maintained in good condition, and may be interrupted only
by driveway openings which meet a street. Any plantings or fencing
components installed for compliance with this subsection which
deteriorate to the point where they no longer provide an effective
screen shall be replaced.
There shall be no site preparation work done in connection with
development of any use of land other than single-family or singlefamily
with accessory apartment use and no such work in connection
with development of any subdivision until all necessary permits and
approvals have been obtained. This subsection shall not prohibit site
work reasonably necessary to the conduct of a land survey or any tests
required as a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit or
approval. If after obtaining all necessary permits and approvals such
work is commenced and later abandoned, any areas of the site which
have been disturbed during construction shall be revegetated in a
manner sufficient to prevent erosion. To secure revegetation in the case
of abandonment of a project, the Building Official or, in the case of a
subdivision of land, the Planning Board may require the owner to post a
bond or other satisfactory security in an amount reasonably estimated
as sufficient to perform the work.
O.
A lot with the required legal frontage must take access along the
required legal frontage. No alternate access may be granted from other
streets, roads, or ways, nor should access be taken from an easement
across an adjacent property without the issuance of a special permit
from the Planning Board. In issuing a special permit, the Planning
Board shall make the following findings:
The alternate access proposed is superior to the access along the
frontage;
(1)
The proposed alternate access is cleared to a minimum of 16 feet
in width and 16 feet in height; and
(2)
When access is proposed from an easement across another lot, the
lot providing the easement will have the required legal frontage for
the zoning district.
(3)
P.
Panhandle lots may be approved by the Planning Board under the
Subdivision Control Law, provided that the following conditions are
met: [Added 5-7-2013 STM by Art. 13]
Lot frontage and lot width within the panhandle portion shall be a
minimum of 35 feet.
(1)
The length of the panhandle portion of a lot shall be a maximum of
300 feet.
(2)
Q.
§ 325-18 HARWICH CODE § 325-18
1:154
§ 325-19. Height exceptions.
§ 325-20. Stories for human use or occupation.
In reference to Table 3, maximum permitted height (stories), in no case may
any building used for multifamily dwellings, hotel or motel use exceed 50
feet in height nor contain more than four levels for human occupation. In
no case shall a single-family residence contain more than two levels for
human occupation, provided that the basement or cellar of a single-family
residence can be used as a family room or recreational room but shall not
be used as sleeping quarters unless it is made to comply with the provisions
of the Building Code regulating the design and construction of such rooms.
In no case shall any other building provide more than two stories or levels
for human use or occupation.
§ 325-21. Table 2, Area Regulations.
Table 2 is included at the end of this bylaw.
Suitable access by a driveway to such lot is provided within the
panhandle and, in the opinion of the Board, the access is wide
enough and otherwise satisfactory for a driveway.
(3)
All panhandle lots shall meet the shape number requirements of
§ 325-18A.
(4)
No panhandle portion of any lot may be contiguous to another
panhandle portion of a lot at the street line.
(5)
In reference to Table 3, any maximum height permitted in this bylaw
shall not apply to:
Municipal use and essential service structures, provided that the
side and rear yards or setbacks required in the district for the
highest permitted principal structure shall be increased two feet in
width for each foot by which the height or such structures exceeds
the height permitted in the district.
(1)
Special industrial structures, such as a cooling tower and other
similar structures where the industrial process requires a greater
height.
(2)
Any personal wireless service facility, provided that no structure
erected in connection with such use exceeds 45 feet in height
above ground level in all districts and further provided that in
a PWS District no structure erected in connection with such use
exceeds 150 feet above ground level.
(3)
A.
Note: Additional requirements for personal wireless service facilities
are contained in Article XI, Personal Wireless Service Facilities, of this
bylaw.
B.
§ 325-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-22
1:155
§ 325-22. Table 3, Height and Bulk Regulations
Table 3 is included at the end of this bylaw.
§ 325-22 HARWICH CODE § 325-22
1:156
ARTICLE VII
Sign Regulations
[Amended 11-12-2009 STM by Art. 14]
§ 325-23. Purpose and scope.
§ 325-24. Relationship to other bylaws.
§ 325-25. Definitions.
A-FRAME/EASEL/SANDWICH SIGNS — Usually a double-faced,
freestanding, portable sign.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Harwich Building Commissioner or Building
Inspector.
BUSINESS OPERATIONS SIGNS — Any on-premises sign used in the dayto-
day operations of a business such as:
The purpose of this article is to regulate signs which facilitate
communication, promote the safety of motorists and pedestrians by
preventing distractions and obstructions of public ways and walks that
may be caused by signage, prevent visual clutter, and encourage
economic development by allowing the siting of signage that identifies
businesses and other land uses in ways that complement and enhance
our community's character.
A.
This sign regulation provides a permitting system to govern the
placement of advertising and other informational signs both outdoors
and in windows within the Town of Harwich.
B.
Nothing in this bylaw shall be construed as exempting an applicant
from any other applicable Town, county, state, or federal bylaws.
A.
To the extent that the requirements of this bylaw differ from or are
not in accordance with any other applicable requirements, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply.
B.
All signs erected within the Historic District shall conform to all
Historic District requirements.
C.
BUSINESS HOUR SIGNS — "Open/closed" and related hours-ofoperation
signs which do not exceed one square foot.
A.
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS — Any on-premises sign that directs the
movement or placement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic without
reference to or inclusion of the name of a product sold or services
performed.
B.
"OPEN" FLAG — One "open" flag per business establishment shall be
allowed and shall not exceed 24 square feet in size.
C.
§ 325-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-25
1:157
CAUTIONARY SIGNS — Signs warning of prohibited activities such as
trespassing, hunting, fishing, or swimming. For regulations, see
§ 325-29A(1).
CLUSTER SIGN — A ground sign which provides space for identifying
multiple tenants or uses within a project or premises having more than one
tenant or use such as a business, commercial or industrial development.
ELECTION/TOWN MEETING SIGN — Any sign erected by the Town of
Harwich to alert the public to an election or a Town Meeting.
FLYERS — Flyers for special events measuring not more than two square
feet in total area.
GROUND SIGN — A sign supported by poles, uprights or braces extending
from the ground but not attached to any part of a building.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGNS — Signs identifying any home occupation as
defined by the Harwich Zoning Bylaw. For regulations see § 325-29A(2).
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY — Any land owned and/or controlled by the Town
of Harwich, including public rights-of-way. Municipal-owned property, for
purposes of this regulation, shall be determined by the road layout as
maintained by the Highway Department with the assumption that the road
is properly located. For ease of determination, any property located
between the edge of the municipal-owned road surface and the greater
distance to any of the following shall be considered municipal owned or
controlled: street sign, utility pole, fire hydrant and/or sidewalk.
MUNICIPAL SIGNS — Permanent signs posted for more than 60
consecutive days by a Town entity and placed on Town property or within
the municipal property right-of-way required or authorized for a public
purpose by law or statute. For regulations, see § 325-30.
MUNICIPAL SIGNS, TEMPORARY — Signs posted for 60 or fewer days by a
Town entity and placed on municipal property for the purpose of promoting
a Town-sponsored event or alerting the public to a public safety matter or
event. For regulations, see § 325-30.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Signs placed on property separate from where a
business is located. For regulations, see § 325-29A(3).
ON-PREMISES SIGN — Signs placed on the same property where a
business is located. The sum of all signage on a property shall not exceed
that allowed in §§ 325-27 and 325-29 unless otherwise exempted.
QUARTERBOARD, RESIDENTIAL — A decoratively carved and painted
wood sign fashioned after those traditionally used on sailing vessels. For
regulations, see § 325-29A(5).
REAL ESTATE SIGNS — A temporary wall or ground sign advertising the
sale, rental, or lease of a designated structure or land area for a permitted
use on which the signs are located. For regulations, see § 325-29A(6).
SIGN — Includes every advertising message, announcement, declaration,
demonstration, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained
§ 325-25 HARWICH CODE § 325-25
1:158
in view of the observer thereof primarily for identification, advertisement,
or promotion of the interest of any person, entity, product, or service. The
definition of a sign shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting
system, and any attachments, flags, ornaments or other features used to
draw the attention of observers and shall further include collection boxes.
Indoor or outdoor displays of merchandise for sale at retail on the premises
shall not be considered a sign for the purposes of this bylaw. The definition
does not include decorations or ornamentation that is not integral to the
nature of the business or the purpose of the sign.
SIGN PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Department for the
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, or improvement of
any sign requiring a permit. Such permit shall be permanently displayed
and available. At the option of the Building Official, temporary and/or offpremises
signs may require a special sticker.
SUBDIVISION SIGNS — A sign placed at the street entrance to a
subdivision. For regulations, see § 325-29A(7).
TEMPORARY SIGNS — Temporary signs may not exceed nine square feet
in area and may not be more than four feet in height. Temporary signs
may be placed on commercial properties no more than twice a year, 10
days in succession each time. Temporary signs may advertise special sales,
anniversaries, grand openings, and other similar special events.
UMBRELLA SIGNS — Signage as part of an umbrella that advertises the
name of a particular establishment or a product for sale on the premises.
For regulations, see § 325-29D.
VENDING MACHINES — The portion of any internally illuminated vending
machine which advertises a product. For regulations, see § 325-29E.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against a wall or
roof of a building or structure whose display surface is either parallel or
perpendicular to the face of the building. For regulations, see § 325-29F.
WATER DEPARTMENT SIGN — A municipal sign that includes any sign
erected by the Town of Harwich Water Department to alert the public to any
drinking water related event, including but not limited to flushing of pipes
and water use restrictions.
§ 325-26. General requirements.
Before a nonexempt sign (see § 325-31) is erected, constructed,
structurally altered or moved, it shall conform to all applicable
requirements contained in this bylaw, including Historic District
requirements when applicable, and shall be approved and shall have
received a permit from a Building Official unless the sign is expressly
exempted herein from the provisions of this bylaw.
A.
Before any sign receives a permit from a Building Official the
application shall be reviewed by Planning Department staff.
B.
§ 325-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-26
1:159
§ 325-27. Sign area measurement.
A preapplication conference with the Building Department is
encouraged in order for the applicant to become acquainted with
application procedures, design standards, and related Town
ordinances.
C.
Sign placement shall not create a hazard or interfere with snow
removal or vision or movement of motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists.
D.
E. All signs shall be reasonably placed so as to not obscure other signs.
No signs shall be located in a public right-of-way nor shall they be
located so as to block a public or private sidewalk, stairway, driveway
or parking lot or impair sight distances for motorists or pedestrians.
F.
No sign shall be affixed to or posted in front of any guardrails located
in a public right-of-way.
G.
Signs shall be externally lit or backlit only and shall be designed,
installed and maintained so as to eliminate or minimize upwarddirected
light and glare and so that lights illuminate only the sign and
not property which adjoins or is nearby.
H.
Nonmunicipal developments having more than one tenant or use within
a project or premises shall provide a master sign plan for the entire
structure or project for review and approval by the Planning
Department staff prior to any sign permit approval by a Building
Official.
I.
Luminous tube/neon/internally illuminated signs are permitted to be
displayed in windows or on vending machine(s) only. The total area of
all luminous tube/neon/internally illuminated signs shall not exceed six
square feet. No animated signs are permitted.
J.
Unless otherwise specified in the definition, all signs shall meet the
area measurement requirements of this section.
A.
The area of a sign face shall be computed by measurement of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that
will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display. This shall include any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it
is placed. The area calculation shall not include structural supporting
framework, bracing or wall. If any advertising is present on the
supports of a sign, the area of the supports will count towards the total
allowable signage. Where there are two faces back to back, the total
area of the largest face shall determine the area of the sign.
B.
No ground sign may exceed 12 feet in height unless otherwise
specified.
C.
§ 325-26 HARWICH CODE § 325-27
1:160
§ 325-28. Construction and maintenance.
For single-tenant, nonmunicipal business accessed directly from a
street, right-of-way or parking area, the maximum permitted area of all
nonexempt signs shall be 48 square feet per respective public entrance
facade. Nonexempt signs counting towards the 48 square feet include
any sign on a property at any time, including but not limited to signs
put out and taken in on a daily basis, and signs in windows.
D.
Nonmunicipal developments having more than one tenant or use within
a project or premises may construct one cluster sign containing the
name of the development and/or listings of individual businesses,
products or services within the development of up to 60 square feet.
Each tenant may have signage at the location of its business of
up to 48 square feet per public entrance facade. Nonexempt signs
counting towards the 48 square feet include any sign on a property
at any time, including but not limited to signs put out and taken in
on a daily basis, and signs in windows.
(1)
Total sign area within the master sign plan is subject to the size
limitations of this section. Sign area cannot be transferred to a
single building or facade from other buildings in the project. In
addition, the amount of signage assigned to a specific space in a
building shall be tied to that space through the lease or purchase
agreement. Under no circumstances may the sign area designated
for an individual space be transferred to another space in the same
building or complex.
(2)
E.
Additional cluster signs may be allowed by special permit from the
Planning Board. Signage in excess of 48 square feet and/or allocation
of total allowed square footage over entry and nonentry facades, as
referenced above in Subsections D and E(1), may also be allowed by
special permit from the Planning Board.
F.
All signs and sign structures shall be constructed of materials of
sufficient strength and quality to withstand weathering or deterioration
by wind, moisture and other natural elements and shall be maintained
in a state of good repair with all braces, bolts, supporting framework,
fastenings, lettering and design work free from deterioration.
A.
Old signs and related hardware/structural supports shall be removed
before any new sign is erected unless the old sign and related
hardware/structural supports have been incorporated into the overall
design or structural support of the new sign and approved pursuant to
this article.
B.
A Building Official shall have the authority to order the repair,
alteration or removal of any sign or structure which constitutes a
hazard to public health and safety or which is otherwise not in
compliance with this bylaw.
C.
§ 325-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-28
1:161
§ 325-29. Additional requirements for specific signage.
If an immediate public safety concern so requires, the Building Official
may take any necessary action, including removal of a sign.
D.
On private and commercial properties.
Cautionary signs may be posted on each lot line; however, no signs
may be within 100 feet of each other. Cautionary signs are limited
to one square foot or less per sign.
(1)
Home occupation signs shall be limited to a wall or a ground
sign. The total square footage of any home occupation sign shall
not exceed nine square feet in area and may be illuminated in
commercial zones per § 325-26 of this bylaw. Wall signs may be
attached to any structure and/or fence. A person seeking to erect
a home occupation sign shall be required to complete the home
occupation worksheet with the Building Department.
(2)
Off-premises sign.
Any business wishing to place a sign on property other than its
own shall obtain written permission from the property owner
where the sign will be posted and shall provide said written
permission to the Building Official with the permit application
or notification materials, except for those public locations
listed in this section.
(a)
An off-premises business sign shall only be posted within a
commercial or industrial district, except for agricultural uses
as defined in Article II (Definitions) of this bylaw which may be
posted within a residential district and opposite the exit ramps
for Route 6 on Routes 124 and 137.
(b)
Entities wishing to place off-premises signage on state-owned
property or within state rights-of-way not listed above such as
Route 28 and the off-ramps at Route 6 on Routes 124 and 137
shall seek permission from the state, in addition to meeting
local requirements.
(c)
An off-premises sign shall be included in the calculation of total
allowable signage for the property or business it is placed upon
and shall not be in addition to allowable signage as specified in
this article unless otherwise exempted.
(d)
No permanent, noncommercial, nonmunicipal sign shall be
allowed on any municipal property, except in accordance with
all of the requirements set forth herein.
(e)
(3)
Political signs. Political signs are allowed in all zoning districts on
private property with the authorization of the owner of the property
on which the sign is to be displayed. The signs must be removed
(4)
A.
§ 325-28 HARWICH CODE § 325-29
1:162
within 60 days of posting or one week following the date of the
election for which they are posted.
Quarterboard, residential. A residential quarterboard shall not
advertise a business or profession and shall not exceed 18 inches
in height or 10 feet in length and shall be wall mounted.
(5)
Real estate sign. One sign of not more than nine square feet shall
be allowed per street frontage, shall not be illuminated, shall not
be located within the public right-of-way, and shall be removed
immediately once the property is rented or leased or sale is
completed.
(6)
Subdivision sign. One externally illuminated sign may appear at
each street entrance and is limited to a maximum of 20 square feet
per sign and may not exceed six feet in height.
(7)
(8) Parking signs shall be limited to one square foot per parking space.
Temporary signs on municipal property. A temporary, noncommercial,
nonmunicipal sign may be located on municipal property if all of the
requirements set forth herein are satisfied:
The sponsoring organization of any temporary on- or off-premises
signs shall be required to file a notice with a Building Official prior
to display.
(1)
Temporary signs shall be erected for no more than 60 days and
removed within 72 hours after the event.
(2)
(3) Temporary signs shall conform to all applicable requirements.
Temporary signs may be posted in the designated municipal areas
after notice has been filed with the Building Official. Temporary,
noncommercial, nonmunicipal signs on municipal property shall be
permitted only at the following locations: [Amended 5-8-2012
STM by Art. 5]
East Harwich: the intersection of Routes 39/137, at the Fire
Station 2, on the corner at the so-called "flagpole parcel."
(a)
North Harwich: facing Queen Anne Road in the grass area east
of the entrance to the transfer station.
(b)
(c) Doane Park on the north side of the park on Route 28.
(4)
The Town shall not be responsible to maintain or safeguard any
nonmunicipal sign on municipal property and such placement shall
be entirely at the sign owner's risk.
(5)
Any sign placed on any municipal property, other than as specified
herein, may be removed by the Building Official. Such sign shall be
retained by him for 14 days and may be reclaimed with a payment
of $10 per sign. After 14 days, such sign shall be disposed of
(6)
B.
§ 325-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-29
1:163
without any prior notice to the sign owner or liability for damages
by the Town.
No temporary, noncommercial, nonmunicipal sign shall be allowed
at the above-specified locations unless it satisfies the following
requirements:
It shall not exceed nine square feet in size and shall not exceed
six feet in height, except that it shall not exceed four feet in
height at Doane Park on Route 28. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM
by Art. 5]
(a)
(b) It shall not be in place for more than 60 days.
It shall not be chained, locked or permanently affixed to any
surface, structure or landscape feature.
(c)
It shall not block a public sidewalk, stairway, driveway or
parking lot, nor shall it impair sight distances for motorists.
(d)
It shall not be placed so as to block any other sign already in
place.
(e)
(7)
Entities wishing to place off-premises signage on municipal
property not listed above shall seek permission from the Board of
Selectmen during a scheduled public hearing.
(8)
No sign exempted under § 325-31 shall be allowed on the abovereferenced
municipal properties.
(9)
Flyers. For those flyers not displayed in windows, they shall not be
attached to trees, utility poles or be located within a public right-ofway.
Such flyers may be posted for no more than 60 days and must be
removed within one week after the event. Flyers posted in violation of
this bylaw shall be subject to removal by the Building Official without
liability to the Town.
C.
Umbrella signs. Umbrellas containing the name of a particular
establishment shall count against the establishment's total signage.
Umbrellas containing the name of a product for sale on the premises
shall not count against the establishment's total signage.
D.
Vending machines. Vending machines shall be counted against the total
allowable signage unless exempted under § 325-31 or internally located
and shielded from public view.
E.
Wall sign. Projecting wall sign shall extend no more than 36 inches from
the surface upon which it is attached, shall not exceed the height of
the building on which it is mounted and must have at least eight feet of
ground clearance.
F.
Construction signs. One temporary wall or ground sign not more than
eight square feet indicating the construction, remodeling or rebuilding
G.
§ 325-29 HARWICH CODE § 325-29
1:164
§ 325-30. Additional requirements for municipal signs.
§ 325-31. Exemptions from permit requirements.
The following signs do not count towards the total permitted signage unless
otherwise indicated and do not require a permit or notification to the
Building Official:
of a certain structure for a permitted use shall be allowed on the
parcel on which the structure is located with written permission of the
property owner. The sign shall not be illuminated and shall be removed
immediately upon final inspection. [Added 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 47]
A temporary or permanent municipal sign may be placed on municipal
property, provided all of the requirements set forth herein are satisfied.
A.
Municipal signs that announce water system information or municipal
traffic signs, as approved by the Harwich police and Harwich
Department of Highways and Maintenance, shall be permitted in a
public right-of-way as a matter of right.
B.
Permanent municipal signs shall not exceed 60 square feet for ground
signs or cluster signs or 48 square feet for wall signs. Only one cluster
sign shall be permitted per property or premises, unless more than one
cluster sign is expressly allowed by the Planning Board. [Amended
5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
C.
Town departments shall have authority over any sign placed on the land
and/or buildings under their control, including signs placed by other
Harwich municipal entities. Signs may remain in place as needed, at the
discretion of the entity with authority over the property. Notice of such
signs shall be required to be filed by the Town entity with a Building
Official prior to display. Note that this does not apply to the following:
election/Town Meeting signage and Water Department signage.
D.
A. Business hour signs.
B. Cautionary signs.
C. Home occupation signs.
D. Municipal signs.
E. Municipal signs, temporary.
F. Political campaign signs.
G. Real estate signs.
H. Residential quarterboard.
I. Special event flyers.
J. Umbrella signs.
§ 325-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-31
1:165
§ 325-32. Nonconforming signs.
Lawfully preexisting signs that do not comply with the provisions of this
bylaw at the time of its adoption may be maintained so long as they are
kept in a state of good repair as specified in § 325-28 of this bylaw and so
long as they are not relocated, replaced or structurally altered. Preexisting
signs that are relocated, replaced, structurally altered or not kept in a
state of good repair as specified in § 325-28 of this bylaw shall not be
allowed to continue as nonconforming signs and shall require new permits
and compliance with this bylaw. A lawfully preexisting nonconforming sign
destroyed by natural disaster or accident can be replaced by a sign of the
same dimensions in the same location as the original sign.
§ 325-33. Appeals.
Any applicant who believes a denial is not justified has the right to appeal
to the Board of Appeals and to appear at a meeting for which proper notice
can be given and agenda time is available. Intention to take an appeal to
the Board of Appeals shall be filed with the Town Clerk in writing within
30 business days following the denial of the permit by a Building Official,
pursuant to MGL c. 40A. Applicants appealing to the Board of Appeals may
request review of the decision of a Building Official or a variance to the sign
regulation pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 10.
§ 325-34. Violations.
Violation of this bylaw is subject to enforcement action through the Building
Department pursuant to § 325-48 of the Town of Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
§ 325-35. Severability.
If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The
invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section or sections of this
bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Harwich Zoning
Bylaw.
Vending machines: one per premises unless more allowed by special
permit.
K.
L. Water Department signs.
M. Town Meeting/election signs.
N. Open house and tag sale signs if displayed for not more than 48 hours.
O. Temporary signs.
§ 325-31 HARWICH CODE § 325-35
1:166
ARTICLE VIII
Home Occupations
§ 325-36. Regulations for home occupations.
Home occupations shall be subject to the following regulations:
No person other than members of the family residing on the premises,
nor more than one apprentice, shall be regularly engaged in such
occupation.
A.
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
secondary and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
B.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of
such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a
required front yard.
C.
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is
conducted in a single-family residence or outside the dwelling unit
if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
premises.
D.
Any sign erected to advertise a home occupation as defined in this
bylaw shall conform to the requirements set forth in Article VII (Sign
Regulations) of this bylaw.
E.
Not more than two commercial vehicles may be used in connection with
said home occupation, one of which may not exceed a three-fourths-ton
rating and the second of which may not exceed a one-ton rating. Any
one-ton vehicle used in connection with said home occupation must be
parked and stored indoors in a residential-type garage, and in no event
may more than one commercial vehicle be parked or stored in the open
at said premises.
F.
There shall be no disposal of toxic or hazardous materials as defined in
this bylaw in connection with the home occupation.
G.
§ 325-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-36
1:167

ARTICLE IX
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 325-37. Objective.
It is the intent of this article that adequate off-street parking and loading
shall be provided to serve all parking demand created by new construction,
whether through new structures or additions to existing ones or through
change of use which creates higher parking demand.
§ 325-38. Applicability.
Existing buildings, structures and land uses are not subject to these offstreet
parking and loading requirements and may be rebuilt, changed or
repaired but not enlarged, altered or subject to a change in use so as to
increase demand without becoming subject to these requirements.
§ 325-39. Off-street parking schedule.
These standards are the minimum requirement. The Planning Board,
under site plan review, may vary the required number of spaces if
the nature and scale of a proposed use warrant such a change. In
determining the number of spaces required, only actual or delineated
spaces shall be calculated. In the case of multiple uses on a single lot,
the required number of parking spaces will be equal to the combined
total of parking spaces for each use. [Amended 5-2-2016 ATM by Art.
47]
Use Parking Spaces
Residential Uses
Single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling
2
Single-family dwelling with
accessory apartment, multifamily
or mixed-use development
1.5 per unit
Home occupation 1 per employee/apprentice or 2 per
400 square feet of space dedicated
to home occupation
Dormitory 1 per room
Lodging house, hotel, motel, inn,
bed-and-breakfast
1.25 per guest room or suite
Public and Quasi-Public Uses
School, municipal building,
library, charitable institution or
similar use
1 per employee, plus 1 per 3 seats
in area of public assembly
A.
§ 325-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-39
1:169
Use Parking Spaces
Church, assembly hall, club or
similar place of public or
semipublic amusement or
assembly
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per classroom
and office
Movie theater 1 per 2 seats
Nursing home and/or personal
care facilities
1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee
maximum shift
Recreational Uses
Standard golf, par 3, and other
outdoor recreational uses,
including but not limited to
amusement parks and other
similar attractions.
1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 3 patrons at maximum
capacity of facility as determined
by the Building Official
Golf teaching facility 1 per employee, plus 1 per student,
maximum capacity
Miniature golf course 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 2 patrons at maximum
capacity of facility as determined
by the Building Official
Playing fields (parking is per
field)
1 per 2 players, plus 1 per 2
bleacher seats, plus 20
Public swimming pools 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per maximum rated capacity
for pool and any associated decks
Stable; commercial or riding
school
1 per 2 stalls, plus 1 per employee
maximum shift, plus area for
storing trailers
Indoor recreational uses,
including but not limited to tennis
clubs, health clubs
1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 2 per tennis court, plus 1 per
2 players for other court sport,
plus 1 per 3 spectator seats
Commercial Uses
Auction galleries, gift shops, arts
and crafts, antique shops, general
merchandise, apparel and
accessories, other retail sales and
customer service
1 per 150 square feet of floor area
dedicated to customer use or
display, but not less than 70% of
the total area
Food stores and supermarkets 1 per 200 square feet customer
area, plus 1 per employee
maximum shift
§ 325-39 HARWICH CODE § 325-39
1:170
Use Parking Spaces
Furniture and home furnishings,
large appliances, lumber,
showroom or other retail display
of large items
1 per 700 square feet
Restaurant, lunchroom, bar,
tavern, private club or other
similar use
1 per 4 seats, including outdoor
seating, plus 1 per employee
maximum shift
Restaurant, fast-food/takeout 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 6, plus 1 per 4 seats, indoor or
outdoor
Establishments offering
entertainment, including public
and private clubs and restaurant
areas dedicated solely to
entertainment
1 per 2 patrons at maximum
capacity of facility as determined
by the Building Official, plus 1 per
employee on maximum shift
Medical office 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 2 seats in waiting room,
plus 1 per treatment room
Professional or administrative
office, bank or other financial
institution and general business
office
1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 250 square feet of floor
area
Funeral home 1 per 2 seats at maximum capacity
of facility as determined by the
Building Official
Animal hospital and animal
kennel
1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 2 seats in waiting room,
plus 1 per treatment room
Motor Vehicle or Boat — Transportation Uses
Sales or rental of motor vehicles 1 per 3,000 square feet of indoor
or outdoor vehicle or boat display
area, plus 1 per employee
maximum shift
Filling station, automotive service
and repair facility, automobile
service station
1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 2 per service bay, including
spray paint booth, plus 2 per 150
square feet service waiting area,
plus 1 per car stored overnight
Car wash 1 per employee maximum shift
Other transportation uses 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus as determined by site plan
approval
§ 325-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-39
1:171
§ 325-40. Loading requirements. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Planning Board through site
plan review approval, loading and unloading areas shall be provided
according to this section. Every building hereafter erected, altered,
enlarged, or occupied for business, industrial or institutional purposes
which has over 5,000 square feet of gross building area shall provide a
minimum of one area for the loading and unloading of service vehicles.
Loading and unloading areas shall be provided in addition to off-street
parking spaces and shall not be considered as supplying required parking
spaces. One additional area shall be provided for every additional 20,000
square feet of gross floor area in the building. Loading and unloading areas
shall be located in the rear of the building.
§ 325-41. Location requirements.
Use Parking Spaces
Marina or boat yard use 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per slip, or 1 space per dry
storage capacity, whichever is
greater, and 1 per each 2 moorings
assigned to the marina or boat
yard
Industrial, Utility and Other
Uses
Light industry and manufacturing 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 2,500 square feet of
floor area
Warehousing and wholesale trade 1 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of
floor area
Other industrial 1.3 per employee maximum shift,
plus 1 per 200 square feet of office
space
Parking company-owned vehicles. In addition to the requirements
outlined above, one space will be required for each company-owned
vehicle kept on the premises, including trailers and heavy machinery.
The space provided must be of an adequate size to accommodate the
equipment utilizing the space.
B.
Parking and loading areas and garages shall be provided on the same
lot as the use they are required to serve, except as provided in
§ 325-44A.
A.
No parking area/space shall be used for disposal containers
(dumpsters). An additional area, outside, but adjacent to the parking
area, shall be required for each disposal container.
B.
§ 325-39 HARWICH CODE § 325-42
1:172
§ 325-42. Design requirements. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Planning Board through site
plan review approval, all parking and loading areas shall be subject to the
design requirements of this section.
A parking area or loading area shall be designed to provide for
adequate backing and turning movements for the type of vehicle being
maneuvered and to eliminate the need to back a vehicle out onto any
public or private street or way, except that single-family residences
and single-family residences with accessory apartments which front on
other than a state-maintained and/or designated roadway may provide
for backing out of vehicles.
A.
The area and access driveways thereto shall be graded and drained so
as to dispose of on site all surface water accumulation on the site.
B.
A substantial bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber or a concrete
curb or berm or curb which is backfilled shall be placed at the edge
of paved parking areas, except driveways, in order to protect abutting
structures, properties and sidewalks.
C.
Any fixture used to illuminate a parking area shall be so arranged as
to direct light away from the street and away from adjoining properties
used for residential purposes.
D.
There shall be no commercial repair of motor vehicles within the
required parking or loading area.
E.
There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment or display of
merchandise within the required parking or loading area. In addition,
there shall be no placement of outdoor seating within the required
parking or loading area.
F.
For any multifamily, commercial or industrial parcel of land, there shall
be no more than two driveways per roadway frontage.
G.
Any entrance or exit driveway for a single- or two-family residential use
shall not exceed 24 feet in width at its intersection with the front lot
line. For any multifamily, commercial or industrial use, any entrance
or exit driveway shall not exceed 50 feet in width when measured in
the aforesaid manner. Should a driveway for a multifamily, commercial
or industrial use require a width in excess of 50 feet, justification
for this increase in width shall be provided by the applicant to the
Planning Board for review, approval or denial as part of the site plan
review process. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in any case where state
regulations or requirements mandate a different driveway width or
location, the provision of said regulations or requirements shall govern
and supersede this provision. The radius of the access drive at the
road shall be 25 feet. The radius of any access road shall not extend
beyond the property line of the property which it serves. The minimum
distance between the side lines of such drives and the side lines of
H.
§ 325-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-42
1:173
any intersecting street and any other street access drive, measured
between where such street and driveway side lines intersect the
adjacent street line, shall be a follows:21
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Types of Drive
From
Intersecting
Streets
From
Other
Drives
From Side
Lot Line
Drives serving a dwelling 50 20 —
Drives serving a hotel or
motel
50 50 —
Drives serving other
permitted principal
structures/uses in a
Residential district 50 50 10
Commercial district 50 50 10
Industrial district 50 50 10
No parking spaces shall be established in the right-of-way of any road
or way, except that the Town of Harwich may establish on-street
parking spaces in accordance with the applicable provisions of state
law.
I.
Parking and loading areas shall be graded, surfaced with a nondusting
material, drained and suitably maintained to the extent necessary to
avoid the nuisance of dust or erosion. The parking lot shall be designed
such that no surface water is allowed to flow onto streets or adjoining
property. Access drives serving unpaved parking areas shall be
constructed with a paved apron meeting the minimum construction
requirements described below. Said apron shall extend from the paved
road edge to the street line. Paved or unpaved parking areas containing
more than five spaces shall conform to construction requirements as
follows:
(1) Base: two feet of frost-free material.
Subbase: four inches of gravel as the subbase plus two inches of
processed stone.
(2)
Pavement: a minimum depth of asphalt composed of a binder
course of 1 1/2 inches plus a one-inch top course after rolling or
compacting.
(3)
For all parking areas of five or more parking spaces, drainage
systems serving the parking and vehicular access areas shall be
(4)
J.
21.Editor's Note: This subsection was amended 2-5-2009 STM by Art. 18.
§ 325-42 HARWICH CODE § 325-42
1:174
designed in accordance with the Rational Method, or equivalent,
based on a twenty-five-year storm frequency.
Calculations shall be made by using topographic maps for the
entire drainage area, including those areas outside the site plan
area. Copies of all drainage calculations shall be submitted with
the site plans. Percolation tests shall be required at all proposed
drainage locations (leaching areas). Subsurface leaching systems
shall be utilized meeting the current Planning Board Subdivision
Rules and Regulations standards.22
(5)
In addition, all paved parking areas containing more than five
spaces shall utilize a system of absorbent pillows or similar device
to absorb vehicle fluids in runoff. This system will be maintained
twice a year, with written proof of maintenance provided to the
Planning Board.
(6)
Parking areas for passenger vehicles shall typically be laid out to meet
the following design criteria:
Angle
Space Width
(in feet)
Space
Length
(perpendicular
to aisle)
Aisle
Width
(feet)
Total
Width
(feet)
45° 9 17.5 15 50
60° 9 19 18 56
90° 9 20 24 64
The above chart is for parking areas with double-loaded aisles.
For single-loaded aisles, subtract the space length from the total
width. Aisle widths for 45° and 60° are for one-way directional flow
patterns.
(1)
The Board, at its discretion, may allow the use of a maximum twofoot
overhang strip as part of the space length. This strip shall be
solely designated for the purpose of vehicular parking and shall not
be part of any walkway, planting area or front or side yard indicated
in § 325-41B.
(2)
K.
Parking and loading zone setbacks for all uses except single-family, twofamily
and single-family with accessory apartment shall be as follows.
For commercial structures, wheel stops for parking spaces
perpendicular to or at an angle to a structure shall be located so as to
provide a clear area of three feet between the end of a vehicle parked
in the space and the nearest structure.
L.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-42
1:175
§ 325-43. Landscape requirements.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Planning Board on special permit under
the site plan provision of this bylaw, all parking areas containing over five
spaces, including automobile service and drive-in establishments, shall be
either contained within structures or subject to the following:
Parking Setbacks1
(feet)
Zone Street Side Line Rear
RR, RM, RL, RH-1, RH-2 and
RH-3
20 10 10
CV, CH-1 and CH-2 20 10 10
IL 15 5 5
MRL and MRL-1 50 50 50
Notes:
1 No parking area containing more than four spaces or loading area
shall be located within a required front yard, except that those
buildings utilizing the provisions of § 325-51L (Village Commercial
Overlay District) shall not locate any parking within the front yard.
The parking area shall be effectively screened on each side which
adjoins or faces the side or rear lot line of a lot situated in any
residential district or any lot used for residential purposes. The
screening shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than three
feet nor more than six feet in height or a planting screen which shall
be composed of shrubs which are planted in such a manner so as
to effectively screen the parking area from view of the adjoining
residential lot or lots. Such shrubs shall be evergreen varieties which
are no less than three feet in height upon planting. Either type of
screening shall be at least two feet from a non-street line and 15 feet
from any street lot line and all maintained in good condition. All planted
materials shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to create an
obstruction to motorists' vision of traffic and pedestrians.
A.
Parking areas containing more than five spaces shall include or be
bordered within five feet of the spaces by at least one tree of threeinch
caliper, measured six inches off the ground, for each five spaces.
Trees within a parking area shall be in curb- or berm-protected plots of
at least 90 square feet per tree. No such protective plot shall be paved
with any impervious material.
B.
At least 10% of the interior area of any parking area containing 20 or
more parking spaces shall consist of landscaped islands which shall be
composed of shrubs and trees and other landscaping materials. The
interior area of a parking area shall be derived by computing the area
C.
§ 325-42 HARWICH CODE § 325-43
1:176
§ 325-44. Special cases.
within the general perimeter of contiguous area containing parking
spaces, maneuvering areas behind the spaces and landscaping areas
within such perimeter, except that required parking setback areas and
required buffers shall not be included in the interior area computation.
Parking space may be provided on lots separate from a nonresidential
use they are to serve, and be credited to such use in meeting the
requirements of this bylaw, provided that they are legally available,
are not designated as off-site parking for another use, and are within
300 feet of the principal structure, measured within street rights-ofway.
Proof of legal availability shall be required, and failure to retain
the availability of such parking spaces for the need they are required
to serve shall be sufficient cause to deny or revoke a special permit
until such spaces are restored or replaced. When such parking spaces
are part of Town-owned and Town-operated parking lots, the Planning
Board shall determine availability based on Town need and the
applicant shall not be required to furnish proof of such availability.
A.
The number of parking spaces required for a multiple dwelling may,
by special permit, be reduced to not less than one per family for the
duration of any special occupancy upon Planning Board determination
that sufficient area is available and will be retained to provide such
otherwise required spaces.
B.
No structure subject to site plan approval may be elevated to allow
parking in the structure or open parking beneath the structure unless
for each parking space so provided the site coverage is reduced by a
minimum of 325 square feet.
C.
In certain cases the Planning Board may allow the applicant to
delineate a number of parking spaces as a reserve area that is available
to be constructed in the future as specified by the Planning Board. It
is the responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation showing
that the proposed use of the property does not require the number of
spaces listed under § 325-39A. Plans shall incorporate and detail all
design aspects of the reserve parking area. As it is the intent of this
special delineation to preserve as much of the site's natural state as
possible, the proposed reserve area shall be dedicated for parking only.
In any case in which the Board permits an applicant to create a reserve
parking area, in lieu of development of the required parking area, then
the Board shall require, as a condition of approval, that the resulting
site plan special permit shall be reviewed on a periodic basis in order
to monitor the adequacy of the constructed parking and the need to
construct all or a portion of the reserve area. After such review, if
appropriate, the Board may require that all or a portion of the reserve
area be actually constructed.
D.
§ 325-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-44
1:177

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 325-45. Building Official.
The Building Official is hereby appointed and authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 325-46. Other approvals required.
§ 325-47. Notice of violation.
The Building Official shall serve, by certified mail, a notice of violation on
any person responsible for any violation of this bylaw, and such notice shall
direct the immediate discontinuance of the unlawful action, use or condition
and the abatement of the violation. Any owner who has been served with a
notice and ceases any work or other activity shall not leave any structure
Where authorization of a use of land or of a structure is required by a
board, a copy of such written authorization shall be sent by the clerk
of the board to the Building Official within 22 days of a granting of the
approval by the board and shall be received by the Building Official
prior to issuance of a permit. In addition, the Building Official, in such
case, shall not issue a permit until the applicant submits an affidavit
from the Barnstable County Registrar of Deeds that the authorization
of the board is recorded, if such recording is required by law. Where
approval under the Subdivision Control Law23 by the Planning Board
is required and/or Conservation Commission and the State Department
of Public Works, no permit shall be issued by the Building Official until
these requirements also are met in writing and any other necessary
permits or licenses are obtained. Within 10 days of the completion of all
these actions, the Building Official shall act upon the application.
A.
The rights authorized by a variance must be exercised within one year
of the date of grant of such variance or said rights shall lapse. Rights
authorized by a special permit must be exercised within two years of
the date of grant thereof. Said time periods shall not include the period
of time during which any appeal of a decision is being processed to final
judgment in any court. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, any
subsequent amendment of this Zoning Bylaw shall apply to construction
or use authorized by a special permit, unless the construction or use
is commenced within a period of not more than six months after the
issuance of the permit, exclusive of any time periods involved in
appealing the grant of a permit through the courts, and in cases
involving construction after a bona fide start, unless said construction
is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously
as is reasonable under the applicable circumstances.
B.
23.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 325-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-47
1:179
or lot in such a condition as to be a hazard or menace to the public safety,
health, morals or general welfare.
§ 325-48. Violations and penalties.
§ 325-49. Board of Appeals.
There is hereby created a Board of Appeals of five members and five
associate members. Members in office at the effective date of this bylaw
shall continue in office. Hereafter, as terms expire or vacancies occur, the
Board of Selectmen shall make appointments pursuant to the Zoning Act.24
The Board shall have those powers and duties granted under the Zoning
Act, by this bylaw and all other pertinent acts of the commonwealth. The
Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings pursuant to the Zoning
Act. The Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to establish, from time to
time, by regulation, the filing fee to be charged for filing a petition or appeal
with the Board.
§ 325-50. Petitions, applications and appeals. [Amended 5-4-2010
STM by Art. 9]
All petitions, applications and appeals to the Board of Appeals shall be made
in accordance with the filing policy requirements in effect at the time of the
application on forms provided by the Board of Appeals and shall be filed
together with copies of all information previously submitted to the Building
Inspector with or in the original application for a building permit, if any,
and with the required number of copies of a site plan, as instructed on the
application when a site plan is required under Article X, § 325-55, of this
bylaw. In addition, one copy of the application material and site plan, if any,
shall be submitted to the Planning Board at the time of submission to the
Any person who, after receipt of the notice above provided, continues
in violation or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this bylaw
may be prosecuted in a criminal action brought by the Building Official
on behalf of the Town and, upon conviction, be fined a sum of $150 for
each offense. Each day, or portion of a day, that any violation is allowed
to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
In addition to the enforcement procedures set forth in Subsection A
above, the Building Official may enforce the provisions of this bylaw
by the noncriminal complaint procedures as established by MGL c.
40, § 21D. The penalty for each offense shall be $150 as provided in
Subsection A, and each day, or portion of a day, that any violation is
allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to limit the Building
Official from enforcing this bylaw through an appropriate civil action
seeking injunctive as well as other relief, commenced in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
C.
24.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 325-47 HARWICH CODE § 325-50
1:180
Board of Appeals. The Planning Board shall render an advisory opinion on
the application to the Board of Appeals, and if no such advisory opinion
is submitted by the Planning Board prior to the Board of Appeals hearing
on the application, the Board of Appeals may act without such advisory
opinion.
§ 325-51. Special permits. [Amended 5-4-2010 STM by Art. 8;
5-3-2011 STM by Art. 24]
The Board of Appeals shall have authority to hear and decide applications
for all changes, alterations, or extensions of a nonconforming structure or
use that require a special permit and for certification of continuance of
existing dwellings under § 325-51P. The Planning Board shall have authority
to hear and decide all other applications for special permits. Special permits
shall only be issued following public hearings held within 65 days after
filing of an application with the Board of Appeals or the Planning, Board,
a copy of which shall forthwith be given to the Clerk by the applicant, and
all notices and other requirements provided by the Zoning Act shall govern
said hearing.
Conditions of approval.
The Board of Appeals or Planning Board shall not approve any
application for a special permit, except a special permit for a
site plan, unless it finds that in its judgment all of the following
conditions are met:
The use as developed will not adversely affect the
neighborhood.
(a)
The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use,
structure or condition.
(b)
There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or
pedestrians.
(c)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
proper operation of the proposed use. This includes the
provision of appropriate sewage treatment facilities which
provide for denitrification, when the permit granting authority
deems such facilities necessary for protection of drinking
water supply wells, ponds or saltwater embayments.
(d)
(1)
The permit granting authority may require the applicant to submit
professionally prepared documentation of the environmental,
traffic or other impacts of a particular project or project element in
order to determine compliance with these general conditions.
(2)
A.
In approving a special permit, except a special permit for a site plan,
the Board of Appeals or Planning Board may attach such conditions
and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the public and the
neighborhood, such as but not limited to the following:
B.
§ 325-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:181
Modification of the exterior features or appearances of the
structure or structures.
(1)
Limitation of size, number of occupants, method or time of
operation, or extent of facilities.
(2)
Regulation of number, design, and location of access drives or
other traffic features.
(3)
Requirement of off-street parking or other special features beyond
the minimum required by this or other applicable bylaws.
(4)
Limitation of the total projected volume of sewage or nitrate
discharge from the project based on standard sewage flow
projection or nitrate loading calculations to be provided by the
applicant when required by the permit granting authority. Such
calculations must be reviewed and approved by the Harwich Town
Engineer prior to their acceptance as facts by the permit granting
authority.
(5)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, the conditions
set forth therein shall not apply to applications for special permits
in the Drinking Water Resource Protection Districts unless a special
permit is required for the intended use in the underlying zoning district.
In granting a special permit for a use requiring such permit in the
Drinking Water Resource Protection District, the Planning Board
shall make the following findings:
Adequate provision has been made to safely and adequately
store, handle and dispose of all toxic or hazardous materials,
as well as to protect said materials from vandalism, corrosion,
leakage and spills.
(a)
Any proposed wastewater treatment or disposal system must
be submitted for approval by responsible state and local health
agencies as a condition precedent to construction.
(b)
All anticipated runoff from impervious surfaces will, whenever
possible, be diverted to areas covered with vegetation.
(c)
In cases where part of a site is located outside the Drinking
Water Resource Protection District, maximum possible use of
the area outside the district will be made for disposal of toxic
or hazardous materials and sewage.
(d)
All systems designed and intended to minimize or eliminate the
threat of pollution to the groundwater resource are adequate
in terms of design and proposed construction to provide
reasonable protection against such pollution and, in the event
said systems should fail, corrective measures and procedures
are available to warrant the conclusion that no unreasonable
threat of pollution to groundwater resources will be created.
(e)
(1)
C.
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:182
In making this required finding, the special permit granting
authority shall require submission by the applicant of a written
determination by the Board of Health of the Town of Harwich
that all such systems called for or required are designed and
intended to meet all applicable design and construction
standards for such facilities and will limit to five parts per
million the total concentration of nitrate nitrogen discharged
to the groundwater on the site.
To assist in making the required findings, the Board shall require,
by regulation, an hydrogeologic impact statement which addresses
the specific issues herein set forth, and the Board shall, by
regulation, establish a format for such hydrogeologic impact
statement. Upon receipt of an application for a special permit
under this section, the Building Official or the applicant at the
direction of the Building Official will provide to the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Town Engineer, Water
Department, and such other affected Town agencies as the Building
Official shall determine a complete copy of the application and
accompanying documents for review and such comment and advice
to the Board as the affected departments should deem appropriate.
(2)
Special permit to construct multifamily dwellings, hotels or motels.
The Planning Board, in acting upon an application for special
permit to construct multifamily dwellings, hotels or motels, shall
have the authority, pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9, to include in
the grant of permission authorization to increase the permissible
density of population or intensity of a particular use in a proposed
development, provided that the petitioner or applicant shall, as a
condition for the grant of authority to increase permissible density,
provide certain open space or some or all of the amenities hereafter
listed, but the Board shall not have the authority to increase the
density of population or intensity of uses beyond the maximums
hereafter specified.
Amenity
Maximum Density
Increase
Swimming pool 8%
Tennis courts 4%
Golf course 16%
Community building or recreation
building
2%
(1)
For the purpose of ensuring that an applicant or petitioner
constructs the proposed amenities in accordance with the plans
and specifications submitted to the Planning Board, the Planning
Board shall require, as a condition to the granting of the permit,
that the applicant or petitioner execute a covenant on such
(2)
D.
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:183
reasonable terms and conditions as the Planning Board may specify
and wherein the petitioner or applicant shall agree to construct the
amenities as proposed in accordance with a timetable approved by
the Planning Board, and the Planning Board may require that the
amenity or amenities, once constructed, shall be under the control
or jurisdiction of a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of
which is the maintenance and management of said amenities, or
that control of said amenities be conveyed to a corporation or trust
owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or residential units
within the development. The covenant required hereunder shall
be recorded at the Barnstable County Registry of Deeds before
any work authorized by the special permit is begun, and no lot,
dwelling or multifamily dwelling unit shall be conveyed (except
as provided in MGL c. 41, § 81U, Clause 2) until said covenant
has been released in whole or as it relates to the portion of the
premises to be conveyed by duly executed instrument or release by
the Planning Board.
Special permits for open space residential development. Special
permits for open space residential development may be granted upon
a determination by the Planning Board that the plan is preferable
to a conventional residential subdivision and that it conforms to the
requirements of this section and other applicable provisions of this
bylaw.
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt and may
from time to time amend rules and regulations consistent with
the provisions of this bylaw and shall file the same with the Town
Clerk. Such rules and regulations shall address, at the minimum,
procedures and submission requirements for open space
residential development applications.
(1)
Density/number of dwelling units.
The total number of dwelling units permitted in an open space
residential development shall not exceed that which would
be permitted under a conventional subdivision that complies
with the Harwich Zoning Bylaw and Planning Board Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land25 and other
applicable laws of the Town, County of Barnstable, or
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, unless said total is
increased in accordance with the provisions of Subsection E(8)
hereunder which sets forth opportunities for density increases.
(a)
The exact number of dwelling units shall be determined by
the Planning Board following its review of a preliminary
subdivision plan depicting compliance with the aforesaid laws.
Such plan may be submitted prior to the formal submission of
(b)
(2)
E.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:184
an application or together with all other materials submitted
with a formal application for a special permit.
Criteria for special permit decision.
Findings. The Planning Board may approve a special permit
for an open space residential development upon finding that it
complies with the requirements of this bylaw and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Subsection E(1) above and
that it is superior in design to a conventional subdivision with
regard to protection of natural features and scenic resources
on the site.
In making its finding on design, the Planning Board shall
consider the following criteria:
Open space as required by this bylaw has been
provided and generally conforms to the design
requirements in Subsection E(7) below.
[a]
Approximate building sites have been identified and
none are located closer than 100 feet to wetlands or
water bodies.
[b]
Proposed streets have been aligned to provide
vehicular access to each house in a reasonable and
economical manner. Lots and streets have been
located to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on open
space areas and to provide views of and access to the
open space for most, if not all, of the home sites.
[c]
All lots meet the applicable dimensional requirements
of Subsection D(4) below.
[d]
[1]
The Planning Board's findings, including the basis of such
findings, shall be stated in the written decision of
approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application
for special permit and shall require a two-thirds vote for
approval.
[2]
(a)
Conditions. The Planning Board may impose conditions in its
decision as necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes
of this bylaw. Approval of an open space residential
development shall be conditioned upon definitive subdivision
approval and shall be conditioned to provide that no further
division of land which increases the number of lots or results
in an alteration to the area to be set aside as open space
may occur without a modification of the special permit. Any
alteration of lot lines or layout of ways shall require
modification of the special permit issued by the Planning Board
and shall be in compliance with the governing provisions of
this bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
(b)
(3)
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:185
Standards and dimensional requirements.
Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be 12,000 square
feet.
(a)
Minimum frontage. The minimum frontage shall be 50 feet for
lots fronting on any proposed roadway within the development.
Lots which will utilize existing frontage shall have a minimum
frontage of 100 feet. Lots may have a minimum of 25 feet of
frontage on any roadway within the development where the
building site is to be generally behind another building site
relative to the same road frontage or at least 75 feet from the
front lot line.
(b)
Lot shape. All building lots must be designed to contain within
them a circle with a diameter of 50 feet with said circle being
tangent to the front lot line, provided that in cases where the
frontage will be less than 50 feet, the fifty-foot circle must
fit within the boundaries of the proposed building site on the
same lot.
(c)
Setbacks. The Planning Board may reduce by up to 1/2 the
setbacks listed in Table 2, Area Regulations, of this bylaw,
if the Board finds that such reduction will result in better
overall design and improved protection of natural and scenic
resources and will otherwise comply with this bylaw.
Notwithstanding this provision or the requirements of the
Zoning Bylaw, every dwelling fronting on a proposed roadway
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the roadway rightof-
way and a minimum of 50 feet from the outer perimeter of
the entire open space residential development site. This fiftyfoot
setback shall be maintained in a naturally vegetated state
to screen and buffer the development and may be included
within the open space. This fifty-foot setback may be
eliminated where the proposed development abuts existing
protected open space.
(d)
(4)
Permissible uses.
Purposes. Open space shall be used solely for noncommercial
recreation, conservation, or commercial or noncommercial
agriculture. Proposed use of the open space area(s) shall be
specified in the application. The Planning Board shall have
the authority to specify what uses will be allowed in the open
space, what uses will occur in what areas of the open space,
and how much of the open space shall remain undisturbed.
(a)
Recreation areas. Where appropriate to the topography and
natural features of the site, the Planning Board may require
that at least 10% of the open space or two acres (whichever
is less) shall be of a shape, slope, location and condition to
(b)
(5)
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:186
provide an informal field for group recreation or community
gardens for the residents of the subdivision.
Leaching facilities. Subject to the approval of the Board of
Health and as otherwise required by law, the Planning Board
may permit a portion of the open space to be used for
components of sewage disposal systems serving the
subdivision, where the Planning Board finds that such use
will not be detrimental to the character, quality, or use of
the open space, wetlands or water bodies, and enhances the
site design, consistent with these regulations. In permitting
such use of the open space area, the Planning Board shall
find, based on the report of the Board of Health, that the
use of open space for sewage disposal system components
shall not result in more building lots than achievable under
a conventional subdivision. The Planning Board shall require
adequate legal safeguards and covenants that such facilities
shall be adequately maintained by the lot owners within the
development.
(c)
Accessory structures. Up to 10% of the open space may be set
aside and designated to allow for the construction of structures
and facilities accessory to the proposed use of the open space,
including parking and paved pathways. With this exception, no
other impervious areas may be included within the open space.
(d)
Ownership of open space.
Options. At the developer's option and subject to approval by
the Planning Board, all areas to be protected as permanent
open space shall be:
Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody
and control of the Conservation Commission and be
accepted by it for a park or open space use; land conveyed
to the Town will be open for public use;
[1]
Conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal
purpose of which is the conservation or preservation of
open space, with a conservation restriction as specified
in Subsection E(6)(b) below; such organization shall be
acceptable to the Board as a bona fide conservation
organization; or
[2]
Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned
by the owners of lots or residential units within the
development (i.e., "homeowners' association") and placed
under conservation restriction. The documents which form
said association are subject to approval by the Planning
Board. If such a corporation or trust is utilized, as
indicated herein, ownership thereof shall pass with
conveyance of the lots or residential units. The developer
[3]
(a)
(6)
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:187
is responsible for the maintenance of the open space and
other facilities to be held in common until such time as
the homeowners' association is capable of assuming such
responsibility. Thereafter, the members of the association
shall share the cost of maintaining the open space. The
Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide
documentation that the homeowners' association is an
automatic (mandatory) association that has been
established prior to the conveyance of any lots within the
subdivision.
Permanent restriction. In any case where open space is not
conveyed to the Town, a permanent conservation or
agricultural preservation restriction approved by the Board
of Selectmen and enforceable by the Town, conforming to
the standards of the Massachusetts Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs, Division of Conservation Services, shall
be recorded to ensure that such land shall be kept in an
open or natural state and not be built for residential use or
developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways
except as permitted by this bylaw and approved by the
Planning Board. Restrictions shall provide for periodic
inspection of the open space by the Town. Such restriction
shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to endorsement
of the definitive subdivision plan and covenant for the project
and recorded at the Registry of Deeds/Land Court prior to
release of the covenant or performance guarantee for any lot.
[Amended 5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
(b)
Encumbrances. All areas to be set aside as open space shall
be conveyed free of any mortgage interest, security interest,
liens or other encumbrances. Certification of said condition by
a qualified title examiner shall be provided to the Planning
Board at the time of conveyance.
(c)
Maintenance of open space. Removal of underbrush in
designated open space shall be permitted only when a plan
for such activity is approved by the Planning Board as part of
approval of a special permit to create an open space residential
development.
(d)
Monumentation. The Planning Board may require placement of
surveyed bounds sufficient to identify the location of the open
space.
(e)
Design requirements. The location of open space provided through
this bylaw shall be substantially consistent with the policies
contained in the local Comprehensive Plan and the Open Space
and Recreation Plan of the Town (where available). The following
design requirements shall apply to open space and lots provided
through this bylaw:
(7)
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:188
Open space shall be planned as large, wide, contiguous areas
whenever possible. Long, thin strips or narrow areas of open
space (less than 100 feet wide) shall occur only when
necessary for access, as vegetated buffers along wetlands or
the perimeter of the site, or as connections between open
space areas.
(a)
Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and
cultural environments such as stream valleys, wetland buffers,
unfragmented forestland and significant trees, wildlife habitat,
open fields, scenic views, trails, and archaeological sites and
to avoid development in hazardous areas such as floodplains
and steep slopes. The development plan shall take advantage
of the natural topography of the parcel and cuts and fills shall
be minimized.
(b)
Open space may be in more than one parcel, provided that
the size, shape and location of such parcels are suitable for
the designated uses. Where feasible, these parcels shall be
linked by trails. Said trails shall be shown on the open space
residential definitive plan.
(c)
Where the proposed development abuts or includes a body
of water or a wetland, these areas and the one-hundred-foot
buffer to such areas shall be incorporated into the open space.
Where appropriate, reasonable access shall be provided to
shorelines.
(d)
The maximum number of house lots compatible with good
design shall abut the open space and all house lots shall have
reasonable physical and visual access to the open space
through internal roads, sidewalks or paths. An exception may
be made for resource areas vulnerable to trampling or other
disturbance.
(e)
Open space shall be provided with adequate access, by a strip
of land at least 20 feet wide and suitable for a footpath, from
one or more streets in the development.
(f)
Development along existing scenic roads and creation of new
driveway openings on existing roadways shall be minimized.
(g)
Where a proposed development abuts land held for
conservation purposes, the development shall be configured to
minimize adverse impacts to abutting conservation land. Trail
connections should be provided where appropriate.
(h)
Optional incentive provisions.
Reduction of roadway standards. The Planning Board may
reduce applicable subdivision road construction standards
(roadway width, center line radii, curbing, cul-de-sac radius,
(a)
(8)
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:189
drainage requirements, etc.) in exchange for the provision of
greater than 50% open space within the open space residential
development where, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
such reductions will result in enhanced overall site design and
provide adequate and safe access for the development.
Enforcement. The Building Official shall enforce the provisions of
this Subsection E.
(9)
The Planning Board, in granting a special permit for cluster
development, shall have the authority, pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9
and MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, to require that open space be
conveyed to the Town or a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose
of which is the conservation of open space, or a corporation or trust
owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or residential units within
the development. If such a corporation or trust is utilized, ownership
thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units.
In any case, where the open space is not conveyed to the Town, a
restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded providing that
such land be kept in an open or natural state, not to be built upon or
developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways.
F.
In a cluster development, the total number of dwelling units shall
not exceed the number of units which could be developed under a
conventional grid-type subdivision.
The maximum number of dwellings per development shall equal the
applicable land area divided by the minimum lot area requirements
for a conventional grid-type subdivision in that district or districts.
(1)
Applicable land area shall be determined by a registered land
surveyor and equal the total area encompassed by the development
plan minus all marsh or wetland and minus land for road
construction or land otherwise prohibited from development by
local bylaw or other regulations.
(2)
When the cluster development includes more than one ownership
and/or lies in more than one district, the number of units allowed
shall be calculated as above for each zoning district and summed
to give an overall total, which may be located on the plan without
respect to allowable subtotals by district or ownership.
(3)
G.
Single-family dwelling with accessory apartment. [Amended 5-7-2013
STM by Art. 12]
Purpose. The intent of permitting accessory apartments is to:
Increase the number of small dwelling units available for rent
in Town;
(a)
(b) Increase the range of choice of housing accommodations;
(1)
H.
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:190
Encourage greater diversity of population with particular
attention to young adults and senior citizens; and
(c)
Encourage a more economic and energy-efficient use of the
Town's housing supply while maintaining the appearance and
character of the Town's single-family neighborhoods.
(d)
Definitions.
OWNER — One or more individuals holding title to the property.
(2)
Criteria for special permit approval. Special permits for singlefamily
dwellings with an accessory apartment, either attached or
detached, may be granted upon determination by the Planning
Board that the following criteria have been met:
Only one accessory apartment is permitted for each principal
dwelling unit.
(a)
The accessory apartment may not be held in separate
ownership from the principal use.
(b)
Only one of the principal dwelling or accessory apartment may
be rented at any given time.
(c)
The accessory apartment shall have a net floor area not
exceeding 1/2 of the net floor area of the principal dwelling
unit and not more than 900 square feet.
(d)
The accessory apartment shall have not more than two
bedrooms.
(e)
At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for the
accessory dwelling unit.
(f)
The minimum lot area required for a parcel to be eligible for
a special permit to allow an accessory apartment shall not
be less than 15,000 square feet if the parcel is situated in a
RH-1, CV, CH-1, MRL or MRL-1 District; 20,000 square feet if
situated in a RL, RM or RR District; and 40,000 square feet if
situated in a Water Resource (WR) Overlay District.
(g)
The accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the
degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the property
remains that of a single-family property with matching
materials, colors, window styles and roof design for one
structure, if the apartment is attached, or for both structures,
if the apartment is detached.
(h)
The principal dwelling unit and accessory apartment shall
meet all wastewater treatment requirements for the combined
number of bedrooms.
(i)
(3)
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:191
The proposed use shall not create traffic hazards or volume
greater than the capacity of the streets affected.
(j)
The proposed use shall not exceed the building or site
coverage for the zoning district.
(k)
If an addition is to be built for the proposed use, the addition
shall be set back from front, side and rear lot lines the distance
required in the zoning district for new construction.
(l)
The applicant shall record with the Registry of Deeds for
Barnstable County a certified copy of the special permit decision
and the special permit shall lapse if it is not so recorded and if it is
not duly exercised within two years as provided for under MGL c.
40A, § 9.
(4)
Transfer of ownership. The provisions of the special permit may be
transferred with ownership of the property provided the provisions
of this section and all other provisions of the Zoning Code of
the Town of Harwich and the State Building Code are met and
the Planning Department has approved a transfer for the special
permit. The new owner also may request a Planning Board
certification for the accessory apartment. To obtain such
certification, the owner shall submit a written request with a
statement that the conditions at the time of the original special
permit approval remain unchanged and with a certification of
ownership. The Planning Board certification shall be recorded at
the Registry of Deeds.
(5)
A final determination that the owner failed to comply with these
provisions or the termination of occupancy by the owner of the
subject property shall be evidence that the rights and benefits
conferred under the special permit were abandoned or otherwise
surrendered and discontinued by the owner and all such rights
and benefits shall lapse and the elements that make the accessory
apartment a separate dwelling unit shall be removed from the
property within 90 days of said final determination, with the owner
to comply with all requirements of the State Building Code and
Town Zoning in removing elements determined to be unpermitted.
(6)
I. (Reserved)26
Granting of a special permit for a dwelling with an accessory apartment
shall be conditioned upon the owner maintaining occupancy of one
of the units. Prior to the issuance of the special permit, a certificate
in the form of a notarized affidavit to verify that the owner is or
shall be in residence in one of the units shall be submitted to the
special permit granting authority and, thereafter, every two years such
notarized affidavit shall be submitted to the Building Inspector by
I.1.
26.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, regarding the intent of permitting accessory
apartments, was repealed 5-7-2013 STM by Art. 12. See now Subsection H(1).
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:192
January 31. Failure to comply with these provisions or termination of
occupancy by the owner shall result in the special permit becoming
null and void and within 12 months thereafter one kitchen unit shall be
removed and the property returned to a single-family dwelling.
Granting of a special permit for a personal wireless service facility
shall be pursuant to the requirements of Article XI, Personal Wireless
Service Facilities, in addition to all other special permit requirements
hereunder.
J.
Granting of a special permit for an adult entertainment use shall be
pursuant to the requirements of Article XIII, Adult Entertainment, in
addition to all other special permit requirements hereunder.
K.
Village Commercial Overlay District.
Purpose. The Village Commercial Overlay District enables the
development and redevelopment of Harwich Port's village center
to be in keeping with its historic development patterns, including
the size and spacing of structures and additional open space. The
redevelopment of existing structures will allow them to come into
compliance with current plumbing, electric and building codes, as
well as the latest fire and handicapped access regulations.
(1)
Scope.
Within the Village Commercial District only property that has
frontage on Route 28 (Main Street), Harwich Port, is permitted
to utilize this section. Property located on the south side of
Lower County Road between Ayer Lane and the intersection of
Route 28 and Lower County Road is also permitted to utilize
this section. A contiguous section of property is permitted
for commercial uses and mixed-use development. All property
owners, including the Town of Harwich, are required to locate
the majority of these structures on the portion of this property
facing Route 28 and to locate parking, septic and open space
to the rear of this property. All single uses remain under the
present Town of Harwich Zoning Bylaw. All other property that
does not have frontage on Route 28 in this overlay district is
not affected by this section.
(a)
The dimensional requirements, including building setbacks,
maximum site coverage and heights of these structures, are
outlined in Subsection L(5) of this section.
(b)
This bylaw is intended to be used in conjunction with other
regulations of the Town, including site plan review and other
bylaws designed to encourage appropriate and consistent
patterns of village development.
(c)
Applicants, with the approval of the Board of Health and Water
Quality Management Task Force, are encouraged to utilize new
(d)
(2)
L.
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:193
and improved technologies for septic treatment and rainwater
drainage purposes.
Location. The Village Commercial Overlay District is shown on the
following map: Village Commercial Overlay District, dated June
2001, prepared by the Town of Harwich Planning Department. Only
contiguous sections of property with frontage on Route 28 (Main
Street), Harwich Port, or Lower County Road in Harwich Port as
described in Subsection L(2) are included in this overlay district.
The overlay district is bounded on the north side of Route 28 by
Freeman Street to the east and by the east side of Bank Street to
the west to a depth of 200 feet; also by the west side of Bank Street
to the east and the east side of South Street to the west to a depth
of 200 feet; also by the west side of South Street to the east and
Miles Street to the west to a depth of 200 feet. The overlay district
is bounded on the south of Route 28 by Bay View Road to the east
and by the intersection of Route 28 and Lower County Road to the
west to a depth of 200 feet. In addition, the overlay district includes
the south side of Route 28 bounded by Route 28, Lower County
Road and the irregular line formed by the westernmost property
line of Assessor's Map 13, Parcel W7-10.
(3)
Procedure.
The Planning Board shall serve as the special permit granting
authority for developments within the Village Commercial
Overlay District.
(a)
Prior to the submission of an application for special permit
under this bylaw, the applicant may meet with the Planning
Board at a public meeting for a preapplication conference
to discuss the proposed development in general terms and
establish the plan filing requirements. The Planning Board
shall schedule a meeting for a preapplication conference
following a written request from the applicant, inviting
preliminary comments from the Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, and any other interested officials or agencies.
The purpose of this preapplication conference is to inform
the Planning Board as to the nature of the proposed project.
As such, no formal filings are required for the preapplication
conference. However, the applicant is encouraged to prepare
sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering
drawings to inform the Planning Board of the scale and overall
concept of the proposed project and its relationship to abutting
properties.
(b)
Special permit applications shall comply with and be subject to
the requirements of § 325-55, Site plan approval.
(c)
(4)
(5) Dimensional requirements.
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:194
Lots shall have frontage along Route 28 (Main Street) to utilize
the dimensional requirements of this Subsection L(5). Adjacent
parcels may be included provided that they are under the same
ownership and are also located within the overlay district.
Where possible, lots should be combined by plan or deed prior
to the issuance of the special permit.
(a)
Setback requirements.
Front setback requirements shall be determined at the
time of site plan review based on existing development
patterns and the elements of the proposed project.
[1]
[2] Side lot line setback shall be 10 feet.
[3] Rear lot line setback shall be 20 feet.
(b)
(c) Parking shall be permitted at the side or rear of the property.
(d) Maximum site coverage shall not exceed 80%.
The maximum permitted height for new constructions shall not
exceed 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
(e)
Minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet. [Added
5-5-2015 STM by Art. 427]
(f)
Assessor's Map 13, Parcel W7-10 is included in this overlay
district with the provision that the westernmost property line,
that abuts residential property, must comply with the minimum
of twenty-foot setback and open space, if the property is
redeveloped.
(g)
The Board may waive or modify these dimensional
requirements if it is found that such waiver or modification will
not substantially derogate from the purpose and intent of this
bylaw and that such waiver or modification may be granted
without substantial detriment to the neighborhood or overall
public good.
(h)
Mixed-use development. Special permits for mixed-use development
may be granted upon a determination by the Planning Board that the
following additional criteria have been met:
There shall be no less than 33% of the floor area of the building
or buildings dedicated to a commercial use(s). A commercial use(s)
shall be located at the front of the building, facing the street, and
shall be located on the ground level.
(1)
For each mixed-use development, there shall be a minimum of
5,000 square feet of lot area per residential unit in the Commercial
(2)
M.
27.Editor’s Note: This article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection L(5)(f)
and (g) as Subsection L(5)(g) and (h), respectively.
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:195
Village (C-V) District and a minimum of 10,000 square feet of
lot area per residential unit in all other permitted districts.
Applications for mixed-use development shall also comply with the
Board of Health regulations. [Amended 5-5-2015 STM by Art. 3]
The parking shall comply with the requirements of Article IX, Off-
Street Parking Regulations.
(3)
There shall be an outdoor landscaped public area provided as part
of the landscaping requirement.
(4)
Special permit applications shall comply with the requirements of
§ 325-55, Site plan approval.
(5)
(6) Screening of parking shall comply with the provisions of § 325-43.
Two-family dwelling. Special permits for two-family dwellings may be
granted upon a determination by the Planning Board that the following
additional criteria have been met:
The lot area shall contain a minimum of 40,000 square feet of
contiguous upland in all applicable zoning districts; however, in the
Drinking Water Resource Protection District (WR) the minimum lot
area shall be 60,000 square feet of contiguous upland.
(1)
The floor area for each dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 800
square feet.
(2)
(3) A common roof or a series of roofs shall connect the dwelling units.
(4) There shall be two off-street parking spaces per each unit.
N.
Harwich Center Overlay District.
Purpose. The Harwich Center Overlay District enables the
development and redevelopment of Harwich Center to be in
keeping with its historic development patterns, including the size
and spacing of structures and provision of open space. The
redevelopment of existing structures will encourage them to come
into compliance with current plumbing, electric and building
codes, as well as the latest fire and handicapped access
regulations. Agencies involved with historic preservation will be
encouraged to make recommendations on proposed development
or redevelopment.
(1)
Scope.
Within the Harwich Center Overlay District, only property that
is currently within the Commercial - Village (CV) Zoning
District in Harwich Center is permitted to utilize this section,
with the following two exceptions: property located on the
southeast corner of the intersection of Sisson Road and Parallel
Street just east of Forest Street, currently shown on Assessor's
(a)
(2)
O.
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:196
Map 40 as Parcel Z5, and the parcel located at the southwest
corner of the intersection of Bank Street and Parallel Street,
currently shown on Assessor's Map 41 as Parcel N4, are also
permitted to utilize this section. All property owners, including
the Town of Harwich, are required to locate the majority of
structures on the street frontage portion of the property and
to locate parking, septic and open space to the rear of the
property.
The dimensional requirements, including building setbacks,
maximum site coverage and heights of these structures, are
outlined in Subsection O(5) of this section.
(b)
This bylaw is intended to be used in conjunction with other
regulations of the Town, including site plan review and other
bylaws designed to encourage appropriate and consistent
patterns of village development.
(c)
Applicants, with the approval of the Board of Health, and
other agencies as required are encouraged to utilize new and
improved technologies for septic treatment and stormwater
drainage purposes.
(d)
Location. The Harwich Center Overlay District is shown on the
following map: Harwich Center Overlay District, October 2003,
prepared by the Town of Harwich Planning Department. The
Harwich Center Overlay District is bounded on the south by
Parallel Street from Bank Street to Sisson Road, but including the
parcel on the south side of Parallel Street at Bank Street (also
shown on Harwich Assessor's Map 41 as Parcel N4) and the parcel
on the south side of Parallel Street at Sisson Road (also shown on
Harwich Assessor's Map 40 as Parcel Z5); the district is bounded
on the west by Sisson Road, Route 39 (Main Street) and Route
124 (Pleasant Lake Avenue); the district is bounded on the north
by Old Colony Way to the west boundary line of Parcel C4-B, on
Assessor's Map 41; the district is bound on the east by the west
boundary line of Parcel C4-B, on Assessor's Map 41, and the east
boundary line of the Town of Harwich owned land (Parcel C302 and
C5, on Assessor's Map 41) and Bank Street to the southeast corner
of Parcel N4 at Bank Street.
(3)
Procedure.
The Planning Board shall serve as the special permit granting
authority for developments within the Harwich Center Overlay
District.
(a)
Prior to the submission of an application for special permit
under this bylaw, the applicant may meet with the Planning
Board at a public meeting for a preapplication conference
to discuss the proposed development in general terms and
establish the plan filing requirements. The Planning Board
(b)
(4)
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-51
1:197
shall schedule a meeting for a preapplication conference
following a written request from the applicant, inviting
preliminary comments from the Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, and any other interested officials or agencies.
The purpose of this preapplication conference is to inform
the Planning Board as to the nature of the proposed project.
As such, no formal filings are required for the preapplication
conference. However, the applicant is encouraged to prepare
sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering
drawings to inform the Planning Board of the scale and overall
concept of the proposed project and its relationship to abutting
properties.
Special permit applications shall comply with and be subject to
the requirements of § 325-55, Site plan approval.
(c)
Dimensional requirements.
Setback requirements:
Front setback requirements shall be determined at the
time of site plan review based on existing development
patterns and the elements of the proposed project.
[1]
[2] Side lot line setback shall be 10 feet.
[3] Rear lot line setback shall be 10 feet.
(a)
(b) Parking shall be permitted at the side or rear of the property.
(c) Maximum site coverage shall not exceed 80%.
The maximum permitted height for new constructions shall not
exceed 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
(d)
Minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet. [Added
5-5-2015 STM by Art. 428]
(e)
The Board may waive or modify these dimensional
requirements if it finds that such waiver or modification will
not substantially derogate from the purpose and intent of this
bylaw and that such waiver or modification may be granted
without substantial detriment to the neighborhood or overall
public good.
(f)
(5)
Uses. Uses permitted by right or special permit for the underlaying
zoning district remain. However, the following additional uses are
allowable by special permit in the Harwich Center Overlay District,
provided that all other zoning requirements herein are met:
(a) Inn.
(6)
28.Editor’s Note: This article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
O(5)(e) as Subsection O(5)(f).
§ 325-51 HARWICH CODE § 325-51
1:198
§ 325-52. Variances.
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide applications
for variances from the provisions of the protective bylaws, including the
power to grant a variance authorizing a use or activity not otherwise
permitted in the district in which the land or structure is located, except
that no variance shall be granted to allow food sales with drive-up or drivethrough
facilities. Variances may be granted by the Board only after a public
hearing and only after the Board has made the finding required by the
Zoning Act.29
§ 325-53. Other requirements.
The granting of any appeal by a permit granting authority shall not exempt
the applicant from compliance with any applicable provisions of the Zoning
Bylaw not specifically varied by the Board of Appeals.
§ 325-54. Nonconforming structures and uses.
(b) Bed-and-breakfast.
Certification of dwelling units.
An accessory apartment or any dwellings in existence on the
effective date of this bylaw that were not in compliance with
existing zoning when constructed may be granted a special permit
from the Board of Appeals to allow the use to continue, provided
that any unit (either the main or accessory unit or a number of
units equal to the number not permitted) is deed restricted to
remain affordable as defined by the Department of Housing and
Community Development for a period of 20 years and that the
Board of Appeals finds that the issuance of the special permit will
not be detrimental to the neighborhood. Prior to appearance before
the Board of Appeals, the dwelling in question must be inspected
and found to comply with all building codes and Board of Health
regulations.
(1)
For the purpose of this section, any accessory apartment or
dwelling being brought up to code within 60 days of the discovery
of the violations will remain eligible for a special permit. Once the
violations are corrected, if zoning violations are also present, an
application for a special permit to the Board of Appeals is required,
pursuant to Subsection I above.
(2)
P.
Nonconforming structures.
Alteration or extension of single- or two-family residential
structure.
(1)
A.
29.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 325-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-54
1:199
A preexisting nonconforming single- or two-family residential
structure may be altered or extended by right if the Building
Official determines that it meets the following criteria:
The proposed addition/extension will conform to current
setbacks and coverage for the zoning district in which the
existing structure and addition/extension are located; and
[1]
The nonconformance concerns the size of the lot in
question and/or the frontage of said lot and/or an
encroachment of the existing structure.
[2]
(a)
In addition, a preexisting nonconforming single- or two-family
structure may be altered by right through the addition of a
dormer or dormers if the Building Official determines that it
meets the following criteria:
The proposed dormer or dormers do not allow for any
increase in the square footage of the single- or two-family
dwelling; and
[1]
The nonconformance concerns the size of the lot in
question and/or the frontage of said lot and/or an
encroachment of the existing structure.
[2]
(b)
In making such determination, the Building Official, after
identifying the particular respect or respects in which the
structure or lot does not presently conform to the Zoning
Bylaw, shall consider whether the proposed addition/extension
meets the criteria stated above. If the Building Official
determines that the addition/extension meets the criteria
stated above, the Building Official may allow the addition/
extension or rebuild by right.
(c)
If the Building Official determines that a proposed addition/
extension to a nonconforming single- or two-family residential
structure increases the nonconforming nature of the structure, the
applicant may seek a new determination from the Board of Appeals.
If the Board of Appeals determines that the alteration or extension
will increase the nonconforming nature of the structure, no such
alteration or extension may occur unless the Board of Appeals
issues a special permit for alteration or extension after finding
that the alteration or extension will not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconformity.
An addition/extension that increases the nonconforming nature of
the structure would include:
A structure built in the same footprint to an increased building
height.
(a)
A structure built in the same footprint that does increase the
habitable floor area.
(b)
(2)
§ 325-54 HARWICH CODE § 325-54
1:200
A structure that continues along the same line as an existing
encroachment without increasing that encroachment.
(c)
A single- or two-family residential structure is determined to be
demolished and replaced if the area of the existing structure to be
removed meets the definition of "demolition" in this bylaw.30
(3)
A lawfully preexisting nonconforming single- or two-family
residential structure may, by right, be demolished and replaced
with a new structure on the same site, provided that:
The proposed new construction will conform to current
setbacks and coverage for the zoning district in which the lot
is located; and
(a)
The nonconformance concerns the size of the lot in question
and/or the frontage of said lot.
(b)
(4)
A lawfully preexisting nonconforming single- or two-family
residential structure may, by special permit, be demolished and
replaced with a new structure on the same site, provided that it is
determined by the Board of Appeals that:
The replacement of the structure will not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing structure;
(a)
The replacement of the structure will not cause or contribute
to any undue nuisance, hazard or congestion in the
neighborhood, zoning district or Town;
(b)
The replacement structure will not increase any of the
following existing nonconformances: building coverage, site
coverage, or setback encroachment;
(c)
The replacement structure will reduce at least one of the
following existing nonconformances: building coverage, site
coverage, or setback encroachment; and
(d)
The replacement structure may not increase the habitable
square footage of the structure by more than 25% over the
habitable square footage of the existing structure over a tenyear
period beginning on the date of the issuance of the special
permit by the Board of Appeals.
(e)
(5)
A proposal to demolish and replace a single- or two-family
residential structure which will increase the nonconforming nature
of the structure will require a variance from the Board of Appeals
pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 10.
(6)
(7) Alteration or extension of other structures.
30.Editor's Note: See § 325-2.
§ 325-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-54
1:201
§ 325-55. Site plan approval.
A preexisting nonconforming structure other than a single- or
two-family residential structure may be altered or extended
by right if the Building Official determines that it meets the
following criteria:
The proposed addition/extension will conform to current
setbacks and coverage for the zoning district in which the
existing structure and addition/extension are located; and
[1]
The nonconformance concerns the size of the lot in
question and/or the frontage of said lot and/or an
encroachment of the existing structure.
[2]
(a)
All other nonconforming structures shall require a variance
from the Board of Appeals pursuant to MGL c. 40A , § 10 for
any alteration/extension or reconstruction.
(b)
Nonconforming uses.
Except for single- and two-family dwellings provided for in
Subsection A(5) of this section, a lawfully preexisting structure,
whether conforming or not, used for a lawfully nonconforming
use may, by special permit, be changed, altered, or razed and
replaced with a new structure on the same site, provided that it is
determined by the Board of Appeals that:
The replacement, alteration or change of the structure will not
be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than
the existing structure;
(a)
The replacement, alteration or change of the structure will
not cause or contribute to any undue nuisance, hazard or
congestion in the neighborhood, zoning district or Town; and
(b)
The replacement, altered or changed structure will be used for
the same use or for a conforming use.
(c)
(1)
In no case shall a nonconforming use be changed to another
nonconforming use.
(2)
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, nonconforming uses, actual
use of which has been discontinued for a period of two consecutive
years, shall be conclusively presumed to be abandoned and
thereafter shall not be reestablished, changed (except to a
conforming use), or extended without a variance from the Board of
Appeals.
(3)
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the safety, public
health, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town
of Harwich by providing detailed review of the design and layout of
A.
§ 325-54 HARWICH CODE § 325-55
1:202
certain developments which have a substantial impact upon the
character of the Town and upon traffic, utilities and services therein.
Powers. The Planning Board is hereby designated the special permit
granting authority for site plan approval regarding activities which are
set forth in Subsection C.
B.
Applicability. In addition to any special permit or variance required
under the Table of Use Regulations, the following development
activities shall require a site plan special permit from the Planning
Board: [Amended 5-4-2010 STM by Art. 9]
Any floor area expansion of any structure or expansion of exterior
space, other than parking, serving any of the following: a
commercial, industrial, multifamily, educational or municipal use,
or personal wireless service facility; or the creation of a drive-up or
drive-through window.
(1)
Expansion or reconfiguration of an existing parking lot and/or
driveway(s) in connection with a commercial, industrial,
multifamily, educational or municipal use, or personal wireless
service facility.
(2)
Establishment of any new commercial, industrial, multifamily,
educational, municipal, fast-food/takeout restaurant or personal
wireless service facility.
(3)
(4) Establishment of any new retail use(s) in the Industrial (IL) Zone.
C.
Required submission. The submission of an application and plans for
site plan approval shall conform to the Planning Board Rules and
Regulations Governing Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, as
amended.31 The Planning Board shall consider all applications at a
public hearing according to the procedure set forth in MGL c. 40A.
D.
Conditions of approval.
If the site plan meets the requirements of this bylaw and the
Planning Board Rules and Regulations Governing Subdivision of
Land and Site Plan Review, as amended, the Planning Board shall
approve it. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such approval may
include reasonable conditions to ensure that:
Reasonable measures are implemented to provide for
screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises,
for adjoining premises or from the street, by walls, fences,
plantings or other devices.
(a)
The convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
are enhanced.
(b)
(1)
E.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-55
1:203
§ 325-56. Conversion.
Conversion of any nonconforming motel, hotel, multifamily dwelling, twofamily
dwelling or two or more buildings designated for human habitation
on one lot to a condominium form of ownership, cooperative form of
ownership, time-sharing or similar usage, if such conversion changes,
extends, or alters the existing usage, shall require a permit from the Board
of Appeals to change or extend such nonconforming use in accordance with
§ 325-54 of the Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
Surface water from parking areas and driveways will be
efficiently and safely disposed of by means of a proper
drainage system as specified in the Board's approval.
(c)
However, the Board cannot deny approval of a site plan for a use
which is allowed by right (not by special permit) in the district but
may impose reasonable conditions on the proposed use. The Board
may not impose conditions on the grant of a special permit the
implementation of which would be contrary to any requirement of
this bylaw or require a variance from it or any other applicable
provision of law.
(2)
Waivers. When in the opinion of the Planning Board the requirements of
Subsection C, Applicability, do not substantially change the relationship
of the structure to the site and to abutting properties and structures,
the Planning Board may determine, without a public hearing, that
submission of a site plan for special permit approval is not required.
Upon application consistent with the Planning Board Rules and
Regulations Governing Site Plan Review, such a determination may be
made by an affirmative vote of a majority of the Planning Board present,
and in no event fewer than four members, in a manner consistent with
the Planning Board Rules and Regulations Governing Site Plan Review.
F.
§ 325-55 HARWICH CODE § 325-56
1:204
ARTICLE XI
Personal Wireless Service Facilities
§ 325-57. Purpose and intent.
§ 325-58. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the respective meanings within the context
of regulation of personal wireless service facilities under this bylaw:
ABOVE GROUND LEVEL (AGL) — A measurement of height from the
natural grade of a site to the highest point of a structure.
ANTENNA — The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and
received by a personal wireless service facility.
CAMOUFLAGED — A personal wireless service facility that is disguised,
hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure or placed within an
existing or proposed structure is considered camouflaged.
CARRIER — A company that provides wireless services.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one
carrier (vertical co-location) and/or several mounts on an existing building
or structure by more than one carrier.
CROSS-POLARIZED (OR DUAL-POLARIZED) ANTENNA — A low mount
that has three panels flush mounted or attached very close to the shaft.
ELEVATION — The measurement of height above sea level.
It is the express purpose of this bylaw to minimize the visual and
environmental impacts of personal wireless service facilities. The bylaw
enables and requires the review and approval of all new and expanded
personal wireless service facilities by the Planning Board in keeping
with the Town's existing bylaws and historic development patterns,
including the size and spacing of structures and open spaces. This
bylaw is intended to be used in conjunction with other regulations
adopted by the Town, including historic district regulations, site plan
review, and other local bylaws designed to encourage appropriate land
use, environmental protection, and provision of adequate infrastructure
development in the Town of Harwich.
A.
The regulation of personal wireless service facilities is consistent with
the Town's planning efforts through its local Comprehensive Plan to
further the conservation and preservation of developed, natural, and
undeveloped areas, wildlife, flora, and habitats for endangered species;
the preservation of coastal resources; protection of the natural
resources of the Town; balanced economic growth; the provision of
adequate capital facilities; the coordination of the provision of adequate
capital facilities with the achievement of other goals; and the
preservation of historical, cultural, archaeological, architectural and
recreational values.
B.
§ 325-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-58
1:205
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT (EA) — The document required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a personal wireless service facility
is placed in certain designated areas.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box at
the base of the mount within which are housed batteries and electrical
equipment.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the
base of a personal wireless facility. The fall zone is the area within which
there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or collapsing
material.
FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES — Cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio,
specialized mobile radio, and paging.
GUYED TOWER — A monopole or lattice tower that is anchored to the
ground or other surface by diagonal cables.
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross bracing of structural steel.
LICENSED CARRIER — A company authorized by the FCC to construct and
operate a commercial mobile radio services system.
MONOPOLE — The type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft
of wood, steel or concrete and one or more platforms (or racks) for panel
antennas.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:
OMNIDIRECTIONAL (WHIP) ANTENNA — A thin rod that beams and
receives a signal in all directions.
PANEL ANTENNA — A flat surface antenna usually developed in multiples.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — Facility for the provision
of personal wireless services, including antennas, telecommunication
equipment, communications towers, monopoles and/or other support
structures, including existing and proposed structures having personal
wireless service devices attached thereto as accessory uses, installed and
operated for the purpose of providing personal wireless services.
A. ROOF-MOUNTED — Mounted on the roof of a building.
B. SIDE-MOUNTED — Mounted on the side of a building.
C. GROUND-MOUNTED — Mounted on the ground.
STRUCTURE-MOUNTED — Mounted on a structure other than a
building.
D.
§ 325-58 HARWICH CODE § 325-58
1:206
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — The three types of services regulated
by this bylaw: commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed wireless
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER — An engineer specializing in
electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio
frequencies.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — The emissions from personal
wireless service facilities.
SECURITY BARRIER — A lockable, secure wall, fence or berm that
effectively discourages unauthorized entry or trespass.
SEPARATION — The distance between one carrier's array of antennas and
another carrier's array.
§ 325-59. District regulations.
Use regulations. A personal wireless service facility, after Planning
Board review and approval, shall require a building permit in all cases
and may be permitted as provided in Article V, Use Regulations, and as
follows:
A personal wireless service facility may locate on any existing
guyed tower or lattice tower, monopole, electric utility
transmission tower, fire tower or any other tower, provided that
the installation of the new facility does not increase the height
of the existing structure except as provided in Subsection C(3)
below. Such installations shall not require a special permit but shall
require site plan approval pursuant to § 325-55 of this bylaw.
(1)
All new or expanded personal wireless service facilities involving
construction of one or more ground or building (roof or side)
mounts, or expansion of an existing facility, shall require a site
plan review and approval as outlined in § 325-55 and the issuance
of a special permit pursuant to Article V, Use Regulations, except
that no special permit shall be required for such facilities when
located on land owned by the Town of Harwich. Such facilities may
be established by special permit in all zoning districts within the
Town, provided that the proposed use complies with the height
and setback requirements of Subsection C hereunder and Article
VI, Area, Height and Bulk Regulations, of this bylaw and all of the
special permit requirements set forth in § 325-60 of this bylaw.
(2)
A.
Location. Applicants seeking approval for personal wireless service
facilities shall comply with the following:
If feasible, personal wireless service facilities shall be located on
or within any existing or new structures, including but not limited
to buildings, existing telecommunications facilities, utility poles
and towers, any other towers, and related facilities, provided that
such installation preserves the character and integrity of those
(1)
B.
§ 325-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-59
1:207
structures. Special consideration will be given to new construction
of internally concealed wireless facilities that are installed in a
manner that preserves the character of the neighborhood and the
integrity of the structure (example: within a flagpole). In particular,
applicants are urged to consider use of existing telephone and
electric utility structures as sites for one or more personal wireless
service facilities. The applicant shall have the burden of proving
that there are no feasible existing structures upon which to locate.
If the applicant can demonstrate that it is not feasible to locate on
an existing structure, personal wireless service facilities shall be
designed so as to be camouflaged to the greatest extent possible,
including but not limited to use of compatible building materials
and colors, screening, landscaping, and placement within trees.
The applicant is also encouraged to consider using contained
structures, including but not limited to steeples and flagpoles,
for the antennas and an underground vault to store necessary
equipment and equipment cabinets.
(2)
The applicant shall submit documentation of the legal right to
install the proposed facility mount at the time of the application for
a building permit and/or special permit.
(3)
Dimensional requirements. Personal wireless service facilities shall
comply with the following requirements:
Height, general. Regardless of the type of mount, personal wireless
service facilities shall be no higher than 45 feet above ground level
[except as described in Subsection C(4), Height, Personal Wireless
Service Overlay Districts]. Personal wireless service facilities may
be established on a building that is legally nonconforming with
respect to height, provided that the facilities do not exceed 45 feet
above ground level.
(1)
Height, existing structures. New antennas for personal wireless
services may be installed on or within any of the preexisting
structures listed below. Such preexisting structures shall be
exempt from the height restrictions of this article to the extent that
the following conditions are met: provided that there is no increase
in height of the existing structure as a result of the installation
of a personal wireless service facility and that its installation is
incidental to the structure and not the structure's primary purpose.
Such structures include guyed towers, lattice towers, fire towers,
any other towers, and monopoles, chimneys and steeples.
(2)
Height, existing utility structures. New antennas located on any of
the following existing structures shall be exempt from the height
restrictions of this bylaw, provided that there is no more than
a twenty-foot increase in the height of the existing structure as
a result of the installation of a personal wireless service facility
and further provided that no such structure shall be permitted
(3)
C.
§ 325-59 HARWICH CODE § 325-59
1:208
to exceed 150 feet in total height above ground level: electric
transmission and distribution towers, telephone poles and similar
utility structures. This exemption shall not apply to historic
districts, within 150 feet of the right-of-way of any scenic roadway
or in designated scenic viewsheds.
Height, Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts. Personal
wireless service facilities in Personal Wireless Service Overlay
Districts may be built to a height of up to 150 feet above ground
level, provided that such structure and site are designed to
accommodate a total of four licensed carriers. Said wireless
facilities which can only accommodate a total of three licensed
carriers shall not exceed 135 feet above ground level. Said wireless
facilities which can only accommodate a total of two licensed
carriers shall not exceed 120 feet above ground level. Said wireless
facilities which can only accommodate a single licensed carrier
shall not exceed 105 feet above ground level.
(4)
Setbacks. All personal wireless service facilities and their
equipment shelters shall comply with the building setback
provisions of the zoning district in which the facility is located. In
addition, the following setbacks shall be observed:
In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from
the base of any ground-mounted personal wireless service
facility to any property line, road or habitable dwelling,
business or institutional use, or public recreational area shall
be determined and documented by an independent, certified
engineering firm to determine the structural integrity and fall
zone of the proposed structure for each contract agreement
and/or renewal. These findings, including all signed and
certified documentation, will be submitted to the Town of
Harwich Planning Board at the specified site plan review
public hearing for review and approval. This fall zone
engineering certification and inspection process shall be at no
cost to the Town of Harwich.
(a)
In the event that an existing structure is proposed as a mount
for a personal wireless service facility, a fall zone shall not be
required, but the setback provisions of the zoning district shall
apply. In the case of preexisting, nonconforming structures,
personal wireless service facilities and their equipment
shelters shall not increase any nonconformities, except as
provided in Subsection C(6) below.
(b)
(5)
In reviewing a special permit application for a personal wireless
service facility, the Planning Board may reduce the required fall
zone and/or setback distance of the zoning district by as much
as 50% of the required distance if it finds that a substantially
better design will result from such reduction. In making such a
(6)
§ 325-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-59
1:209
§ 325-60. Special permits for personal wireless service facilities.
All personal wireless service facilities shall comply with the performance
standards set forth in this section.
finding, the Planning Board shall consider both the visual and
safety impacts of the proposed use.
Design standards.
Visibility/camouflage. Personal wireless service facilities shall be
camouflaged as follows:
Camouflage by existing buildings or structures.
When a personal wireless service facility extends above
the roof height of a building on which it is mounted, every
effort shall be made to conceal the facility within or behind
existing architectural features to limit its visibility from
public ways. Facilities mounted on a roof shall be stepped
back from the front facade in order to limit their impact on
the building's silhouette.
[1]
Personal wireless service facilities which are side-mounted
shall blend with the existing building's architecture and
shall conform to Subsection A(1)(c).
[2]
(a)
Camouflage by vegetation. If personal wireless service
facilities are not camouflaged from public viewing areas by
existing buildings or structures they shall be surrounded by
buffers of dense tree growth and understory vegetation in
all directions to create an effective year-round visual buffer.
Ground-mounted personal wireless service facilities shall
provide a vegetated buffer of sufficient height and depth to
effectively screen the facility. Trees and vegetation may be
existing on the subject property or installed as part of the
proposed facility or a combination of both. The special permit
granting authority shall determine the types of trees and plant
materials and depth of the needed buffer based on site
conditions.
(b)
Color.
Personal wireless service facilities which are side-mounted
on buildings shall be painted or constructed of materials
to match the color of the building material directly behind
them.
[1]
To the extent that any personal wireless service facilities
extend above the height of the vegetation immediately
surrounding them, they shall be painted in a light grey or
light blue hue which blends with sky and clouds.
[2]
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 325-59 HARWICH CODE § 325-60
1:210
Equipment shelters. Equipment shelters for personal wireless
service facilities shall be designed consistent with one of the
following design standards:
(a) Equipment shelters shall be located in underground vaults;
Equipment shelters shall be designed consistent with
traditional Cape Cod architectural styles and materials, with
a roof pitch of at least 10/12 and wood clapboard or shingle
siding; or
(b)
Equipment shelters shall be camouflaged behind an effective
year-round landscape buffer, equal to the height of the
proposed building, and/or wooden fence. The special permit
granting authority shall determine the style of fencing and/or
landscape buffer that is compatible with the neighborhood.
(c)
(2)
Lighting, signage and security.
Personal wireless service facilities shall be lighted only if
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities on
site shall be shielded from properties. There shall be total
cutoff of all light at the property lines of the parcel to be
developed, and footcandle measurements at the property line
shall be 0.0 initial footcandle when measured at grade.
(a)
Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the property
and the owner and warn of any danger. All signs shall comply
with Article VII, Sign Regulations, of this bylaw.
(b)
All ground-mounted personal wireless service facilities shall be
surrounded by a security barrier.
(c)
(3)
Historic buildings and districts.
Any personal wireless service facilities located on or within
an historic structure shall not alter the character-defining
features, distinctive construction methods, or original historic
materials of the building.
(a)
Any alteration made to an historic structure to accommodate a
personal wireless service facility shall be fully reversible.
(b)
Personal wireless service facilities within an historic district
shall be concealed within or behind existing architectural
features or shall be located so that they are not visible from
public roads and viewing areas within the district.
(c)
(4)
Environmental standards.
Personal wireless service facilities shall not be located in wetlands.
Locating of wireless facilities in wetland buffer areas shall be
(1)
B.
§ 325-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-60
1:211
§ 325-61. Application and approval process.
The special permit granting authority shall adopt and may from time to
time amend rules and regulations governing the application and approval
process for personal wireless service facilities. Special permits and site plan
applications for personal wireless service facilities shall be governed by said
rules and regulations and the special permit and site plan requirements of
Article X.
§ 325-62. Co-location.
avoided whenever possible and disturbance to wetland buffer areas
shall be minimized.
No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any personal
wireless service facility. If any hazardous materials are to be used
on site, there shall be provisions for full containment of such
materials. An enclosed containment area shall be provided with a
sealed floor, designed to contain at least 110% of the volume of the
hazardous materials stored or used on the site.
(2)
(3) Stormwater runoff shall be contained on site.
Ground-mounted equipment for personal wireless service facilities
shall not generate noise in excess of 50 db at the property line.
(4)
Roof-mounted or side-mounted equipment for personal wireless
service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of 50 db at
ground level at the base of the building closest to the antenna.
(5)
Safety standards.
Radio frequency radiation (RFR) standards. All equipment
proposed for a personal wireless service facility shall be authorized
per the FCC Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of
Radio Frequency Radiation (FCC Guidelines).
(1)
C.
Licensed carriers shall share personal wireless service facilities and
sites where feasible and appropriate, thereby reducing the number of
personal wireless service facilities that are stand-alone facilities. All
applicants for a special permit for a personal wireless service facility
shall demonstrate a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers.
Such good faith effort includes:
A survey of all existing structures that may be feasible sites for colocating
personal wireless service facilities;
(1)
Contact with all the other licensed carriers for commercial mobile
radio services operating in the County of Barnstable; and
(2)
Sharing information necessary to determine if co-location is
feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to colocation.
(3)
A.
§ 325-60 HARWICH CODE § 325-62
1:212
§ 325-63. Modifications.
A modification of a personal wireless service facility may be considered
equivalent to an application for a new personal wireless service facility and
will require a special permit when the following events apply:
§ 325-64. Monitoring and maintenance.
In the event that co-location is found to be not feasible, a written
statement of the reasons for the infeasibility shall be submitted to
the Planning Board. The Planning Board may retain a technical expert
in the field of RF engineering to verify if co-location at the site is
not feasible or is feasible given the design configuration most
accommodating to co-location. The cost for such a technical expert will
be at the expense of the applicant. The Town may deny a special permit
to an applicant that has not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide
for co-location.
B.
If the applicant does intend to co-locate or to permit co-location, the
Planning Board shall request drawings and studies which show the
ultimate appearance and operation of the personal wireless service
facility at maximum capacity.
C.
If the special permit granting authority approves co-location for a
personal wireless service facility site, the special permit shall indicate
how many facilities of what type shall be permitted on that site.
Facilities specified in the special permit approval shall require no
further zoning approval. However, the addition of any facilities not
specified in the approved special permit shall require a new special
permit. Estimates of RFR emissions will be required for all facilities,
including proposed and future facilities.
D.
The applicant and/or co-applicant wants to alter the terms of the special
permit by changing the personal wireless service facility in one or more
of the following ways:
(1) Change in the number of facilities permitted on the site.
Change in technology used for the personal wireless service
facility.
(2)
A.
The applicant or co-applicant wants to add any equipment or additional
height not specified in the original design filing.
B.
After a personal wireless service facility is operational, the applicant
shall submit to the Planning Board and Board of Health, within 90
days of beginning operations and at annual intervals from the date of
issuance of the special permit, existing measurements of RFR from the
personal wireless service facility. Such measurements shall be signed
and certified by an RF engineer, stating that RFR measurements are
accurate and meet FCC Guidelines as specified in the radio frequency
standards section [§ 325-60C(1)] of this bylaw.
A.
§ 325-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-64
1:213
§ 325-65. Abandonment or discontinuation of use.
§ 325-66. Reconstruction or replacement of existing towers and
monopoles.
Guyed towers, lattice towers, utility towers and monopoles in existence at
the time of adoption of this bylaw may be reconstructed, altered, extended
or replaced on the same site by special permit from the Planning Board,
provided that the Board finds that such reconstruction, alteration, extension
or replacement will not be substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood and/or the tower than the existing structure. In making such
a determination, the Planning Board shall consider whether the proposed
After a personal wireless service facility is operational, the applicant
shall submit to the Planning Board and Board of Health, within 90
days of beginning operations and at annual intervals from the date of
issuance of the special permit, existing measurements of noise from the
personal wireless service facility. Such measurements shall be certified
by an acoustical engineer, stating that noise measurements are
accurate and meet the noise standards of § 325-60B(4) of this bylaw.
B.
The applicant and co-applicant shall maintain the personal wireless
service facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but
shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the mount and
security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
C.
At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a personal wireless service facility, such carrier will notify
the Building Official by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of
abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice, a copy of
which shall be sent to the Planning Board via regular U.S. mail, shall
be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation
of operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give such
notice, any personal wireless service facility allowed on special permit
by this bylaw shall be considered abandoned upon such discontinuation
of operations.
A.
Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall
physically remove the personal wireless service facility within 90 days
from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. "Physically
remove" shall include but not be limited to:
Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security
barriers from the subject property.
(1)
Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance
with local and state solid waste disposal regulations.
(2)
Restoring the location of the personal wireless service facility to
its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall
remain in the after-condition.
(3)
B.
§ 325-64 HARWICH CODE § 325-66
1:214
reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement will create public
benefits such as opportunities for co-location, improvements in public
safety, and/or reduction in visual and environmental impacts. No
reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement shall exceed the height
of the existing facility by more than 20 feet.
§ 325-67. Term of special permit.
A special permit issued for any personal wireless service facility over 45
feet in height shall be valid for 15 years. At the end of that time period, the
personal wireless service facility shall be removed by the carrier or a new
special permit shall be required.
§ 325-68. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event that any
provision of this article is determined to be invalid for any reason, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 325-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-68
1:215

ARTICLE XII
Elderly Affordable Housing District
§ 325-69. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article XII is to provide for elderly affordable housing.
The Elderly Affordable Housing District is established as a special district
which overlays an existing residential zoning district. The Elderly Affordable
Housing District permits the development of elderly affordable housing
units subject to the specific regulations and requirements contained in this
Article XII, which regulations and requirements shall govern even where
they are inconsistent with or less restrictive than the other requirements
of the Zoning Bylaw. The regulations of this Article XII relating to use,
building and lot dimensions, development intensity, parking, ingress and
egress, and site plan review shall only apply to an elderly affordable housing
development and not to any other use that is allowed or permitted in the
underlying zoning district.
§ 325-70. Relationship to underlying district.
§ 325-71. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE — Dwelling units leased by a nonprofit corporation or
governmental entity, the rents for which do not exceed the guidelines
for such rental housing established by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or any successor agency or by any
comparable agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
ELDERLY AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — An affordable
multifamily housing development whose occupants shall and must be 60
years of age or older.
§ 325-72. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted: elderly affordable housing development.
The Elderly Affordable Housing District shall overlay the underlying
residential district so that any parcel of land in the Elderly Affordable
Housing District shall also lie in the residential zone in which it is
otherwise classified by this Zoning Bylaw.
A.
All reductions, requirements, and definitions contained in the Zoning
Bylaw shall apply within the Elderly Affordable Housing District to the
extent they are not inconsistent with the specific provisions of this
Article XII. To the extent any such provisions are inconsistent, the
provisions of this Article XII shall prevail.
B.
§ 325-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-73
1:217
§ 325-73. Dimensional and bulk requirements.
An elderly affordable housing development shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 325-74. Parking standards.
Parking standards are as follows: one space per dwelling unit.
A. Minimum lot area: eight acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
C. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
F. Minimum density: eight units per acre of contiguous upland.
G. Maximum building height: 40 feet.
H. Maximum permitted height: 2 1/2 stories.
Maximum building coverage of lot (covered area as percentage of total
lot area): 15%.
I.
J. Maximum site coverage as percentage of total site area: 50%.
K. Minimum residential net floor area (square feet): none.
§ 325-73 HARWICH CODE § 325-74
1:218
ARTICLE XIII
Adult Entertainment
§ 325-75. Authority.
This bylaw is enacted pursuant to MGL c. 40A and pursuant to the Town's
authority under the Home Rule Amendment to the Massachusetts
Constitution to serve the compelling Town interests of limiting the location
of and preventing the clustering and concentration of certain adult
entertainment uses, as defined and designated herein, in response to
studies demonstrating their deleterious effects.
§ 325-76. Purpose.
§ 325-77. Definitions.
Adult entertainment uses shall include the following uses:
It is the purpose of this adult entertainment bylaw to address and
mitigate the secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments
and sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and defined
herein. Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime,
adverse impacts on public health, adverse impacts on the business
climate of the Town, adverse impacts on the property values of
residential and commercial properties, and adverse impacts on the
quality of life in the Town. All of said secondary impacts are adverse to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of Harwich and its
inhabitants.
A.
The provisions of this bylaw have neither the purpose nor intent of
imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative matter or
materials, including sexually oriented matter or materials. Similarly, it
is not the purpose or intent of this bylaw to restrict or deny access
by adults to adult entertainment establishments or to sexually oriented
matter or materials that are protected by the Constitution of the United
States or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or
deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials
may have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matter or materials.
Neither is it the purpose or intent of this bylaw to legalize the sale,
rental, distribution, or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or
materials.
B.
A. Adult bookstore, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
B. Adult motion-picture theater, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
C. Adult paraphernalia store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
D. Adult video store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
Any establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons, with the
term "nudity" as defined by MGL c. 272, § 31.
E.
§ 325-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-78
1:219
§ 325-78. Adult entertainment uses by special permit.
Adult entertainment uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except
as otherwise permitted in this bylaw and may be permitted only upon the
grant of a special permit by the Planning Board. Such special permit shall
not be granted unless each of the following standards has been met:
The application for a special permit for an adult entertainment use shall
provide the name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner
and all principal investors of the establishment, the legal owner and all
principal investors of the property, and the manager of the proposed
establishment.
A.
No adult entertainment use special permit shall be issued to any person
convicted of violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63 or MGL c. 272,
§ 28. The applicant shall be responsible for all related costs for record
check processing.
B.
Location.
Adult entertainment uses shall not be located within:
One thousand feet from the nearest church, school, park,
playground, play field, youth center, children's day-care center,
licensed home day-care facility, library (public or private),
recreation facility or area open to the public; or
(a)
One thousand feet from the nearest establishment licensed
under MGL c. 138, § 12.
(b)
(1)
The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight
line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the
proposed adult entertainment use is to be located to the nearest
property line of any of the designated uses set forth above.
(2)
In addition, no structure which contains an adult entertainment use
shall be closer than 100 feet to any primarily residential zoning
district boundary.
(3)
C.
All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a
manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment
by the public.
D.
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to display for
advertisement or other purpose any signs, placards or other like
materials to the general public on the exterior of the building or on
the interior where the same may be seen through glass or other like
transparent material which contain any sexually explicit figures or
words as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
E.
No adult use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate
adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view
displays or linger on the premises.
F.
§ 325-78 HARWICH CODE § 325-78
1:220
§ 325-79. Conditions.
The special permit granting authority may impose reasonable conditions,
safeguards and limitations on the time or use of any special permit granted
and may require that any such special permit granted shall be personal to
the applicant, shall not run with the land, and shall expire upon expiration
of the applicant's lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject property.
§ 325-80. Expiration of special permit.
A special permit to conduct an adult entertainment use shall expire after
a period of two calendar years from its date of issuance and shall be
automatically renewable for successive two-year periods thereafter,
provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the special
permit granting authority prior to said expiration and that no objection to
said renewal is made and sustained by the special permit granting authority
based upon public safety factors applied at the time that the original special
permit was granted.
§ 325-81. Variances.
In no event shall any variances of the requirements pertaining to adult
entertainment as defined and set forth in this bylaw be granted.
§ 325-82. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event that any
provision of this article is determined to be invalid for any reason the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
The proposed adult entertainment use shall comply with the off-street
parking requirements set forth in this bylaw.
G.
No adult entertainment use shall have any flashing lights or neon signs
visible from outside the establishment.
H.
No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign or
off-premises sign.
I.
No adult entertainment use shall be established prior to submission and
approval of a site plan by the Planning Board, pursuant to § 325-55.
The site plan shall, at the minimum, depict all existing and proposed
buildings, parking spaces, driveways, service areas, and other open
uses. The site plan shall show the distances between the proposed adult
entertainment use and the boundary of the nearest primarily residential
zoning district and the nearest property line of each of the uses set
forth in Subsection C above.
J.
No adult entertainment establishment shall employ any person or
persons who would be excluded as a permit holder under this bylaw.
K.
§ 325-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-82
1:221

ARTICLE XIV
Residential Subdivision Growth Rate Limit
§ 325-83. Purpose and intent.
§ 325-84. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — As described herein, shall be defined as
property subdivided and governed by the Subdivision Control Law.32
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION BUILDING PERMIT — A building permit
granted to property/lots created by means subdivision plans approved
subsequent to the adoption of this bylaw, as defined in "residential
subdivision" above.
The purpose of this Article XIV, Residential Subdivision Growth Rate
Limit, is to ensure that the rate of development does not exceed the
Town's ability to provide at least the current level of municipal services
(e.g., schools, fire and police protection, an adequate supply and
distribution of clean drinking water, roadways, solid waste disposal,
etc.) and maintain at least the current ratio of protected open space
area per year-round resident. The Town's 1993 Comprehensive Plan
and 1999 Revised Comprehensive Plan Draft and supporting documents
indicate the consequences of unchecked growth and recommend
provision of adequate capital facilities and municipal services to meet
the demands of current and future residents. These objectives are
best accomplished by restraining the rate of residential growth to an
annual level at which the Town can achieve its open space preservation
goals and provide adequate municipal facilities and services within the
constraints imposed by "Proposition 2 1/2," so called. Environmental
constraints require that open land be developed at a minimum density
of one dwelling per acre. Careful evaluation of this rate of land
consumption has indicated that the costs associated with population
growth would prevent the Town from providing adequate facilities and
services and/or work against the Town's effort to protect sufficient
open space and water supplies due to increased competition for limited
funding. In addition, this article is intended to further the legitimate
commonwealth and local interests in the provision of a fair share of
housing that is affordable to persons of low and moderate income.
A.
The intent of this Article XIV, Residential Subdivision Growth Rate
Limit, is to limit residential subdivision development within the Town
of Harwich to no more than 50 building permits per year, as further
defined herein. No person or persons as defined in § 325-87 may be
granted more than 10% of this total, as described herein.
B.
32.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 325-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-85
1:223
§ 325-85. Applicability.
This bylaw shall limit the issuance of residential subdivision building
permits for subdivision lots created after approval of this bylaw and issued
pursuant to an approved subdivision as defined in the Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land and Site Plans of the Town of Harwich,
Massachusetts,33 except division of land not creating new road frontage.
§ 325-86. Issuance of residential subdivision building permits.
The Building Department shall issue no more than 50 residential subdivision
building permits per year for lots governed by this bylaw. As it is the
intent of this bylaw that an equitable number of permits be available to all
applicants, permits shall be issued under this section as follows:
§ 325-87. Exemption.
Low- and moderate-income housing constructed by a public agency,
nonprofit organization, or limited dividend sponsor of affordable housing,
as defined by MGL c. 40B, provided that such housing units have deed
restrictions to ensure that they remain affordable for no less than the
time period specified by the relevant subsidy program or statute, is hereby
exempted from the provision of this bylaw.
§ 325-88. Severability.
If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The
invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section or sections of this
Residential subdivision building permits shall be issued on a first come,
first served basis as further governed herein.
A.
No more than 10% of the available residential subdivision building
permits shall be issued in one calendar month.
B.
Applicants shall demonstrate, by means of a deed or other similar
instrument, ownership of the property at the time of application and
prior twelve-month period.
C.
To ensure equitable distribution, all applicants for residential
subdivision building permits under this section (whether an individual,
a corporation or a realty trust) must, under penalty of perjury, divulge
those holding a beneficial interest in excess of 1%. No permit shall
be issued to any corporation or realty trust if any individual holder of
beneficial interest in excess of 1% has been party to the issuance of five
residential subdivision building permits during the current calendar
year, whether such interest was as an individual or as a holder of
beneficial interest in excess of 1% in any corporation or realty trust.
D.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-85 HARWICH CODE § 325-88
1:224
bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Harwich Zoning
Bylaw.
§ 325-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-88
1:225

ARTICLE XV
Special Conditions
§ 325-89. Excavation and removal of sand, gravel, quarry or other
earth materials.
In addition to the general conditions set forth in § 325-51 of this bylaw,
for all special permits the following special conditions shall apply to the
excavation and removal of sand, gravel, quarry or other earth materials
other than that which is incidental to and in connection with construction of
a building on the same lot, and for processing and treating raw materials:
No sand, gravel, quarry or other earth materials shall be removed
below the four-foot elevation above maximum groundwater elevation.
These elevations shall be established from a test pit and the levels
related to a fixed benchmark on the property.
A.
Removal and processing operations shall not be conducted closer than
100 feet to a street or closer than 25 feet to neighboring lot lines.
Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on the undisturbed land
for screening and noise reduction purposes.
B.
All equipment for sorting, washing, crushing, grading, drying,
processing and treating or other operation machinery shall not be used
closer than 100 feet to any street or to any adjoining lot line.
C.
No more than one entrance and one exit shall be permitted to any
excavation area.
D.
Any access to excavated areas or areas in the process of excavation will
be adequately posted with "Keep Out - Danger" signs.
E.
Adequate provisions shall be made for drainage during and after
completion of operations. The land shall be left so that natural storm
drainage leaves the property at the original points and so that the area
of drainage to any one point shall not be increased.
F.
Any temporary shelters or buildings erected on the premises for use by
personnel or storage of equipment shall be screened from public view.
These structures shall be removed from the premises within 30 days
after they are no longer needed.
G.
H. No excavation shall be allowed closer than 50 feet to a natural stream.
In all zones, other than the Industrial - Limited Zone, operation hours
shall be only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. weekdays,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays, and loaded trucks may leave
prescribed premises only within such hours.
I.
During operations, when an excavation is located closer than 200 feet
to a residential area public way and where the excavation will leave a
depth of more than 15 feet with a slope in excess of 1:1, a fence of at
least six feet high shall be erected to limit access to this area.
J.
§ 325-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-89
1:227
Lateral support shall be maintained for all adjacent lots in order to
prevent landsliding and cave-ins.
K.
A special permit, if issued, shall be issued for an initial three-year
period. A renewal permit shall be necessary after a three-year period
from the Board.
L.
If, during the period of excavation of any area used for the removal
of sand, gravel, quarry, or other earth materials, any portion thereof
amounting to more than 30,000 square feet becomes unsuited for
further use or is abandoned for removal operations, whichever comes
first, such area or portion thereof shall be graded and replanted with
grass, trees or shrubs or any permanent cover crop.
M.
All sand and gravel pits presently operated as such are exempt from the
requirement of obtaining a permit but must conform to all of the other
conditions of this section.
N.
No topsoil (loam) or subsoil (hardening) shall be removed from any
area of ground within the legal limits of the Town consisting of more
than 50,000 square feet, other than that which is incidental to and in
connection with the construction of a building on the same lot, unless
that person removing such topsoil or subsoil shall replant the entire
area with rye, vetch, wheat, legumes or any permanent cover crop or
reforest the area.
O.
§ 325-89 HARWICH CODE § 325-89
1:228
ARTICLE XVI
Six Ponds Special District
§ 325-90. Purpose.
The purpose of the Six Ponds Special District is to establish zoning
regulations that accomplish the following:
§ 325-91. District boundaries.
Enhance protection of water quality within existing and potential future
zones of contribution to water supply wells;
A.
Enhance protection of water quality within the Herring River
watershed and the Pleasant Bay coastal embayments;
B.
C. Evaluate and protect future well areas to serve future Town needs;
Protect the water quality of Aunt Edie's, Cornelius (Eldredge), Walker's,
Oliver's, Black and Hawksnest Ponds;
D.
Protect the district's key natural resources, including rare plant and
wildlife habitat, wetlands and coastal plain pondshores, unfragmented
forest areas, fisheries, and wildlife corridors;
E.
Maintain the scenic character of area roads and views of pondshores
and woodlands;
F.
Preserve cultural landscapes, archaeological sites, historic structures
and traditional land uses within the district, including agriculture;
G.
Restore areas of the district that have been significantly degraded by
excavation, mining, or other activities;
H.
Encourage the continued use of land within the district for open space
and recreational purposes; and
I.
Foster land uses that are compatible with the resource protection goals
of the district.
J.
The Six Ponds Special District encompasses approximately 1,350 acres
of land area and approximately 114 acres of pond surface area. The
boundaries of the district are shown on a plan titled "Six Ponds Special
District" prepared by the Town of Harwich Planning Department dated
December 2000 which is hereby made a part of this bylaw. The plan is
on file in the Planning Department. The Six Ponds Special District shall
be shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Harwich.
A.
Zoning districts. For the purpose of this bylaw, the Six Ponds Special
District is divided into the following zoning overlay districts:
Zone A. To permit moderate density along the major roadways
of the Six Ponds District's perimeter while minimizing impacts to
its resources. Zone A encompasses all land within the Six Ponds
(1)
B.
§ 325-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-91
1:229
§ 325-92. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in the Town of Harwich Zoning
Bylaw, § 325-2, the following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this
bylaw:
AGRICULTURAL USE — Premises, including necessary structures and
equipment, which are used for the keeping or raising of livestock or the
raising of agricultural products, including a stand for the sale of produce,
50% or more of which is raised on the premises upon which the farm stand
is located. All such uses are to be defined as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 3
and are subject to compliance with MGL c. 128 and MGL c. 131, § 40 (as
described in "Farming in Wetland Resource Areas," 1996).
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — See definition in § 325-2.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The coverage of an individual site by any
building. For the purposes of this definition, a building is defined as set forth
in § 325-2.
CLEARED AREA — Any part of the area of a lot disturbed from its natural
state.
CLEARING — Removal or causing to be removed, through either direct or
indirect actions, trees, shrubs and/or topsoil from a site, or any material
change in the use or appearance of the land. Actions considered to be
clearing include, but are not limited to, causing irreversible damage to
roots or trunks, destroying the structural integrity of vegetation, and/or any
filling, excavation, grading or trenching in the root area of a tree which has
the potential to cause irreversible damage.
EARTH REMOVAL — The excavation and removal of sand, gravel, quarry
or other earth materials other than that which is incidental to and in
connection with construction of a building on the same lot.
EDUCATIONAL USE — A school owned and operated by a public, sectarian,
denominational, or nonprofit educational corporation. All such uses are to
be defined as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 3.
FILLING — The act of transporting or placing (by any manner or
mechanism) material from, to, or on any soil surface or natural vegetation.
FLEXIBLE CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT (FCD) — A subdivision plan allowing
for variations in development styles in order to minimize the impacts of
development while preserving open space in perpetuity.
Special District 400 feet or less from one of the following roads:
Route 124, Queen Anne Road, Route 39 and Route 137.
Zone B. To maintain the rural and scenic character of the district's
interior and protect its resources. Zone B encompasses all land
more than 400 feet from one of the following roads: Route 124,
Queen Anne Road, Route 39 and Route 137.
(2)
§ 325-91 HARWICH CODE § 325-92
1:230
GRADING — Any excavating, clearing, filling, or the creation of impervious
surfaces, or any combination thereof, which alters the existing surface of
the land.
GRID SUBDIVISION (GS) — A subdivision consistent with MGL c. 41, §§ 81K
through 81GG and Town of Harwich rules and regulations.34
LOT COVERAGE — See "site coverage" in § 325-2 of this Zoning Bylaw.
MUNICIPAL USE — A municipal use as defined in § 325-2 that would be
compatible with the purpose of the district.
RELIGIOUS USE — See definition of "church or religious use" in § 325-2 of
this bylaw.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — For the purposes of this
article, the Planning Board is the special permit granting authority. The
special permit granting authority of the Planning Board is outlined in
§ 325-51 of the Town of Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
§ 325-93. Permitted uses.
§ 325-94. Special permit uses.
The following uses are conditionally allowed through a special permit to be
granted by the Planning Board, provided that the use does not conflict with
the purpose of the district or more specifically endanger or unacceptably
The following uses are permitted within underlying residential districts:
(1) Agricultural use.
(2) Home occupation.
(3) Religious use.
(4) Single-family home.
A.
The following uses are permitted within underlying commercial
districts:
(1) Religious use.
(2) Educational use.
(3) Municipal use.
(4) Medical facility.
(5) Agricultural use.
(6) Retail store.
(7) Professional office.
B.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-94
1:231
impact district resources as described in § 325-90. For the purpose of
this Article XVI (Six Ponds Special District), Article X, § 325-51 inclusive
shall apply to any special permit under this Article XVI. As special permit
granting authority, the Planning Board is authorized to waive submission
requirements of § 325-51 if it deems a requirement to be duplicative or
unnecessary.
§ 325-95. Prohibited uses.
Any uses not specifically allowed as of right or by special permit within this
district are prohibited.
§ 325-96. Preexisting uses.
Any lawfully existing use of a structure or land that does not conform to
the provisions of this bylaw may continue. Any change of such use shall be
governed by the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 325-97. Dimensional regulations.
Lot size, lot width, setbacks, coverage and height regulations shall be as set
forth below:
Within the underlying residential district:
Single-family dwelling with accessory apartment. For existing lots
lawfully laid out by plan or deed prior to the effective date of this
article the minimum required lot size within the Six Ponds District
shall be 60,000 square feet for any single-family dwelling with
accessory apartment. For all lots created after the effective date
of this article the minimum required lot size within the Six Ponds
District shall be 100,000 square feet for any single-family dwelling
with accessory apartment.
(1)
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Flexible cluster development.
(4) Swimming pools as an accessory to an allowed principal use.
(5) Grid subdivision as described in MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG.
Earth removal/sand and gravel mining. An operation permit is
required pursuant to § 325-102. Operators of cranberry bogs within
the Six Ponds Special District using sand specifically in the
operation of the bog are exempt from the requirements of
§ 325-102. Excavation associated with the construction of a
permitted structure is exempt from the requirements of § 325-102.
(6)
A.
B. Within the underlying commercial district: mixed-use development.
Zone A, up to 400 feet from the following roads: Route 137, Route 39,
Queen Anne Road, and Route 124. Lots partially within Zone A must
A.
§ 325-94 HARWICH CODE § 325-97
1:232
have at least 50% of their lot area within Zone A to utilize the Zone A
dimensional requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size: 60,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks: 25 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(6) Maximum building coverage: 10%.
(7) Maximum building height: 30 feet.
Zone B, all other land within the district.
(1) Minimum lot size: 100,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 80 feet.
(4) Minimum side and rear yard setbacks: 40 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
(6) Maximum building coverage: 10%.
(7) Maximum building height: 30 feet.
B.
Lots in more than one district. Where the district boundary line
between Zone A and Zone B divides a lot in existence at the time
such line is adopted, each portion of the lot shall comply with the area
requirements for the applicable zoning district.
C.
Accessory uses to single-family dwelling. A garage and/or a shed
greater than 100 square feet are accessory uses allowed as of right in
the Six Ponds Special District and are subject to setback and coverage
regulations as outlined in Subsections A and B.
D.
Preexisting lots. Existing lots lawfully laid out by plan or deed prior to
the effective date of this article shall be considered lawfully preexisting,
nonconforming lots, provided that the lot meets the provisions of
§ 325-7 of the Town of Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
E.
Developed lots. Structures on preexisting, nonconforming lots may be
added to or extended, and accessory structures exceeding 100 square
feet constructed, on the provision that the addition, extension, or
accessory structure exceeding 100 square feet meets the following
criteria:
F.
§ 325-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-97
1:233
§ 325-98. Clearing and grading.
No person may clear any portion of a lot for construction without first
obtaining a foundation permit or a building permit from the Building
Department. No person shall undertake land clearing/grading activities
exceeding an area of 30,000 square feet without first obtaining a special
permit from the Planning Board. While the clearing/grading of an area less
than 30,000 square feet does not require a special permit, compliance with
the measures contained in Subsection B(1) through (8) is encouraged for all
development within the district.
The addition, extension, or accessory structure exceeding 100
square feet is set back no less than 25 feet from any street and 20
feet from the side and rear lot lines; and
(1)
(2) Maximum lot coverage does not exceed 25%.
Application requirements. Unless determined otherwise by the
Planning Board the following submittals are required at the time of
application:
A plan must be accurately drawn to scale (not less than one inch
equals 40 feet) on a sheet or sheets having dimensions of not less
than 11 inches by 17 inches. Multiple sheet site plan sets must be
labeled using the format of "Sheet 1 of _____, Sheet 2 of _____, etc."
The plan must contain adequate drawings, symbols, and notations
to indicate the following information:
Seal and signature of the contributing registered land surveyor
for any plan showing property line locations and seal and
signature of the contributing registered civil engineer for any
plan proposing new or altered stormwater drainage facilities.
Information may be superimposed on a valid survey plan or
a valid existing site plan, provided that the following notation
is included on the site plan: "[This site plan was prepared
by (name of preparer) using a (plan of land/site plan) titled
____________________, dated ____________ and last revised on
____________, scale: __________, prepared by _______________.]"
(a)
Scaled site locus map (at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet),
Assessor map(s) and parcel number(s), North arrow, graphic
scale, title block, plan references, names of applicant(s) and
record owner(s) and date of site plan preparation.
(b)
Total area of property containing the site of proposed
development. Plans for redevelopment of a site shall show all
land on the subject parcel and any other parcels relating to
the subject use. Failure to show all property pertaining to
the subject use(s) may result in incomplete notification to all
parties in interest that may invalidate any approval obtained.
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 325-97 HARWICH CODE § 325-98
1:234
All existing and proposed contour lines at intervals of no more
than two feet.
(d)
All proposed structures and facilities, including all property
line setbacks.
(e)
(f) Existing and proposed surface water drainage facilities.
Location and extent of subsurface drainage and sewage
disposal facilities.
(g)
Location of existing waterlines, if any. The location of proposed
waterlines is to be determined pursuant to the requirements of
the Board of Water Commissioners and shall be shown on the
plan.
(h)
A zoning compliance table showing the required and proposed
dimensions/quantities or lot size, frontage, setbacks
(structures and parking), building coverage, site coverage,
building height, and clearing and grading area.
(i)
Delineation of all bodies of water, including vernal pools,
streams, ponds, and any wetlands as defined by MGL c. 131,
§ 40 located within 100 feet of any disturbance or alteration on
the site. Delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain should
also be provided.
(j)
Plan indicating the limit of work. The limit of work shall include
all building, parking and vehicular use areas and any grading
associated with the proposed development. The plan or
accompanying narrative shall document the species and
quantities of specimen trees and/or other vegetation to be
removed or relocated within the project area.
(k)
Granting of a special permit by the Planning Board for clearing/grading
shall be based on the applicant's ability to prepare and execute a
plan that meets the review standards listed below. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the following measures are employed in the
development of the site:
Site/building design shall preserve natural topography outside of
the development footprint to reduce unnecessary land disturbance
and to preserve natural drainage channels on the site.
(1)
Clearing of vegetation and alteration of topography shall be limited
to 30% of the site. Disturbed areas shall be revegetated with native
plants.
(2)
Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area
necessary to maneuver a backhoe or other construction equipment.
Roots should be cut cleanly rather than pulled or ripped out during
utility trenching. Tunneling for utility installation should be utilized
wherever feasible to protect root systems of trees.
(3)
B.
§ 325-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-98
1:235
In the design of a development or siting of a structure, priority
shall be given to retention of existing stands of trees, trees at site
perimeter, contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites, and specimen
trees.
(4)
Additional efforts to minimize the clearing and grading on a site
associated with construction activities shall be employed, such
as parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling of
equipment/materials, etc., in areas already planned for permanent
structures. Topsoil shall not be stockpiled in areas of protected
trees, wetlands, and/or their vegetated buffers.
(5)
Finished grades should be limited to a slope no greater than 4:1,
while preserving, matching, or blending with the natural contours
and undulations of the land to the greatest extent possible.
(6)
The site shall be protected during construction through erosion and
sedimentation controls, such as the following:
Temporary or permanent diversions, berms, grassed
waterways, special culverts, shoulder dikes and other
mechanical measures as are necessary should be provided to
intercept and divert surface water runoff.
(a)
Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed in
accordance with the Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Guidance Manual.
(b)
Erosion control measures shall include the use of erosion
control matting, mulches and/or temporary or permanent
cover crops. Mulch areas damaged from heavy rainfalls, severe
storm or construction activity shall be repaired immediately.
(c)
Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the
site by stormwater infiltration basins, vegetated swales,
constructed wetlands or similar systems covered with natural
vegetation. Runoff shall not be discharged directly to ponds,
streams, rivers or other surface water bodies. All basins shall
be preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps. The mouths
of all basins shall be fitted with filter fabric during the entire
construction process to minimize siltation. Basins shall not be
located within the three-hundred-foot wetland buffer. Dry wells
shall be used only where other methods are not feasible.
(d)
(7)
The site shall be revegetated immediately after grading.
Proper revegetation techniques shall be employed using native
plant species, proper seedbed preparation, appropriate
fertilizer and mulching to protect germinating plants.
Revegetation shall occur on cleared sites within seven
calendar days of final grading and shall occur during the
planting season appropriate to the selected plant species.
(a)
(8)
§ 325-98 HARWICH CODE § 325-98
1:236
§ 325-99. Pond buffer regulations.
A minimum of four inches of topsoil shall be placed on all
disturbed surfaces that are proposed to be planted.
(b)
Finished grades shall be no higher than the trunk flare(s) of
trees to be retained.
(c)
Shoreline location. The pond shoreline location for the six ponds shall
be measured from the extreme high-water line of the ponds within the
district.
A.
Prohibitions. The following are prohibited within 300 feet of the pond
shoreline:
(1) Septic systems (soil absorption systems) and leaching fields.
Direct discharge of stormwater from roads, rooftops, developed
land areas and any other uses and/or activities.
(2)
Any disturbance or removal of natural vegetation, with the
exception of a single path not more than five feet wide to provide
access from a single point at the edge of the buffer zone to the pond
shore. Appropriate erosion controls, such as terracing of the path,
should be incorporated into any design. The layout of this path
must be reviewed and approved by the Conservation Commission.
(3)
Use of pesticides will be in conformity with 333 CMR 1.00 to 11.00
as authorized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Pesticide
Board.
(4)
(5) All other structures.
B.
Nonconformity. In cases where existing lots lawfully laid out by plan
or deed prior to the effective date of this article are too small to
accommodate soil absorption systems, structures and/or stormwater
runoff discharge outside the three-hundred-foot buffer, these structures
shall be located at the maximum possible distance from the shoreline
elevation of the pond. Additional provisions for protection of ponds,
such as advanced wastewater treatment and evaluation of nutrient
loading capacity of adjacent pond, are advised in this instance.
C.
Existing single-family homes. An existing single-family home shall
become preexisting nonconforming if it, at the time of the adoption of
this bylaw, does not meet the requirements of § 325-97. Any additions
or alterations shall be consistent with the provisions of Subsection B for
the express purpose of becoming as conforming as possible.
D.
Existing commercial structures. An existing commercial structure shall
become preexisting nonconforming if it, at the time of the adoption of
this bylaw, does not meet the requirements of § 325-97. Any additions
or alterations shall be consistent with the provisions of Subsection B for
the express purpose of becoming as conforming as possible.
E.
§ 325-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-100
1:237
§ 325-100. Scenic road corridor regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to both sides of the following
roadways and roadway segments:
(1) Seth Whitefield Road (county road).
(2) Nathan Walker Road (private road).
(3) Spruce Road (Town road).
(4) Hall's Path (Town road).
(5) Hawksnest Road (county road).
(6) Round Cove Road (Town road).
A.
New structures. The following criteria shall be met to preserve the
character and enhance safe travel on the scenic roadways:
New structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from the edge of
pavement on any of the roadways or roadway segments described
in Subsection A.
(1)
With the exception of a curb cut for a driveway, a minimum onehundred-
foot buffer of natural vegetation, including overstory and
understory vegetation, shall be maintained along the frontage of all
lots fronting on the roadways and roadway segments described in
Subsection A.
(2)
Where lot depth or the three-hundred-foot pond buffer as required
in § 325-99 would prevent development of a lot, the Planning Board
may grant a special permit allowing development if the following
criteria are met:
Dense plantings of evergreen vegetation combined with the
construction of berms to screen new construction from the
scenic road. Plant varieties shall be indigenous to the area and
may include rhododendron, cedar, white pine, American holly,
inkberry, spruce, fir and sheep laurel.
(a)
New lawn area shall not be planted within the one-hundredfoot
scenic road corridor.
(b)
New subdivisions shall be designed to incorporate the onehundred-
foot scenic road corridor along subdivision roadways
as part of the required open space.
(c)
(3)
B.
Design guidelines. The following guidelines are recommended for new
development and driveway construction on any of the roadways and
roadway segments as described in Subsection A:
The use of shared driveways is encouraged whenever two or more
lots are being created by any division of land regulated by the
(1)
C.
§ 325-100 HARWICH CODE § 325-100
1:238
§ 325-101. Flexible cluster development and grid subdivision.
This section is established to permit variation in development styles and
minimize the impacts of development while preserving open space in
perpetuity for the protection of natural resources, protecting the historical
and archaeological resources of the district, and providing for the efficient
layout of roads and utilities.
Subdivision Control Law.35 A special permit from the Planning
Board may reduce the frontage required by § 325-97 to a minimum
of 100 feet for any lot that is subject to a permanent deed
restriction requiring a shared driveway. The deed restriction
language shall be submitted with the application for the division
of the land and must be of a form and content acceptable to
the Planning Board and Town Counsel. The deed restriction shall
be recorded with the plan that divides the parcel. This provision
shall only apply to the frontage dimensional requirement; no other
dimensional requirement shall be lessened through this provision.
Where shared driveways are not feasible, applicants are
encouraged to design driveways and new subdivision roadways to
obscure views of new development from the scenic roadway.
(2)
The use of board fencing stained to blend with the natural
landscape or natural finish wooden fencing, especially split rail
fencing, is encouraged when installing fencing along front lot lines.
(3)
Landowners and land developers are encouraged to use siding and
roofing colors that blend with the natural landscape. Such colors
include browns, grays, dark greens, and naturally stained building
materials.
(4)
New structures shall be sited to minimize obstruction of existing
views of the ponds from the scenic roadway.
(5)
Application. A flexible cluster development (FCD) or grid subdivision
(GS) as defined in MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG is permitted in the Six
Ponds Special District by special permit from the Planning Board.
A.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in a flexible cluster
development or grid subdivision:
Single-family dwelling. Detached, single-family dwellings are
allowed and permitted accessory uses, including a cluster unit and
a duly permitted wastewater treatment facility.
(1)
(2) Open space. Common open space, restricted in perpetuity.
B.
Density requirements. The total number of residential units allowable
within a flexible cluster residential development shall not exceed the
C.
35.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 325-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-101
1:239
number of units that would be allowed as demonstrated under a
conventional grid subdivision according to the dimensional
requirements of § 325-97 and in conformance with the Town of Harwich
Zoning Bylaw and the Town of Harwich Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land and Site Plans,36 most recent
edition, without bonuses, variances or waivers. The sharing of
driveways is encouraged to reduce curb cuts.
Density calculation. The allowed number of dwelling units (density) in
an FCD shall be calculated as follows:
For the purposes of calculating the number of dwelling units for
an FCD, the applicants shall list which map and parcel numbers of
land in their ownership they wish to develop.
(1)
Land that is the subject of a permanent conservation restriction or
that has been dedicated as open space by any special permit or
"development of regional impact" decision shall not be used in the
density calculation.
(2)
D.
Dimensional requirements. FCD lot coverage, yard, frontage and lot
area regulations shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum side and rear yard setback: 10 feet.
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
E.
Wastewater. The FCD shall comply with the provisions of 310 CMR
15.00 of the State Environmental Code (Title V) and the on-site
wastewater disposal regulations of the Board of Health.
F.
Common open space. Within an FCD all land area not utilized for lots,
roads, and drainage shall be set aside as open space. Applicants are
encouraged to include any areas of high natural resource value or
historic resource value within this open space. Common open space
shall be maintained in an open and natural condition, without clearing,
in its natural condition for the protection of habitat. The open space
shall be used, designed and maintained in accordance with the
following standards:
Purposes. Open space shall be used solely for recreation,
conservation or agricultural purposes by residents of the FCD and/
or the public. The proposed use of the open space shall be specified
in the application and depicted on the plan. The Planning Board
(1)
G.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Special Permits.
§ 325-101 HARWICH CODE § 325-101
1:240
shall reserve the authority to approve or disapprove use(s)
proposed for designated open space.
Open space shall be planned as large, contiguous areas wherever
possible. Long, thin strips or narrow areas of open space (less
than 100 feet wide) shall occur only when necessary for access, as
vegetated buffers along wetlands or the perimeter of the site, or as
connections between open space areas.
(2)
Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and
cultural environments such as stream valleys, wetland buffers,
unfragmented forestland and significant trees, wildlife habitat,
open fields, scenic views, trails, and archaeological sites and to
avoid development in hazardous areas such as floodplains and
steep slopes. The development plan shall take advantage of the
natural topography of the parcel.
(3)
Where a proposed development abuts land held for conservation
purposes, including the designated open space of a preapproved
open space residential development or flexible cluster
development, the development shall be configured to minimize
adverse impacts to abutting conservation land or designated open
space of a preapproved open space residential development or
flexible cluster development. Trail connections should be provided
where appropriate.
(4)
Common open space ownership and management. At the developer's
option and subject to approval by the Planning Board, all areas to be
protected as permanent open space shall be:
Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody and
control of the Conservation Commission and be accepted by it for
open space use; land conveyed to the Town will be open for public
use;
(1)
Conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of
which is the conservation or preservation of open space, with a
conservation restriction; such organization shall be acceptable to
the Board as a bona fide conservation organization; or
(2)
Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by
the owners of lots or residential units within the development
(i.e., homeowners' association) and placed under conservation
restriction. The documents which form said association are subject
to approval by the Planning Board. If such a corporation or trust
is utilized, as indicated herein, ownership thereof shall pass with
conveyance of the lots or residential units. The developer is
responsible for the maintenance of the open space and other
facilities to be held in common until such time as the homeowners'
association is capable of assuming such responsibility. Thereafter,
the members of the association shall share the cost of maintaining
the open space. The Planning Board shall require the applicant
(3)
H.
§ 325-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-101
1:241
to provide documentation that the homeowners' association is an
automatic (mandatory) association that has been established prior
to the conveyance of any lots within the subdivision.
Review procedure.
Submission requirements.
Any person who seeks approval of the Planning Board for a
flexible cluster development or grid subdivision shall file with
the Board the following:
One linen or reproducible copy and 13 positive prints of
the flexible cluster or grid plan.
[1]
A properly executed application form. [Amended
5-8-2012 STM by Art. 5]
[2]
One linen or reproducible film copy and four positive
prints of all plans, profiles, and cross sections showing
proposed design and location of streets, sidewalks,
drainage, sanitary sewers (if any), and water supply (if
any).
[3]
(a)
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice
with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission of the
flexible cluster or grid plan and accompanied by a copy of
the completed application form. [Amended 5-8-2012 STM by
Art. 5]
(b)
The applicant shall submit to the Harwich Board of Health
one copy of the flexible cluster or grid plan and any additional
material needed by the Board of Health to determine which, if
any, of the lots shown on the flexible cluster or grid plan can be
used for building sites without injury to the public health.
(c)
The applicant shall submit two positive prints of the flexible
cluster or grid plan prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet. The plan shall include the lot numbers and lot areas in
acres. Distances and bearings need not be shown.
(d)
One copy of drainage calculations, including drainage curves
and contour plan delineating contributing areas, shall be
submitted.
(e)
The applicant may be required to provide a natural resource
inventory of the property in question at the request of the
Planning Board.
(f)
In the case of an application to amend an existing cluster
special permit, the procedures in § 325-51E shall apply, except
as to such materials as the Planning Board may waive as
duplicative of materials previously submitted. Modification of
(g)
(1)
I.
§ 325-101 HARWICH CODE § 325-101
1:242
§ 325-102. Earth removal; sand and gravel mining.
any existing flexible cluster development, open space
residential development or grid subdivision within the Six
Ponds District must comply with the requirements set forth in
this article.
Flexible cluster development or grid subdivision criteria for
approval. Approval of a flexible cluster development or grid
subdivision can be granted upon a determination by the Planning
Board that the plan complies with the requirements of this section
and that the flexible cluster development or grid subdivision plan
meets or exceeds the following criteria:
Preserves open space for conservation, recreation and the
protection of the resources within the Six Ponds Special
District.
(a)
Utilizes, preserves and enhances the natural features of the
land.
(b)
Provides the most efficient arrangement of streets, utilities and
other public services.
(c)
Minimizes to the greatest extent possible the impacts of
development upon the natural features and resources of the
Six Ponds Special District.
(d)
Enhances the character of the Six Ponds Special District by
preserving scenic vistas, limiting traffic impacts, and using
building materials that blend with existing structures and the
surrounding area.
(e)
Preserves, improves or enhances the surface water quality of
the district.
(f)
(g) Preserves existing unfragmented forest.
(2)
Purpose. One of the purposes of these regulations is to control
accelerated stormwater runoff, soil erosion and resulting sedimentation
as a result of earthmoving and sand and gravel mining activities. The
primary purpose and most important goal of this Zoning Bylaw is to
protect groundwater and enhance public safety in the Six Ponds Special
District.
A.
Scope.
Within the Six Ponds Special District, no person, firm or
corporation shall undertake any mining of sand or gravel or
excavation or filling of topsoil or subsoil material exceeding 500
cubic yards or exceeding a combined area of 10,000 square feet
over a period of six months without first obtaining an operations
permit from the Planning Board pursuant to these regulations.
(1)
B.
§ 325-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-102
1:243
In cases where previously preexisting lots were used for earth
removal/sand and gravel mining and continued use is planned,
accommodations must be made for soil absorption systems and/
or stormwater runoff discharge outside of the three-hundred-foot
wetland buffer. All of these earth removal/sand and gravel mining
or related operations shall be located at the maximum possible
distance from the shoreline elevation of a pond. Additional
provisions for protection of adjacent ponds are also advised in
these instances. Facilities for the dumping of construction debris or
other solid waste, including wood waste reclamation facilities, are
prohibited within the Six Ponds Special District.
(2)
Operations permit. Earth removal shall be allowed only under an
operations permit issued by the Planning Board. Any applicant must
first file a written application for this purpose on Form 11 that includes
the required information and materials. Permits shall be issued for a
period of not more than two years. An operations permit only covers
earth removal and sand and gravel mining. All applicants for earth
removal operations permits are also subject to site plan review by the
Planning Board.
Required elements for application. Ten sets of plans drawn to a
scale of at least one inch equals 40 feet, prepared and stamped
by a registered land surveyor and registered engineer, shall be
submitted containing the following information:
Preexcavation plan.
Existing property lines for the subject property, with
names and addresses of all direct abutters.
[1]
Existing topography in the proposed area for earth
removal and for 100 feet beyond the proposed area within
the boundaries of the subject property.
[2]
[3] Any existing wetlands.
Estimates of the evaluation of historic high groundwater
as determined from monitoring wells and historical water
table fluctuation compiled by United States Geological
Survey (USGS).
[4]
[5] Grades below which excavation will not take place.
[6] Existing cover vegetation and trees.
[7] Proposed signage.
[8] Surface runoff plan.
[9] Commencement and estimated completion dates.
[10]Municipal lien certificate.
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 325-102 HARWICH CODE § 325-102
1:244
Proof of ownership of the property in question. If the
applicant is not the owner of the property, the owners will
provide a notarized statement that they are aware of and
support the applicant's request.
[11]
Post-excavation plan.
Proposed finish grades upon completion of removal and
restoration activities.
[1]
[2] Proposed cover vegetation and trees.
(b)
Waivers. The Planning Board may waive any of the above
requirements. An applicant seeking a waiver from any of these
requirements should include a written request for waivers with the
application materials for the operations permit.
(2)
Review considerations.
Before granting a , the Planning Board shall give due
consideration to the location of the proposed earth removal,
the general character of the surrounding neighborhood, the
protection of water supply, and the general safety of the public
on the public ways in the vicinity and in any publicly accessible
areas adjacent to the earth removal operation, as well as those
set forth in § 325-90 (Purpose).
(a)
Where the subject property covers an area larger than five
acres, the operations permit may be granted for a specific area
not to exceed five contiguous acres. Approval of additional
areas shall be contingent upon the satisfactory completion
and reclamation of each previous section. The Planning Board
may allow the applicant to delay reclamation of a specified
area to facilitate circulation on the site and for continuity of
the earthmoving operation. Work of any sort connected with
earthmoving shall not be performed on more than one phase
area at a time without prior approval of the Planning Board.
(b)
(3)
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing
following the procedures set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9 (Special
permits).
(4)
Criteria for approval. Approval by the Planning Board will be contingent
upon receipt of a removal and restoration plan by the applicant.
Approval shall be based on the following criteria:
Removal criteria.
Areas proposed for excavation shall be posted and/or secured
to prevent trespassing. Security measures may include
signage, fencing, vegetated screening or other suitable
measures.
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 325-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-102
1:245
Finish grade shall not lie below a level that would reasonably
be considered a desirable grade for later development of the
area or below the grades specified on the plan accompanying
the permit application. The Board may specify a base grade
below which excavation shall not take place under any
circumstances. No excavation shall take place within 10 feet of
historic high groundwater.
(b)
Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water and for
prevention of wind or water erosion carrying materials onto
adjoining properties.
(c)
A minimum two-hundred-foot buffer strip shall be maintained
at all boundaries of earth removal/sand and gravel mining
operations. Excavation may take place within the buffer strip;
however, a slope of not greater than four feet horizontal to one
foot vertical shall be maintained.
(d)
All stumps shall be removed to a licensed wood waste
reclamation facility.
(e)
A road map shall be provided indicating the routes to be used
to transport the materials removed. The map will include any
driveways to and from the subject property. Not more than one
entrance or exit from a public or private way shall be provided
to any area of operation. Access points shall be located in
such a way so as to avoid routing of vehicles over developed
residential streets if possible.
(f)
No excavation shall be allowed closer than 300 feet to a natural
stream or pond.
(g)
No topsoil (loam) or subsoil (hardening) shall be removed from
any area of ground within the legal limits of the Town
consisting of more than 50,000 square feet, other than that
which is incidental to and in connection with the construction
of a building on the same lot, unless that person removing such
topsoil or subsoil shall replant the entire area with rye, vetch,
wheat, legumes or any permanent cover crop or reforest the
area and stabilize the soil.
(h)
Operation hours shall be only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. weekdays, excluding Sundays and legal holidays,
and loaded trucks may leave the subject parcel only within
these hours.
(i)
Earth removal/sand and gravel operations must comply with
existing state and federal regulations governing the visibility,
sound and airborne particulates from processing equipment
and dust created through the operations of the pit.
(j)
§ 325-102 HARWICH CODE § 325-102
1:246
Restoration. Following the expiration or withdrawal of a permit,
or upon voluntary cessation of operations, the entire area shall be
restored as follows:
All land shall be graded so that no slope exceeds one foot
vertical rise in a four-foot horizontal distance and shall be
graded to safely provide for drainage without erosion.
(a)
The entire area shall be covered with not less than four inches
of topsoil, which shall be planted with cover vegetation
adequate to prevent soil erosion.
(b)
(2)
Additional conditions. The Planning Board must be notified of any
transfer of ownership or legal interest or change in contractual interest
in the subject premises within 10 days of such transfer or change.
Failure to do so will be grounds for revocation of said permit.
E.
Renewal or review of permit.
No operations permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
section for a period of more than two years. A permit may be
renewed upon application without a public hearing at the
discretion of the Planning Board. Prior to any renewal, an
inspection of the premises shall be made by the Planning Board
or its agent to determine if the provisions of this bylaw and the
operations permit have been and are being complied with.
(1)
The Planning Board may conduct a duly noticed public hearing at
any time to determine whether any operations permit has been or
is being violated and shall notify the Building Official to request
an inspection of the property and appropriate enforcement if
necessary.
(2)
F.
Expenses. The Town shall require the permit holder to pay a permit fee
based on the following: for up to one acre to be excavated: $200; for
each additional acre: $100, to a maximum fee of $600 for five acres.
G.
Applicability.
Removal of earth material from a parcel for which removal was
previously authorized under a special permit pursuant to Town
of Harwich Zoning Bylaw Article XV (Special Conditions) shall
be permitted until the expiration date of said permit. From that
expiration date, full compliance with the requirements of this bylaw
must be met.
(1)
In the case when no special permit was ever issued for the removal
of earth materials under the prior zoning bylaw because said
activity preceded the adoption of said zoning bylaw, an owner and/
or operator must file an application for an operations permit within
90 days of the effective date of this bylaw as set forth in Subsection
C (Operations permit).
(2)
H.
§ 325-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-103
1:247
§ 325-103. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this bylaw invalid,
the remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of
any section or sections or parts of any section or sections of this bylaw shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of the bylaw.
§ 325-103 HARWICH CODE § 325-103
1:248
ARTICLE XVII
Floodplain Regulations
§ 325-104. Purpose.
The purposes of the floodplain regulations are to ensure public safety
through reducing the threats to life and personal injury, to eliminate new
hazards to emergency response officials, to prevent the occurrence of public
emergencies resulting from water quality contamination and pollution due
to flooding, to avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flood
would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the
community beyond the site of flooding, to eliminate costs associated with
the response and cleanup of flooding conditions and to reduce damage to
public and private property resulting from flooding waters.
§ 325-105. Floodplain areas. [Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The
District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Harwich
designated as Zone A, AE, AO, or VE on the Barnstable County Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance
Program. The map panels of the Barnstable County FIRM that are wholly
or partially within the Town of Harwich are panel numbers 25001C0584J,
25001C0592J, 25001C0601J, 25001C0602J, 25001C0603J, 25001C0604J,
25001C0606J, 25001C0607J, 25001C0608J, 25001C0609J, 25001C0611J,
25001C0612J, 25001C0613J, 25001C0616J, 25001C0617J, 25001C0626J
and 250010628J dated July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the District
may be defined by the one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown on
the FIRM and further defined by the Barnstable County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk,
Planning Department, and Building Official.
§ 325-106. Use regulations.
Existing regulations.
All development in the floodplain, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with the following:
Section of the State Building Code which addresses floodplain
and coastal high-hazard areas (currently 780 CMR).
[Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(a)
Wetland Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00).
(b)
Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00).
[Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 325-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-106
1:249
Coastal Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 12.00).
[Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(d)
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
(e)
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sewage
Regulations, Town of Harwich.
(f)
(g) Harwich Wetlands Protective Bylaw.37
Any variance from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state or local regulations may only be granted in
accordance with the required variance procedures of these state or
local regulations.
(2)
Other use regulations.
Within Zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths are
required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures.
(1)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. [Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(2)
Man-made alterations of sand dunes are prohibited within Zone
VE which would increase potential flood damage. [Amended
5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(3)
Located within the floodplain are areas designated as coastal highhazard
areas (Zone VE. Since these areas are extremely hazardous
due to high-velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave
wash, the following provision shall apply: all new construction
shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. Existing
contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must
be included on any plan proposal. [Amended 5-6-2014 STM by
Art. 3]
(4)
All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
(c)
(5)
B.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Wetlands Protection.
§ 325-106 HARWICH CODE § 325-106
1:250
§ 325-107. Permitted uses.
The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no
obstructions to flood flows are encouraged, provided that they are
permitted in the underlying district and they do not require structures, fill,
or storage of material or equipment:
§ 325-108. Definitions.
The definitions contained herein pertain only to this article of the bylaw.
Each lot will be served by water and sanitary disposal systems
certified by the Board of Health to be so designed as to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters in
the event of flooding to base elevations.
(d)
In unnumbered A Zones, in the absence of Federal Emergency
Management Agency data, the base flood elevations shall be
determined by obtaining, reviewing and reasonably utilizing any
existing base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is
required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A Zones. [Amended 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(6)
In a riverine situation, the Community Rating System Coordinator
shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse: [Added 5-6-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(a) Adjacent communities.
NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation, 251 Causeway Street, Suite
600-700, Boston, MA 02114-2104.
(b)
NFIP Program Specialist, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Region I, 99 High Street, 6th Floor, Boston, MA 02110.
(c)
(7)
A. Agricultural uses, such as farming, grazing, horticulture, etc.
B. Forestry and nursery uses.
C. Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.
D. Conservation of water, plants, and wildlife.
E. Wildlife management areas and foot, bicycle and/or horse paths.
Temporary nonresidential structures used in connection with fishing,
growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises.
F.
G. Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
§ 325-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-108
1:251
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99,
V1-30, VE, or V.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high-velocity waters,
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on
a FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DISTRICT — Floodplain District.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — Administers
the National Flood Insurance Program. FEMA provides a nationwide flood
hazard area mapping study program for communities as well as regulatory
standards for development in the flood hazard areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of floodrelated
erosion hazards.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of state and local
regulations.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) — Administered by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of October 6, 1976. For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
"new construction" means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective of an initial FIRM or after December
31, 1974, whichever is later.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood and/or
flood-related erosion hazards and shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30,
AE, A99, AH, V, V1-30, or VE.
§ 325-108 HARWICH CODE § 325-108
1:252
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure," for insurance
coverage purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas
or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to
a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on foundation. For
the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration, or repair but does not include building materials or
supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration, or repair, unless
such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.
§ 325-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-108
1:253

ARTICLE XVIII
Regulations for Wind Energy Systems
§ 325-109. Residential wind energy systems.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of residential wind energy systems installed
to reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied electricity.
A.
Findings.
Harwich finds that wind energy is an abundant, renewable, and
nonpolluting energy resource and that its conversion to electricity
will reduce our dependence on nonrenewable energy resources
and decrease the air and water pollution that results from the
use of conventional energy sources. Distributed small wind energy
systems will also enhance the reliability and power quality of the
power grid, reduce peak power demands, and help diversify the
state's energy supply portfolio. Small wind systems also make the
residential electricity supply market more competitive by
promoting customer choice.
(1)
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has enacted a number of
laws and programs to encourage the use of small-scale renewable
residential energy systems, including rebates, net metering,
property and sales tax exemptions, and solar easements. However,
many existing zoning ordinances contain restrictions which, while
not intended to discourage the installation of small wind turbines,
can substantially increase the time and costs required to obtain
necessary construction permits.
(2)
Therefore, it is necessary to standardize and streamline the
issuance of permits for small residential wind energy systems so
that this clean, renewable energy resource can be utilized in a costeffective
and timely manner.
(3)
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 25
kW and which is intended to reduce on-site consumption of residential
utility power for a single residential lot.
ROTOR — The blades and hub of the wind turbine that rotate during
turbine operations.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above existing grade of the fixed portion
of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
C.
Special permit requirements. The Planning Board is hereby established
as the special permit granting authority in connection with the
D.
§ 325-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-109
1:255
construction of residential wind energy systems (RWES) in the Town of
Harwich. A special permit may be issued for the erection of a RWES as
an accessory use in any designated residential district or in connection
with any residential use in a designated commercial district, provided
that the following conditions are met:
Lot size. RWES may not be placed on lots of less than 40,000
square feet.
(1)
Tower placement. No part of the wind system, support structure, or
the structure on which the rotor is located is to be located within a
wetland area.
(2)
Tower height. Tower height shall be limited to 150 feet from
existing grade.
(3)
Setback. No part of the wind system support structure, including
guy wire anchors, may extend closer to the property boundaries
than the standard structure setbacks for the zone where the land
is located. The structure on which the rotor is located must be
set back at least 10 feet from any habitable structure on the
lot on which it is located. The structure on which the rotor is
located must be set back from habitable structures on abutting
lots in place at the time of RWES installation a distance equal
to the height of the structure from ground level to the tip of the
rotor blade. The structure on which the rotor is located must be
set back from lot lines a distance equal to 3/4 of the height of
the structure from ground level to the tip of the rotor blade. A
setback from a lot line shall not be required when the abutting
owner(s) grants an easement to the owner of the RWES. In a case
where the applicant is also the owner of the abutting property, the
setback shall be measured from the furthest lot line of the abutting
property. Setback distances may be reduced with the permission of
the abutting property owner(s) and the Planning Board.
(4)
Noise. In no instance may the noise level at the lot line exceed 10
dB(A) over the ambient sound level. In a case where the applicant
is also the owner of the abutting property, the distance shall be
measured from the furthest lot line of the abutting property. In
addition, any RWES is required to comply with Chapter 189, Noise,
of the Town of Harwich General Bylaws.
(5)
Prevention of tower access. Climbing access to the tower shall
be limited by one of the following methods: by placing climbing
apparatus no lower than 10 feet from the ground, or by placing
shielding over climbing apparatus or access, or by installation of a
fence.
(6)
Compliance with State Building Code. Building permit applications
for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base,
and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing
(7)
§ 325-109 HARWICH CODE § 325-109
1:256
§ 325-110. Wind energy systems in commercial districts.
compliance with the State Building Code and certified by a licensed
professional engineer shall also be submitted. This analysis is
frequently supplied by the manufacturer.
Compliance with FAA regulations. Small wind energy systems must
comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
(8)
Compliance with Massachusetts Electric Code. Building permit
applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied
by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to
allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms
to the Massachusetts Electrical Code. This information is
frequently supplied by the manufacturer.
(9)
Utility notification. No small wind energy system shall be installed
until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
(10)
Special permit approval criteria. Any special permit granted shall
meet the conditions of § 325-51A of the Zoning Bylaw.
(11)
Abandonment. A residential wind energy system (RWES) will be
considered to be abandoned if it is not operated for a period of two
years or if it is designated a safety hazard by the Building Official.
Once an RWES is designated as abandoned, the owner shall be required
to immediately physically remove the installation. "Physically remove"
shall include, but not be limited to:
Removal of RWES, any equipment shelters and security barriers
from the subject property.
(1)
Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance
with local and state solid waste disposal regulations.
(2)
Restoring the location of the RWES to its natural condition, except
that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the aftercondition.
(3)
E.
Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and, in the
event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid
for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and
effect.
F.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ROTOR — The blades and hub of the wind turbine that rotate during
turbine operations.
A.
§ 325-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-110
1:257
§ 325-111. Wind energy systems in the Industrial - Limited (IL)
District.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above existing grade of the fixed portion
of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than
25 kW and which is intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility
power for a single nonresidential lot. A meteorological/test tower used
to measure factors including wind speed and wind directions for the
purpose of determining the appropriateness of a specific location for a
wind energy system is also considered part of a wind energy system.
Special permit requirements. The Planning Board is hereby established
as the special permit granting authority in connection with the
construction of wind energy systems (WES) in commercial districts in
the Town of Harwich. A special permit may be issued for the erection
of a WES as an accessory use in any designated commercial district,
provided that the conditions outlined in § 325-109D(1) to (11) of this
article are met.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ROTOR — The blades and hub of the wind turbine that rotate during
turbine operations.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above existing grade of the fixed portion
of the tower, excluding the wind turbine itself.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than
25 kW and which is intended to reduce on-site consumption of utility
power for a single nonresidential lot. A meteorological/test tower used
to measure factors including wind speed and wind directions for the
purpose of determining the appropriateness of a specific location for a
wind energy system is also considered part of a wind energy system.
A.
Special permit requirements. The Planning Board is hereby established
as the special permit granting authority in connection with the
construction of wind energy systems (WES) in the Industrial - Limited
(IL) District in the Town of Harwich. A special permit may be issued for
the erection of a WES as an accessory use in any designated industrial
district, provided that the conditions outlined in § 325-109D(1) to (11)
of this article are met.
B.
§ 325-110 HARWICH CODE § 325-111
1:258
ARTICLE XIX
Large-Scale Wind Generation38
§ 325-112. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide for the construction and operation
of large-scale wind facilities and to provide standards for the placement,
design, construction, monitoring, modification and removal of such wind
facilities that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural
and historic resources and provide adequate financial assurance for
decommissioning.
§ 325-113. Applicability.
§ 325-114. Definitions.
HEIGHT — The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade to
the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height.
METEOROLOGICAL OR WIND MONITORING TOWER — A temporary
tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction,
typically used to determine how much wind is available to generate power
from a wind turbine at a site.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production equipment. This output is typically specified by the
manufacturer in kilowatts or megawatts with a "nameplate" on the
equipment.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY (SPGA) — The SPGA shall be
the Planning Board for the issuance of special permits to construct and
operate wind facilities.
SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE — Such evidence as a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to support a conclusion.
WIND FACILITY — All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in
connection with the conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but
is not limited to, transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment,
support structure, foundations, generation equipment, substations,
transformers, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines.
This article applies to all large-scale and on-site wind facilities proposed
to be constructed after the effective date of this article. It does not
apply to single stand-alone wind turbines under 25 kilowatts of rated
nameplate capacity.
A.
Any physical modification to existing wind facilities that materially
alters the type or increases the size of such facilities or other equipment
shall require a special permit.
B.
38.Editor's Note: This article was added 5-4-2009 ATM by Art. 34.
§ 325-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-114
1:259
WIND FACILITY, LARGE-SCALE — A wind facility with a rated nameplate
capacity of over 25 kilowatts.
WIND FACILITY, MUNICIPAL — A wind facility located on Town-owned
property which is designed to provide some portion of its electrical output
for the use or benefit of the Town and without regard to the ownership
of the structure or equipment. A third party may own and operate such
facility. The Town may benefit by utilizing a portion or all of the energy
generated by the facility and/or the sale of energy and RECS (renewable
energy certificates).
WIND FACILITY, ON-SITE — A wind project which is located at a
commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional, or public facility that will
consume more than 50% of the electricity generated by the project on
site or at other community-owned facilities through virtual net metering in
accordance with the Green Communities Act of 2008.
WIND FACILITY, UTILITY-SCALE — A commercial wind facility where the
primary use of the facility is electrical generation to be sold to the wholesale
or retail electricity markets.
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more
blades.
§ 325-115. General requirements.
Special permit granting authority (SPGA).
No wind facility over 25 kilowatts of rated nameplate capacity
shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified as provided in
this article without first obtaining a permit from the SPGA. The
construction of a wind facility shall be permitted in any zoning
district subject to the issuance of a special permit and provided
that the use complies with all requirements set forth in this section
and §§ 325-16, 325-17 and 325-18. All such wind energy facilities
shall be constructed and operated in a manner that minimizes
any adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts. No special
permit shall be granted unless the SPGA finds in writing that:
(a) The specific site is an appropriate location for such use;
(b) The use is not expected to adversely affect the neighborhood;
There is not expected to be any serious hazard to pedestrians
or vehicles from the use;
(c)
(d) No nuisance is expected to be created by the use; and
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
proper operation of the use.
(e)
(1)
A.
§ 325-114 HARWICH CODE § 325-115
1:260
§ 325-116. General siting standards.
Such permits may also impose reasonable conditions, safeguards
and limitations and may require the applicant to implement all
reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the
wind facility, should they occur.
(2)
Meteorological or wind monitoring towers shall be permitted in
all zoning districts subject to issuance of a building permit for
a temporary structure and subject to reasonable regulations
concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard
size, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking, and building coverage
requirements.
(3)
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all such proposed wind facilities shall be consistent
with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including
but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, environmental,
electrical, communications and aviation requirements.
B.
Proof of liability insurance. The applicant shall be required to provide
evidence of liability insurance in an amount and for a duration sufficient
to cover personal injury to the public and loss of facilities and
structures occasioned by the failure of the facility.
C.
Site control. At the time of its application for a special permit, the
applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective control
of the project site sufficient to allow for installation and use of the
proposed facility. Documentation shall also include proof of control over
setback areas and access roads, if required. "Control" shall mean the
legal authority to prevent the use or construction of any structure for
human habitation within the setback areas.
D.
Height. Wind energy conversion facilities shall be no higher than 300
feet above the natural grade. The height of all wind turbines shall be
measured to the highest point reached by the rotor blades. The SPGA
may allow this height to be exceeded to a maximum of 400 feet as part
of the special permit process if the project proponent can demonstrate
that the additional height is needed, and that the additional benefits of
the higher tower outweigh any increased adverse impacts, and satisfies
all requirements of this bylaw. Monopole towers are the preferred type
of support for wind turbines.
A.
Setbacks.
Wind turbines shall be set back from the property line a minimum
distance equal to the overall height of the proposed wind turbine.
(1)
Setback waiver.
The SPGA may reduce the minimum setback distance as
appropriate based on site-specific considerations, if the project
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 325-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-116
1:261
§ 325-117. Design standards.
satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special permit
under the provisions of this article.
The SPGA may reduce minimum setback distances as
appropriate based on site-specific conditions and only after
review of substantial evidence, including but not limited to
detailed engineering reports or product engineering
certification, which demonstrates that safety concerns have
been minimized and that setbacks have been complied with to
a reasonable extent. A request for a waiver from the setback
requirements should be supported by a letter from the abutting
property owner(s) whose land would be encroached on by the
setback indicating their acknowledgement and agreement to
waive the setback requirement.
(b)
As part of a waiver request, the applicant shall be required
to provide evidence of liability insurance in an amount and
for duration sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons,
structures, or property occasioned by the failure of the facility,
including but without limitation coverage for adjacent
properties.
(c)
Color and finish. The SPGA shall have discretion over the wind facility
color, although a neutral, nonreflective exterior color designed to blend
with the surrounding environment is encouraged.
A.
Lighting and signage.
Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the
Federal Aviation Administration. Lighting of other parts of the
wind facility, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to
that required for safety and operational purposes and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
(1)
Signage. Signs on the wind facility shall comply with the
requirements of the Town's sign regulations39 and shall be limited
to:
Those necessary to identify the owner, provide a twenty-fourhour
emergency contact phone number, and warn of any
danger.
(a)
Educational signs providing information about the facility and
the benefits of renewable energy.
(b)
(2)
Advertising. Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the wind energy facility.
(3)
B.
39.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 325-116 HARWICH CODE § 325-117
1:262
§ 325-118. Safety, aesthetic and environmental standards.
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate
utility connections from the wind facility underground, depending
on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site
and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical
transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if
required by the utility provider.
(4)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to such wind
facilities shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the
bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area,
setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All
such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to equipment
shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other and shall be contained
within the turbine tower whenever technically and economically
feasible. Structures shall only be used for housing of equipment for this
particular site. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from
view by vegetation and/or equipment located in an underground vault
or within the base of the support monopole. Structures shall be joined
or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
C.
Support towers. Monopole towers are the preferred type of support for
the wind facilities.
D.
Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project
summary and site plan to the local emergency services entity, as
designated by the SPGA. Upon request the applicant shall cooperate
with local emergency services in developing an emergency response
plan.
A.
Unauthorized access. Wind turbines or other structures part of a wind
facility shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access.
B.
Shadow/flicker. Wind facilities shall be sited in a manner that minimizes
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of proving
that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring
or adjacent uses through either siting or mitigation.
C.
Noise.
The wind facility and associated equipment shall conform to the
provisions of the Department of Environmental Protection's
Division of Air Quality Noise Regulations (310 CMR 7.10), unless
the Department and the SPGA agree that those provisions shall not
be applicable. A source of sound will be considered to be violating
these regulations if the source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10 dB(A)
above ambient; or
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 325-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-118
1:263
§ 325-119. Monitoring and maintenance.
§ 325-120. Abandonment and decommissioning.
Produces a "pure tone" condition, when an octave band center
frequency sound-pressure level exceeds the two adjacent
center frequency sound-pressure levels by three decibels or
more.
(b)
These criteria are measured both at the property line and at the
nearest inhabited residence. "Ambient" is defined as the
background A-weighted sound level that is exceeded 90% of the
time measured during equipment hours. The ambient may also be
established by other means with consent from DEP. An analysis
prepared by a qualified engineer shall be presented to demonstrate
compliance with these noise standards. The SPGA, in consultation
with the Department, shall determine whether such violations shall
be measured at the property line or at the nearest inhabited
residence.
(2)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the wind facility and is
otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
E.
Facility conditions. The applicant shall maintain the wind facility in
good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site
access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief
and emergency medical services. The project owner shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the wind facility and any access
road, unless accepted as a public way, and the cost of repairing any
damage occurring as a result of operation and construction.
A.
Modifications. All material modifications to a wind facility made after
issuance of the special permit shall require approval by the SPGA as
provided in this article.
B.
Removal requirements. Any wind facility which has reached the end
of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed. When the
wind facility is scheduled to be decommissioned, the applicant shall
notify the Town by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued
operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall physically
remove the wind facility no more than 150 days after the date of
discontinued operations. At the time of removal, the wind facility site
shall be restored to the state it was in before the facility was
constructed or any other legally authorized use. More specifically,
decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all wind turbines, structures, equipment,
security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(1)
A.
§ 325-118 HARWICH CODE § 325-120
1:264
§ 325-121. Term of special permit.
§ 325-122. Application process and requirements.
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local
and state waste disposal regulations.
(2)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize
erosion. The SPGA may allow the owner to leave landscaping or
designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion
and disruption to vegetation.
(3)
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning,
the facility shall be considered abandoned when the facility fails to
operate for more than one year without the written consent of the
SPGA. The SPGA shall determine in its decision what proportion of
the facility is inoperable for the facility to be considered abandoned. If
the applicant fails to remove the wind facility in accordance with the
requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the
proposed date of decommissioning, the Town shall have the authority
to decommission and dismantle the wind energy facility at the owner's
expense.
B.
Financial surety. The SPGA may require the applicant for utility-scale
wind facilities to provide a form of surety, either through escrow
account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event
the Town must remove the facility, of an amount and form determined to
be reasonable by the SPGA, but in no event to exceed more than 125%
of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements
set forth herein, as determined by the applicant. Such surety will not
be required for municipally or state-owned facilities. The applicant
shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a
mechanism for cost of living adjustment.
C.
A special permit issued for a wind facility shall be valid for 25 years,
unless extended or renewed. The time period may be extended or the
permit renewed by the SPGA upon satisfactory operation of the facility.
Request for renewal must be submitted at least 180 days prior to
expiration of the special permit. Submitting a renewal request shall
allow for continued operation of the facility until the SPGA acts. At the
end of that period (including extensions and renewals), the wind facility
shall be removed as required by this article.
A.
The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number and
identify a responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and
complaints throughout the life of the project.
B.
A. Application procedures.
§ 325-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-122
1:265
General. The application for a wind facility shall be filed in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the SPGA concerning
special permits.
(1)
Application. Each application for a special permit shall be filed by
the applicant with the city or town clerk pursuant to Section 9 of
Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
(2)
Required documents. The applicant shall provide the SPGA with 12
copies of the application. All plans and maps shall be prepared,
stamped and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
Massachusetts. Included in the application shall be:
Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, as
well as all co-applicants or property owners, if any.
(1)
The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the applicant.
(2)
Documentation of the legal right to use the wind facility site,
including the requirements set forth in Subsection C(2)(a) of this
section.
(3)
B.
Siting and design. The applicant shall provide the SPGA with a
description of the property which shall include:
Location map. Copy of a portion of the most recent USGS
Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, showing the proposed
facility site, including turbine sites, and the area within at least two
miles from the facility. Zoning district designation for the subject
parcel should be included; however a copy of a zoning map with the
parcel identified is suitable.
(1)
Site plan. A plan, one inch equals 200 feet, of the proposed wind
facility site, with contour intervals of no more than 10 feet, showing
the following:
Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within
300 feet.
(a)
Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g.,
residence, garage, etc.), on site parcel and all adjacent parcels
within 500 feet. Include distances from the wind facility to
each building shown.
(b)
Location of all roads, public and private, on the site parcel
and adjacent parcels within 300 feet and proposed roads or
driveways, either temporary or permanent.
(c)
Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees,
on the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 300 feet.
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 325-122 HARWICH CODE § 325-122
1:266
Proposed location and design of wind facility, including all
turbines, ground equipment, appurtenant structures,
transmission infrastructure, access, fencing, exterior lighting,
etc.
(e)
Location of viewpoints referenced below in Subsection C(3) of
this section.
(f)
Visualizations. The SPGA shall select between three and six sight
lines, including from the nearest building with a view of the wind
facility, for pre- and post-construction view representations. Sites
for the view representations shall be selected from populated areas
or public ways within a two-mile radius of the wind facility. View
representations shall have the following characteristics:
View representations shall be in color and shall include actual
pre-construction photographs and accurate post-construction
simulations of the height and breadth of the wind facility (e.g.,
superimpositions of the wind facility onto photographs of
existing views).
(a)
All view representations will include existing, or proposed,
buildings or tree coverage.
(b)
Include description of the technical procedures followed in
producing the visualization (distances, angles, lens, etc.).
(c)
(3)
Landscape plan. A plan indicating all proposed changes to the
landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads or
driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting,
other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structures. Lighting shall
be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and, except as
required by the FAA, be directed downward with full cutoff fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
D.
Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a plan
for maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls, as well as
general procedures for operational maintenance of the wind facility.
E.
Compliance documents. If required under previous sections of this
bylaw, the applicant will provide with the application:
(1) A description of financial surety that § 325-120C of this article.
(2) Proof of liability insurance that satisfies § 325-115C of this article.
(3) Certification of height approval from the FAA.
A statement that satisfies § 325-118D, listing existing and
maximum projected noise levels from the wind facility.
(4)
F.
Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for a
special permit, the SPGA will be authorized to hire outside consultants,
G.
§ 325-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-122
1:267
pursuant to Section 53G of Chapter 44 of the Massachusetts General
Laws. As necessary, the applicant may be required to pay not more than
50% of the independent consultant's costs.
§ 325-122 HARWICH CODE § 325-122
1:268
ARTICLE XX
Amendment and Validity
§ 325-123. Validity.
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or illegality of any provision of this bylaw
or boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall not have any effect upon the
validity, constitutionality, or legality of any other provisions or boundary.
§ 325-124. Amendment in whole.
The Protective Bylaw originally adopted in 1951, and amended from time to
time, is hereby amended in whole and replaced in whole by this bylaw.
§ 325-125. Amendment, adoption or change.
Amendment, adoption or change of this bylaw may be initiated by the
submission to the Board of Selectmen of a proposed zoning ordinance or
bylaw by the Board of Selectmen, a board of appeals, planning board,
regional planning agency, by an individual owning land to be affected by
change or adoption, or by request of registered voters pursuant to MGL c.
39, § 10. The Board of Selectmen shall, within 14 days of receipt of such
proposed zoning ordinance or bylaw, submit it to the Planning Board for a
public hearing.
§ 325-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-125
1:269

ARTICLE XXI
Outdoor Lighting
[Added 5-4-2010 STM by Art. 7]
§ 325-126. Purpose.
The regulation of outdoor lighting is intended to enhance public safety and
welfare by providing for adequate and appropriate outdoor lighting, provide
for lighting that will complement the character of the Town, reduce glare,
minimize light trespass, and reduce the cost and waste of unnecessary
energy consumption.
§ 325-127. Applicability.
§ 325-128. Exemptions.
The following outdoor lighting shall be exempt from the specific
requirements of this bylaw but any such lighting shall, nevertheless, be
placed and directed so as to minimize the detrimental effects of glare on
motorists, pedestrians and abutting lots:
§ 325-129. Definitions.
In addition to the terms defined in § 325-2 of this bylaw, the following
technical terms applying to lighting shall have the meaning indicated below.
Although set forth here for convenience, the terms shall have the same
effect as if set forth in § 325-2, Definitions.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted from the lamp, off the reflector or reflector
diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
The requirements of this section shall apply to outdoor lighting on lots
and parcels in all districts except as provided in § 325-128.
A.
When an existing outdoor lighting fixture is being modified, extended
or expanded, it shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
B.
Outdoor lighting that is accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling use
on a lot where such a use is the principal use.
A.
Outdoor temporary holiday lighting, provided it is illuminated only
during traditional holiday periods.
B.
Outdoor municipal lighting which shall be guided by a municipal
outdoor lighting policy.
C.
D. Traffic lights.
Warning and alarm lights that alert to a malfunction or emergency
situation.
E.
F. Lighting of flagpoles.
§ 325-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-129
1:271
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps, and which may
include a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens, or diffuser lens.
FOOTCANDLE (FC) — A measurement of the amount of light reaching an
object. A footcandle is the measurement of the intensity of one lumen of
light falling on one square foot of surface area one foot away from the
source.
FULLY-SHIELDED LUMINAIRE — A lamp and fixture assembly designed
with a cutoff angle of 90°, so that no direct light is emitted above a
horizontal plane.
GLARE — Light emitted from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to
produce annoyance, discomfort, or a reduction in a viewer's ability to see.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The vertical distance from the finished grade
of the ground directly below to the lowest direct light emitting part of the
luminaire.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
LIGHT FIXTURE — A lighting device that may be secured to a wall, ceiling,
pole, or post and is used to hold one or more lamps. Lighting fixtures are
designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamp(s), and to
connect the lamp(s) to the electrical power supply.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of direct light produced by a luminaire
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which it is located.
LUMEN — A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For purposes of this bylaw, the
lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by the
manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and
a fixture.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — The nighttime illumination of an outside area or
object by any man-made device that produces light, including lights located
indoors which are directed for outdoor illumination.
§ 325-130. Control of glare and light trespass.
Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated a total of more than 2,000
lumens (as reference, a one-hundred-watt incandescent lamp emits
about 1,750 lumens) shall be of fully shielded design and shall not emit
any direct light above a horizontal plane passing through the lowest
part of the light emitting luminaire.
A.
All luminaires shall be equipped with whatever shielding, lenses, or
cutoff devices are required to eliminate light trespass onto any street
or abutting lot or parcel and to minimize glare perceptible to persons
on any street or abutting lot or parcel.
B.
§ 325-129 HARWICH CODE § 325-130
1:272
§ 325-131. Lighting hours.
Outdoor lighting shall not be illuminated between midnight and 6:00 a.m.
with the following exceptions:
§ 325-132. Illumination levels.
Lighting levels shall be limited to that needed for good visibility. Guidelines
for average illumination levels of area to be lit are:
§ 325-133. Lighting plan.
Wherever outside lighting is proposed, every application for a building
permit, a special permit, a special permit with site plan review, a variance,
or an electrical permit, shall be accompanied by a lighting plan which
shall show the location and type of any outdoor luminaires, including the
height of the light fixture; the light fixture manufacturer's specification
data, including lumen output and photometric data showing cutoff angles;
the type of lamp such as metal halide, compact fluorescent, or high-pressure
sodium; and a photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination at
ground level, expressed in footcandles. The lighting plan shall demonstrate
by manufacturer's data, cross section drawings, or other means that all
luminaries shall comply with the requirements of § 325-130.
All luminaires shall be fully shielded and directed downward, except
that the walls of any building or freestanding sign may be up-lit to a
limited extent as long as the direct light from the light fixture shall be
confined to the surface of such sign or building.
C.
If the use is being operated, such as a business open to customers, or
where employees are working or where an institution or place of public
assembly is conducting an activity, normal illumination shall be allowed
during the activity and for not more than 1/2 hour prior to and after the
activity ceases.
A.
Low-level lighting sufficient for the security of persons or property on
the lot may be in operation between midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
the average illumination on the ground or on any vertical surface is not
greater than 0.5 footcandle.
B.
A. Parking areas: 1.0 footcandle.
B. Building exteriors: entry: 5.0 footcandles.
C. Building grounds: 1.0 footcandle.
D. Commercial roads: 2.0 footcandles.
E. Residential roads: 0.4 footcandle.
§ 325-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-133
1:273

ARTICLE XXII
Temporary Moratorium on the Sale and Distribution of Recreational
Marijuana
[Added 5-1-2017 ATM by Art. 37]
§ 325-134. Purpose.
§ 325-135. Definitions.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY — An entity licensed to test
marijuana and marijuana products, including certification for potency and
the presence of contaminants.[Added 5-7-2018ATM by Art. 36]
MANUFACTURE — To compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make
or prepare a marijuana product.
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Equipment, products, devices or materials
of any kind that are intended or designed for use in planting, propagating,
By vote at the state election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the
commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation, distribution,
possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes. The law
took effect on December 15, 2016, and (as amended on December 30,
2016; Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016, and thereafter, on July 28,
2017, by Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017) requires a Cannabis Control
Commission to issue regulations regarding the licensing of commercial
activities by March 15, 2018, and begin accepting applications for
licenses on April 1, 2018. [Amended 5-7-2018ATM by Art. 36]
A.
Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, nonmedical marijuana
establishments (hereinafter a "recreational marijuana establishment")
as defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, are not specifically addressed in the
Zoning Bylaw, and any regulations promulgated by the State Cannabis
Control Commission are expected to provide guidance to the Town
in regulating recreational marijuana establishments. [Amended
5-7-2018ATM by Art. 36]
B.
The regulation of recreational marijuana establishments and marijuana
retailers raise novel and complex legal, planning, and public safety
issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider the regulation
of recreational marijuana establishments and address such issues, as
well as to address the potential impact of the state regulations on
local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending
the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of recreational marijuana
establishments and other uses related to the regulation of recreational
marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on
the use of land and structures in the Town for recreational marijuana
establishments so as to allow the Town sufficient time to engage in
a planning process to address the effects of such structures and uses
in the Town and to adopt provisions of the Zoning Bylaw in a manner
consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
C.
§ 325-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-135
1:275
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing marijuana into the human body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate, process and
package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments and
to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to
consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator, independent
testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana-related business.[Amended
5-7-2018ATM by Art. 36]
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed to obtain,
manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana products, to
deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and
to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Products that have been manufactured and
contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated
forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other
ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible
products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to purchase and deliver
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and to
deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
marijuana establishments and to consumers.40
§ 325-136. Temporary moratorium. [Amended 5-7-2018ATM by Art.
36]
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision
of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary
moratorium on the use of land or structures for recreational marijuana
establishments. The moratorium shall be in effect through December 31,
2018. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning
process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the
Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission's regulations regarding
recreational marijuana establishments and related uses, determine whether
the Town shall restrict any, or all, recreational marijuana establishments
and shall consider adopting new provisions of the Zoning Bylaw to address
the impact and operation of recreational marijuana establishments and
related uses.
40.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “marijuana testing facility,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 36. See now the definition of
“independent testing laboratory.”
§ 325-135 HARWICH CODE § 325-137
1:276
§ 325-137. Severability.
The provisions of this bylaw are severable. If any provision, paragraph,
sentence, or clause of this bylaw or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the other provisions or application of this bylaw.
§ 325-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-137
1:277

ARTICLE XXIII
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Arrays
[Added 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 33]
§ 325-138. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the creation of new large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations (250kW or larger and
covering at least one acre in size) by providing standards for the placement,
design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of
such installations to address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic,
natural and historic resources, and provide adequate financial assurance
for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. The provisions set
forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair
of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations. This section
shall apply to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations
proposed for construction after the effective date of this section. This
section shall also pertain to physical modifications that materially alter the
type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment.
§ 325-139. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING — As-of-right siting shall mean that development
may proceed without the need for a special permit, variance, amendment,
waiver, or other discretionary approval. As-of-right development may be
subject to large-scale solar review to determine conformance with local
zoning ordinances or bylaws. Projects subject to large-scale solar review
cannot be prohibited, but can be reasonably regulated by the building
commissioner or local inspector.
DESIGNATED LOCATION — The location designated by the Zoning Bylaw,
in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, § 5, where
large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations may be sited asof-
right. Said location(s) are shown on the Zoning Map of Harwich pursuant
to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, § 4. This map is hereby made
a part of this section and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted
on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum nameplate
capacity of 250 kW DC. All large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be owned and operated by either the Town of Harwich or
under agreements with the Town of Harwich.
LARGE-SCALE SOLAR REVIEW — A review by the Planning Board to
determine conformance with local zoning ordinances or bylaws.
§ 325-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-139
1:279
ON-SITE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic
installation that is constructed at a location where other uses of the
underlying property occur.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of the
electric power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current (DC).
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY — An arrangement of solar photovoltaic
panels.
§ 325-140. Large-scale solar review.
Prior to construction, installation or modification, large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger nameplate
capacity shall undergo large-scale solar review by the Planning Board as
provided below. In accordance with Section 22(c) of the Massachusetts
Green Communities Act, large-scale solar review shall be expedited and
no decision shall be rendered more than one year after the date of the
application.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and
federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety,
construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All
buildings and fixtures forming part of the installation shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Building Code. No large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed,
installed or modified without first obtaining a building permit.
A.
Large-scale solar review application and plan requirements. All
applications and plans shall be filed with the Planning Board.
Two copies of a properly executed application for large-scale solar
review, along with a filing fee of $525.
(1)
Twelve copies of site plan(s), prepared by a Registered Land
Surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, at a
scale of one inch equals 40 feet, including:
(a) North arrow and locus map;
(b) Property boundaries;
(c) Name/description of project;
Topography, both existing and proposed, including proposed
drainage;
(d)
(e) Zoning designation;
Location of proposed structures, drives, etc., including
setbacks;
(f)
(2)
B.
§ 325-139 HARWICH CODE § 325-140
1:280
§ 325-141. Operation and maintenance plan.
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to
the installation, stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
§ 325-142. Utility notification.
No large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be
constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the
utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to
(g) Sign(s) location(s);
(h) Landscaping, both existing and proposed;
(i) Lighting, including locations, type and wattage.
Twelve copies each of the following:
Plans or drawings of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation prepared by a registered professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures;
(a)
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all
National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and
overcurrent devices;
(b)
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter(s);
(c)
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control
of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and
operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation;
(d)
(e) An operation and maintenance plan (see also § 325-141);
(f) Proof of liability insurance;
(g) Description of financial surety that satisfies § 325-148;
A public outreach plan, including project development
timeline, which indicates how the project proponent will meet
the required site plan review notification procedures and
otherwise inform abutters and the community.
(h)
(3)
Waiver of requirements. Upon written request submitted as part of the
application, the Planning Board may waive any requirements.
C.
§ 325-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-142
1:281
be located has been informed of the installation owner or operator's intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems
shall be exempt from this requirement.
§ 325-143. Dimension and density requirements.
§ 325-144. Design standards.
§ 325-145. Safety and environmental standards.
Setbacks. Setbacks from all boundary lines shall be a minimum of 50
feet.
A.
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be subject to
reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures,
lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage
requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including, but not
limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and
substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other.
Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by
vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
B.
Lighting. Lighting of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law.
Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational
purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
Where feasible, lighting of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall
incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
A.
Signage. Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall comply with a Harwich Sign Code. A sign that
identifies the owner and provides a twenty-four-hour emergency
contact phone number shall be required. Large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or
operator of the installation.
B.
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning
Board, shall be made to place all utility connections for the largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation underground,
depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of
the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical
transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if
required by the utility provider.
C.
Emergency services. The large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Harwich
A.
§ 325-142 HARWICH CODE § 325-145
1:282
§ 325-146. Monitoring and maintenance.
§ 325-147. Abandonment and decommissioning.
Fire Chief. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with
local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan.
All means of shutting down the installation shall be clearly marked.
The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public
inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and bylaws.
B.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation conditions.
The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner
or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance
shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level
acceptable to the Harwich Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services.
The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining
the installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
A.
Modifications. All material modifications to a large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the
required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board.
B.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life
or has been abandoned consistent with § 325-147B shall be removed.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more
than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or
operator shall notify the large-scale solar review authority by certified
mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers
and transmission lines from the site.
(1)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local,
state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(2)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize
erosion. The large-scale solar review authority may allow the owner
or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
(3)
A.
§ 325-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-147
1:283
§ 325-148. Financial surety.
Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall
provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise,
to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town must remove the
installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount and form
determined to be reasonable by Planning Board, but in no event to exceed
more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional
requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project proponent.
Such surety will not be required for municipally or state-owned facilities.
The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs
associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount
shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to
inflation.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning
or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned
when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written
consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the
installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within
150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the
Town may enter the property and physically remove the installation.
B.
§ 325-147 HARWICH CODE § 325-148
1:284
Part III: Regulations
Chapter 350
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 325-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-148
1:285

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Planning Board Rules and Regulations
§ 350-1. Acceptance of renumbering of regulations.
The Rules and Regulations Governing Subdivisions and Special Permits
including Site Plan Review of the Town of Harwich, Massachusetts, adopted
by the Planning Board of the Town of Harwich on May 1, 2003, as amended
through November 12, 2008, as renumbered, revised and codified by
General Code and set forth as Chapter 400 of the Code of the Town of
Harwich are hereby approved.
§ 350-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 400, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of regulations in force immediately prior to this acceptance of
Chapter 400, are intended as a continuation of such regulations and not
as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior regulation. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Planning Board of the Town of Harwich, and it is
the intention of said Planning Board that each such provision contained in
Chapter 400 is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in the Code.
§ 350-3. Changes in previously adopted regulations.
In compiling and preparing the regulations for renumbering and
revision as part of the Code, certain corrections in grammar, spelling
and punctuation were made in said regulations. It is the intention
of the Planning Board that all such changes be accepted as part of
the regulations as if the regulations so changed had been previously
formally adopted to read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this enactment.
(Chapter and section number references are to the regulations as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
In the definition of "Drinking Water Resource Protection District"
in § 400-5 the map date of December 1996 has been changed to
December 1997.
(1)
In the definition of "subdivision" in § 400-5 the following changes
have been made: "the clerk of the city or town" has been changed
to "Town Clerk"; "the city or town in which the land lies" has been
changed to "the Town"; and "zoning or other ordinance or bylaw, if
any, of said city or town" has been changed to "the Zoning Bylaw of
the Town."
(2)
In § 400-11A(1) the word "plan" has been deleted following
"access"; a period has been added after "Subdivision Control Law";
(3)
B.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:287
and the wording "The plan" has been added before "will be
scheduled."
In § 400-14E(2) the wording "must be provided for disposal" has
been changed to "disposal must be provided for."
(4)
Section 400-18A(3) has been revised to match the wording of
§ 400-11C(1)(c).
(5)
In § 400-18E the reference to § MGL c. 40A, § 2 has been deleted
(§ 2 was repealed in 1987).
(6)
Section 400-20, which duplicated § 325-102 of the Zoning Bylaw,
has been replaced with the following reference statement: "Earth
removal and sand and gravel mining within the Six Ponds Special
District require an operations permit in accordance with § 325-102
of the Zoning Bylaw."
(7)
§ 350-3 HARWICH CODE § 350-3
1:288
Chapter 400
SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND SITE PLAN SPECIAL PERMITS
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:289

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 400-1. Authority.
§ 400-2. Original regulations; adoption of state law.
The Town of Harwich originally adopted local subdivision regulations made
effective March 25, 1949. The State Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41,
§§ 81A to 81Y, inclusive, was adopted by the Town of Harwich effective
October 2, 1953.
§ 400-3. Title.
These rules and regulations of the Harwich Planning Board shall be known
and may be cited as the "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision
of Land and Special Permits including Site Plan Review in the Town of
Harwich, Massachusetts," which herein are called "these rules and
regulations." As a short title, these rules and regulations shall be known and
may be cited as the "Harwich Rules and Regulations."
§ 400-4. Purpose.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of
Harwich by MGL c. 41, § 81Q and all other applicable sections thereof,
said Board hereby adopts these Rules and Regulations Governing the
Division of Land and Special Permits including Site Plan Review in the
Town of Harwich, Massachusetts, to supersede present regulations and
to be effective on the date of adoption.
A.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is
made to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG and MGL c. 40A.
B.
These rules and regulations have been enacted for the purpose of
protecting the safety, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Harwich by regulating the laying out and construction of
roadways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein,
but which have not become public roadways, and ensuring sanitary
conditions in subdivisions and, in proper cases, parks and open areas.
A.
The Harwich Planning Board, through these rules and regulations, shall
pursue the objectives of:
Providing adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by
roadways that will be safe and convenient for travel;
(1)
(2) Lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways;
(3) Reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles;
Securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other
emergencies;
(4)
B.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4
1:291
§ 400-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the terms and words defined in the
Subdivision Control Law shall have the meaning given therein.
ABUTTER — A person who owns property that adjoins, or faces across a
way, a lot/parcel that is the subject of the subdivision application or related
procedure.
APPLICANT — An owner, agent, representative or assign who is authorized
to propose and/or develop the proposed subdivision.
APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED (ANR) PLAN — A plan showing a division of
land where each lot created is served by existing safe and adequate access
(with limited exceptions). While an ANR does not require Planning Board
approval, it does require Planning Board endorsement verifying that the
plan is consistent with MGL c. 41, § 81L.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Harwich.
BYLAWS, GENERAL — Legislation governing aspects dealing primarily with
administrative policies and quality of life in the Town of Harwich.
BYLAWS, ZONING — Legislation that deals primarily with land use in the
Town of Harwich.41
DEFINITIVE PLAN — A plan submitted for Planning Board approval which
represents the proposed specifications for the division of land and
construction of roadways and utilities (MGL c. 41, § 81L).
DRINKING WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT (DWRPD) — Any
designated district falling within the recharge boundaries for the drinking
water/aquifer area. This specially zoned area places limitations on certain
uses within its boundaries as defined in Article V, Table 1 of the Harwich
Zoning Bylaw.42 The Drinking Water Resource Protection Districts
(5) Ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning bylaws;
Securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, and
other requirements where necessary in a subdivision;
(6)
Coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with
the public ways in the Town of Harwich and with the ways in
neighboring subdivisions;
(7)
(8) Encouraging good subdivision design;
Ensuring sound community growth with minimum governmental
costs consistent with the encouragement of the appropriate
development of land; and
(9)
Relating new subdivisions to the Harwich Local Comprehensive
Plan.
(10)
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
§ 400-4 HARWICH CODE § 400-5
1:292
established in the Harwich Zoning Bylaw are shown on a map titled
"Drinking Water Resource Protection District and Approved Zone II
Delineations, Harwich, Massachusetts," dated December 1997, scale:
1:12,000, which map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk, the
authenticity of said map to be established in the same manner as provided
for establishing the authenticity of the Zoning Map.[Amended 5-11-2010]
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
FRONTAGE — The boundary of a lot that runs adjacent to a roadway.
GENERAL LAWS — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts General Laws
(MGL), with all additions and amendments. In case of a rearrangement of
the General Laws, any citation of particular sections of the General Laws
shall be applicable to the corresponding sections in the new codification.
LAND SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
LOT — A measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated
on a plot or survey in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or
available for use, as the site of one or more lots or buildings.
PARCEL — A tract or plot of land in one ownership, with definite
boundaries, used, or available for use, as the site of one or more lots or
buildings.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — An informal and optional working plan which
precedes a definitive plan used to confirm direction and details needed for
a definitive plan submitted for Planning Board approval (MGL c. 41, § 81L).
ROADWAY — A traveled path that allows for safe and adequate access to
lots and parcels. The term "roadway" shall mean, but is not limited to,
street, place, path, court, trail, way, road, avenue, boulevard, etc. Roadways
as referenced in Table 1, Recommended Geometric Design Standards for
Roadways,43 are categorized as follows:
WAY — A traveled roadway which in the opinion of the Board is used to
service abutting lots and is not intended for use by through traffic, and
shall include any roadway servicing five or fewer lots or dwelling units.
A.
MINOR — A traveled roadway which in the opinion of the Board is used
to service abutting lots and is not intended for use by through traffic,
and shall include any roadway servicing six to 49 lots or dwelling units.
B.
MAJOR — A traveled roadway collecting traffic from several minor
roadways, and shall include any roadway servicing 50 to 99 lots or
dwelling units.
C.
COLLECTOR — A traveled roadway which in the opinion of the Board is
being used or will be used as a thoroughfare between different sections
D.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Zoning.
43.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:293
ROADWAY, PAPER — A way shown on a recorded plan but not built on the
ground.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — A publication of the Planning Board which
governs the procedures for the submission and approval of applications for
subdivision, site plan review and special permits (MGL c. 41, § 81Q).
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots,
including resubdivision, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate
to the process of subdivision or the land or territory subdivided; provided,
however, that the division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not
be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract
so divided has frontage on a public way or a way which the Town Clerk
certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or a way shown on a
plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Law, or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law
became effective in the Town, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for
the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal
services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected
thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required
by the Zoning Bylaw of the Town for erection of a building on such lot,
and if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be of at least 20 feet.
Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing
the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected
without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on
which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control
Law went into effect in the Town into separate lots on each of which one of
such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision (MGL c.
41, § 81L).[Amended 5-11-2010]
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — Sections 81K to 81GG, inclusive, of
Chapter 41, General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and any
modifications or additions thereto. See http://www.mass.gov/legis/laws/mgl/
mgllink.htm.
UTILITIES — Sewers, surface water drains, water pipes, gas pipes, electric
lines, telephone lines, fire alarm lines, cable television and/or internet lines,
their respective appurtenances, and other like services.
WETLANDS — Resource areas subject to regulation under MGL c. 131, § 40
and the Town of Harwich Wetland Bylaw.44
§ 400-6. Waiver of rules and regulations.
of the Town, or which will be used as a principal access to a business or
industrial subdivision, and shall include any roadway servicing 100 or
more lots or dwelling units.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Wetlands Protection.
§ 400-5 HARWICH CODE § 400-6
1:294
§ 400-7. Informal discussions.
Requests for informal discussions shall be made to the Planning Department
in writing. Written requests must include the requester's name, address,
local phone number, and a brief explanation of the matter to be discussed
with the Board. Such discussions will be scheduled for the next available
time slot on the Board's regular meeting agenda. No informal discussions
will be scheduled less than seven days prior to a meeting date.
§ 400-7.1. Project review fees. [Added 6-22-2010]
As provided in MGL c. 41, § 81R, the Planning Board may waive strict
compliance with these rules and regulations when, in its judgment,
such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent
or purposes of the Subdivision Control Law. However, it cannot waive
those requirements that originate from the General and Zoning Bylaws.
A.
Applicants seeking waivers from the requirements of the rules and
regulations must, at the time of filing of an application for approval,
submit a separate written request for waivers. Said request shall:
(1) Specify the waivers requested by section and subsection;
Provide a concise statement of the nature and extent of the
waiver(s) requested; and
(2)
Specify the reason(s) for the request and how such waiver(s) would
serve the public interest.
(3)
B.
In acting to approve waiver requests, the Board may consult with other
agencies as appropriate and may impose reasonable conditions and/
or requirements not expressly written in these rules and regulations,
provided that such conditions or requirements represent a reasonable
consideration for the waiver requested, serve the public interest, and
are not unduly burdensome to the applicant.
C.
Employment of consultants. In accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53G,
the Planning Board, acting through the Town Planner, may require
that applicants pay the reasonable cost for employment of outside
consultants to review a proposed project. The Planning Board may
use the project review fee to engage experts, other than attorneys, as
outside consultants to assist the Planning Board in its review process.
A.
Establishment of special account. The project review fee shall be
deposited with the Town Treasurer who shall establish a special
account in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53G. Expenditures from this
special account may be made at the direction of the Town Planner
under the overall guidance of the Planning Board, and shall be made
only for services rendered in connection with a specific project for
which a project review fee has been collected from the applicant. The
consultant's review shall not commence until the Town Planner verifies
receipt of the project review fee. Failure of an applicant to pay a
B.
§ 400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7.1
1:295
required project review fee shall be grounds for finding the application
incomplete.
Reimbursement of excess amount. At the completion of the Planning
Board's review of a project, any excess amount in the account, including
interest, shall be repaid to the applicant along with a final report of said
account.
C.
Administrative appeal. Any applicant may make a written
administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to
the Board of Selectmen within 20 days after the Planning Board has
delivered notice of the selection to the applicant. The grounds for such
an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has
a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum qualifications
required for the task. The required time limit for action upon an
application by the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration of
the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the
Board of Selectmen within one month following the filing of the appeal,
the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand.
D.
§ 400-7.1 HARWICH CODE § 400-7.1
1:296
ARTICLE II
Subdivision of Land
§ 400-8. Introduction.
§ 400-9. Approval not required (ANR) plan.
The primary intent of subdivision review is for protecting the safety,
convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Harwich by
regulating the laying out and construction of roadways which provide
access to the lots within the subdivision.
A.
Applications for a subdivision may be submitted to the Planning Board
under two conditions:
Access to the lots already exists and is safe and adequate*.
Approval of a plan for subdivision by the Planning Board is not
required for this type which is referred to as an "ANR." (*Most
commonly. There are other situations where approval is not
required pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81L.)
(1)
Access to the lots does not exist or is not safe and adequate.
Approval of the subdivision by the Planning Board is required
(subdivision). Plans will be referred to as "subdivision" and may be
submitted in the following forms:
(a) Preliminary.
(b) Definitive.
(c) Modification or amendment of an approved plan.
(d) Rescission of an approved plan.
(2)
B.
Criteria for endorsement of ANR. In determining whether or not a plan
constitutes a subdivision, the Board shall determine whether or not all
three of the following standards have been met in accordance with MGL
c. 41, §§ 81L and 81M:
The lots shown on such plan must meet the minimum frontage
requirements as specified in MGL c. 41, § 81L;
(1)
The lots shown on such plan must front on one of the three types of
ways specified in MGL c. 41, § 81L:
A public way or a way that the Harwich Town Clerk certifies is
maintained and used as a public way;
(a)
A way shown on a plan previously approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
(b)
A way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in the Town of Harwich; and
(c)
(2)
A.
§ 400-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:297
The Planning Board verifies that existing access to such lots
provide sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction
to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the land
abutting or served thereby and for the installation of municipal
service to serve such land and the buildings existing thereon to be
erected as specified in Table 1 of these rules and regulations.45
(3)
Determination of safe and adequate access. In determining whether or
not existing access meets the standards as defined in these rules and
regulations, the Planning Board will examine evidence as follows:
(1) The applicant will provide all items listed in Appendix 4.46
The Planning Board will circulate the application to the Town
Engineer and Surveyor for general comments. When necessary,
additional comments may be requested from the following
departments:
(a) Department of Public Works.
(b) Fire Department.
(c) Police Department.
(2)
All ways which are neither Town ways nor ways shown on a plan
approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control
Law (existing private ways) must meet the minimum standards
for new ways in the Town of Harwich as specified in Table 1 of
these rules and regulations in order to be considered frontage
for building purposes or the division of land for which approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required. If such way
is substandard, approval may be granted if the applicant agrees
to complete the necessary improvements to the substandard way,
said agreement to be filed in the form of a covenant at the time of
approval of the definitive plan (MGL c. 41, § 81FF).
(3)
B.
Satisfaction of safe and adequate access. When in the opinion of the
Planning Board the existing condition of the roadway does not meet
the minimum standards for roadways in the Town of Harwich in order
to be considered frontage for building purposes, and the necessary
roadway improvements do not substantially change the nature, layout
or composition of the roadway, the Planning Board may determine,
without a public hearing, that submission of a subdivision plan for
approval is not required by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
Planning Board present, and in no event fewer than four members.
Once the improvements have been made, the applicant may submit his
request for determination of safe and adequate access. Improvements
to Town roadways must also meet the requirements of Town of Harwich
General Bylaws Chapter 255, Streets and Sidewalks.
C.
45.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-9 HARWICH CODE § 400-10
1:298
§ 400-10. Subdivision filing.
General filing requirements. Applications shall meet all requirements
as specified in this section. Failure to file a complete application with
the Planning Board may be considered grounds for denial of Board
approval (MGL c. 40A, §§ 9 and 14).
Prior to submitting any plans showing a proposed road to the
Board, the applicant will cause the intersection of the center line of
the proposed road and the existing road to be staked on the ground
with one point, for inspection by the Board.
(1)
Prior to submission to the Planning Board, the applicant shall file
with the Town Clerk, by delivery or registered mail, a complete set
of application materials, including plans and supporting documents
to be stamped with the date of submission.
(2)
All taxes, assessments, and charges relative to land being
subdivided must be paid in full prior to submission of the
application. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining a
municipal lien certificate from the Town Treasurer indicating that
all taxes, assessments, and charges have been paid in full.
(3)
For preliminary and definitive plans of a subdivision, the
information requested shall be submitted by the applicant to both
the Planning Board and Board of Health for discussion and
approval, modification, or disapproval. The submission of a
preliminary plan will enable the applicant, the Planning Board, the
Board of Health and other local agencies to discuss and clarify the
problems of such subdivision before a definitive plan is prepared.
(4)
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as large trees, watercourses, ponds,
wetlands, beaches, dunes, scenic points, historic spots, and similar
community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
value to the subdivision.
(5)
When a filed subdivision plan is to be revised, six full-size copies
of the revised subdivision plan which must show the latest revision
date and the word "Revised" in bold capital letters, must be
submitted to the Town Clerk's office no later than 10 days prior
to the next scheduled discussion of the application by the Board.
Failure to meet this deadline may cause discussion of the
application to be continued until a subsequent meeting or, if the
Board is constrained by an action deadline, could result in the
denial of said plan (MGL c. 41, § 81S).
(6)
(7) All other requirements as listed in Appendix 4 shall be met.47
A.
B. Plan, profile and cross-section requirements.
47.Editor's Note: Appendix 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-10
1:299
§ 400-11. Subdivision review procedure.
All plans shall be prepared and stamped by a professional land
surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink
upon a reproducible material acceptable for recording at the
Registry of Deeds or in Land Court, complying with the
requirements of the Registry of Deeds and Land Court, if
applicable, and having an error of closure not to exceed 1:12,000.
(1)
When a separate plan and profile are submitted, they shall be of
the same exact size. The plan and profile shall be prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer.
(2)
(3) All other requirements as listed in Appendix 4 shall be met.
Additional requirements.
Special permits. All applications must comply with any additional
requirements as stated in the Zoning Bylaw, Article V, Table 1, such
as flexible cluster, open space residential (see Chapter 325, Zoning,
§ 325-51E), and Six Ponds District.
(1)
Naming new ways. Three proposed street names shall be submitted
with a subdivision plan. Duplicate street names or names similar to
existing street names shall not be considered.
(2)
Renaming existing ways. Refer to MGL c. 85, §§ 3 and 3B and MGL
c. 41, § 74 which require that the Planning Board notice and hold
a public hearing to change the name of an existing way. See also
the Town of Harwich General Bylaws Chapter 255, Streets and
Sidewalks, for petition requirements along private ways.
(3)
The Planning Board may require additional information as
necessary.
(4)
C.
Approval not required (ANR).
A plan showing a division of land where each lot created is believed
to be served by existing adequate access shall be submitted for a
determination as to whether or not the plan requires approval by
the Planning Board under the Subdivision Control Law. The plan
will be scheduled for action by the Board at the earliest reasonable
date but no later than 21 days after filing with the Town Clerk's
office (MGL c. 41, § 81P). [Amended 5-11-2010]
(1)
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval,
it shall without a public hearing and without unnecessary delay
endorse the plan with the words "Approval under the Subdivision
Control Law Not Required."
(2)
The Board may add to such endorsement a statement of the reason
approval is not required. Notice of the Board's endorsement shall
(3)
A.
§ 400-10 HARWICH CODE § 400-11
1:300
be made to the Town Clerk and the applicant. The original plan
shall be returned to the applicant.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law, it shall give written notice of its
determination to the Town Clerk and the applicant.
(4)
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this section
within 21 days after its submission, it shall be deemed to have been
determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not
required, and it shall make such endorsement on the plan. If the
Board fails to do so, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the
same effect. In either case, the original shall be delivered to the
applicant.
(5)
Preliminary plan.
Action.
Within 45 days after submission of a preliminary plan, the
Planning Board shall approve with modifications, or
disapprove the preliminary plan. In the case of disapproval,
the Board must state specific reasons for denial. Said notice
of decision shall be filed with the Town Clerk and sent via
certified mail to the applicant.
(a)
Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of
a subdivision. The rules and regulations in effect at the time of
submission of such preliminary plan shall govern the definitive
subdivision plan evolved from such preliminary plan, provided
that such definitive plan is submitted within seven months of
the submission of the preliminary plan.
(b)
(1)
Certificate of approval (decision). The action of the Board with
respect to a preliminary plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall
be certified by and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by certified
mail to the applicant. If the Board modifies or disapproves the plan,
it shall state specifically the reasons for its action.
(2)
B.
Definitive plan, including modification, amendment or rescission. All
procedures relating to the submission and approval of a subdivision
plan of land shall, so far as apt, be applicable to the approval of the
modification, amendment, or rescission, and to the plan which has been
changed. A public hearing is required before approval, modification of
approval, disapproval or rescission of the definitive plan is given.
Public notice. A public hearing shall be held by the Board, with
notice of the time and place of the hearing as well as the subject
matter, sufficient for identification, as follows:
(1)
C.
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:301
The Board shall give notice by posting such notice in a
conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than
14 days before the day of such hearing;
(a)
The Board shall give notice by advertisement in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town of Harwich, once in each of
two successive weeks, the first publication being not less than
14 days before the day of such hearing; and
(b)
The applicant shall give notice by mailing a copy of such
advertisement via certified mail, return receipt, to property
owners within 300 feet abutting the subject property, which
may also include abutters to abutters, and properties across
the roadway from the subject property. The advertisement and
list of abutters, to include names and addresses of abutters
certified by the Harwich Board of Assessors, will be supplied to
the applicant by the Planning Department. Said notice shall be
mailed out no less than 10 days prior to the scheduled public
hearing. A copy of the certified mail receipts must be filed with
the Planning Office and the original returned "green cards"
shall be submitted as well.
(c)
Public hearing. At a public hearing a presentation is made by the
applicant and the Board reviews and considers all information and
comments submitted by interested parties and discusses the merits
of the application. The Board, on its own motion or acting on the
petition of any person interested, may modify, amend, or rescind its
approval of a plan of a subdivision or require a change in a plan as
a condition of its retaining the status of an approved plan.
(2)
Action. The Planning Board must take final action and file a notice
of decision with the Town Clerk within 90 days of the filing date,
provided that the definitive filing was preceded by a preliminary
plan within the last seven months or 135 days if either there
was no preliminary plan or 45 days have not elapsed since the
submission of the preliminary plan. It may approve, modify and
approve, or disapprove said plan as provided by statute. In the
case of disapproval, the Board must state specifically where the
plan does not comply with the rules and regulations or the
recommendation of the Board of Health or Health Officer. The
Planning Board shall file said decision with the Town Clerk and
shall send via certified mail a copy of the decision to the applicant.
(3)
Certificate of approval (decision). The action of the Board with
respect to a definitive plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall
be certified by and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by certified
mail to the applicant. If the Board modifies or disapproves the
plan, it shall state specifically the reasons for its action. Approval,
if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the plan
by the signatures of a majority of the Board (or by the signature
of the person officially authorized by the Board) but not until the
(4)
§ 400-11 HARWICH CODE § 400-11
1:302
statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the filing
of the certificate of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk and
said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed.
Performance guarantee. The Board shall require, before endorsement
of its approval of a definitive plan of a subdivision, that the applicant
shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in
§ 400-14 according to his plans and profiles, such construction and
installation to be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the
other, of the methods described below. In addition, other methods may
be approved by the Planning Board.
Approval with financial security, to include escrow, bonds, and
surety. The applicant shall post a financial security in an amount
determined by the Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of
the improvements shown on the subdivision plans. Such financial
security, if filed or deposited, shall be approved as to form and
manner of execution by Town Counsel and as to sureties by the
Harwich Town Treasurer. Such financial security shall be
contingent on the completion of such improvements within two
years of the filing of other surety. At the discretion of the Board, a
time extension may be granted.
(1)
Approval with covenant. The applicant shall file a covenant (Form
B-2), executed and duly recorded with Barnstable County Registry
of Deeds by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby
such ways and services as shown on the plans shall be provided to
serve any lot before such a lot may be built upon or conveyed, other
than by mortgage deed, provided that a mortgagee who acquires
title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and
any succeeding owner of the mortgaged premises or part thereof
may sell any such lot, subject to that portion of this covenant which
provides that no lot shall be built upon until such ways and services
have been provided to serve such lot, and provided, further, that
nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a
single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel
of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously
released by the Board.
(2)
D.
Recording of plan. Once the plan and covenant have been recorded,
documentation of said recording shall be filed with the Planning Board.
Upon receipt of notification of recording, the Board shall file one print
of the definitive plan with the Building Department. In accordance
with the statute, where approval with covenant is noted, the Building
Department shall issue no permit for the construction of a building on
any lot within the subdivision except upon receipt from the Board of a
copy of the certificate of release of covenant (Form B-3) releasing the
lot or lots in question (see Subsections F and G below). In addition,
no site work or road construction work shall commence until the plan
and covenant have been recorded and documentation of said recording
shall be filed with the Planning Board.
E.
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:303
Evidence of satisfactory performance. Before the Board will release the
interest of the Town in a performance bond or deposit or, in the case of
approval with covenant, issue a release of covenant the following must
be submitted to and approved by the Board:
A certification shall be done by a professional engineer with the
following statement or similar statement: "All roadways, sidewalks,
sewers, storm drains, and water mains and their appurtenances
shown have been constructed in accordance with the approved
design plan." Certification shall be by the professional engineer
employed by the applicant at his or her own expense.
(1)
An as-built drawing shall be prepared and certified by a
professional land surveyor in accordance with Appendix 448 with
the following statement or similar statement: "All roadways,
sidewalks, sewers, storm drains, and water mains and their
appurtenances shown have been laid out in accordance with the
lines and grades of the approved plan and are accurately located
as shown hereon." Certification shall be by the professional land
surveyor employed by the applicant at his or her own expense.
(2)
The Board shall obtain in writing from the Town Engineer a
statement that all work required by the rules and regulations and
the approved definitive subdivision plan has been inspected by him
or her and completed in each roadway in the subdivision (or the
roadway or roadways serving the lots in question), including storm
drains, bridges, and sidewalks, and that he or she has approved the
methods of construction and materials used in the performance of
such work.
(3)
The Board shall obtain in writing from the Board of Water
Commissioners a statement that it has inspected and that the
applicant has completed each water main and its appurtenances in
accordance with the requirements of these rules and regulations
and that it has approved the methods of construction and materials
used in the performance of such work.
(4)
The applicant shall execute an instrument, in a form approved
by the Board, transferring to the Town or to an approved public
utility company, without cost, valid unencumbered title to all water
mains and appurtenances thereto constructed and installed in the
subdivision or approved portion thereof and conveying to the Town
or to an approved public utility company, without cost and free
of all liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights and easements
to construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace, operate, and forever
maintain such water mains, with any manholes, pipes, conduits
and other appurtenances, and to do all acts incidental thereto, in,
through and under the whole of all roadways in the subdivision
or approved portion thereof, and if any such sewers or water
(5)
F.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-11 HARWICH CODE § 400-11
1:304
mains have been constructed and installed in land not within such
roadways, then in, through, and under a strip of land extending 10
feet in width on each side of the center line of all such water mains.
Release or partial release of performance guarantee.
The penal sum or the amount of any financial security held under
Subsection D, Performance guarantee, above may, from time to
time, be reduced by the Board and the obligations of the parties
thereto released by the Board in whole or in part. If release is by
reason of covenant, a new plan of the portion to be subject to the
covenant may be required.
(1)
A request for a full or partial release of security will be considered
by the Board no sooner than 10 days after the Planning Department
has received a written request for the release, subject to the
availability of Town officials to perform the required inspections
of the respective improvements and furnish written reports to the
Board.
(2)
Upon completion of improvements shown on the applicant's plans,
security for the performance of which was given by financial
security or covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant with
respect to any lot, the applicant shall submit to the Town Clerk
and the Planning Board a written statement that said construction
or installation in connection with which such financial security or
covenant has been given has been completed in accordance with
these rules and regulations, such statement to contain the address
of the applicant.
(3)
Upon receiving the applicant's request for a partial or full release
of covenant or security, the Board will request from the Town
Engineer a report regarding the quality and quantity of work
completed. The Town Engineer will produce a list of the items of
work left to be completed in the subdivision, in accordance with the
approved definitive subdivision plan and the rules and regulations,
and give an estimate of the cost to cover the remaining items of
work. Such estimate shall reflect 150% of the calculated cost.
(4)
If the Board determines that said construction or installation has
not been completed in accordance with the approved definitive
subdivision plan based on the Town Engineer's report, it shall
specify in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and
delivered to the Town Clerk the details wherein said construction
and installation fail to comply with these rules and regulations.
Upon failure of the Board to act on such application within 45
days after the receipt of the application by the Town Clerk, all
obligations under the financial security shall cease and terminate
and any deposit shall be returned and any such covenant shall
become void. In the event that said forty-five-day period expires
without such Board action or without the release and return of the
(5)
G.
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:305
§ 400-12. Design standards for new roadways.
bond or return of the financial security or release of the covenant
as aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect,
duly acknowledged, which shall be recorded.
Location and alignment.
All streets/roads in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in
the opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel.
Due consideration shall also be given by the applicant to create an
attractive street/road layout.
(1)
The recommended street design standards presented by Table 1
and displayed by the Figures 1 to 9 are to be used by the designer.49
(2)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No roadway shall intersect any other roadway at less
than 70° (Figure 1). Owners are encouraged to consult with the
Town's Tree Warden concerning removal of trees within the Town
right-of-way and to plan and locate road intersections to minimize
their loss.
(3)
Public and private utilities shall be located within the right-of-way
in accordance with Figure 3. All utilities shall be underground. The
applicant may be requested to make provisions for streetlighting.
(4)
(5) Other design standards shall be consistent with Table 1.
A.
Width.
The minimum width of a right-of-way shall be consistent with Table
1.
(1)
The minimum width and other dimensions of ways shall be as
indicated by Figures 3 and 4 and in Table 1. Eighteen-inch machine
berms shall be required to be installed on both sides of the
pavement.
(2)
B.
Dead-end way (Figure 1).
Dead-end ways shall be no longer than 1,200 feet unless, in the
opinion of the Board, greater length is appropriate. The distance of
1,200 feet shall be measured from the intersecting right-of-way to
the center of the turnaround along the proposed center line.
(1)
Dead-end ways shall be provided at the closed end with a circular
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 90
feet and a property line diameter of at least 110 feet. "T" type
turnarounds are not permitted. Dead-end ways shall be provided
with a turning circle paved in the same manner as the rest of
(2)
C.
49.Editor's Note: Table 1 and Figures 1 to 9 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-11 HARWICH CODE § 400-12
1:306
§ 400-13. Design standards for utilities.
the roadway. The paved turning circle shall have a radius of at
least 45 feet with twenty-five-foot transition radii. Within a circular
turnaround, a thirty-foot diameter planting area may be considered
by the Board.
Waivers of road length limit. Where topography or other unique site
conditions exist, the Board may waive the specified road length limit
as it deems appropriate, provided that such action is, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, in the public interest and not inconsistent with the
intent or purposes of the Subdivision Control Law.
D.
Waivers from design standards for subdivisions to maintain rural
character. In order to apply for waivers under this section, the applicant
must file a preliminary subdivision plan along with any waiver requests
with the Board. In order to maintain the rural character of an area,
the Planning Board may grant waivers for a residential subdivision plan
which is designed to be in keeping with the rural character of the
surrounding area based on the following findings by the Board:
That the plan is well designed and generally in keeping with the
design principles set forth in these rules and regulations.
(1)
(2) That there is adequate access to the lots for the intended uses.
That the plan is in keeping with the character of the surrounding
area.
(3)
E.
Drainage.
The quantity of stormwater carried to basins or pipes shall be
determined by the Rational Method, and the design shall be for
twenty-five-year storms, except for bridges in which case it shall
be for fifty-year storms. Coefficient of runoff to be used shall be
as outlined in Appendix 1, a detailed description of the Rational
Method of Drainage Design.50 Other methods may be used with the
approval of the Planning Board on the recommendation of the Town
Engineer.
(1)
Pipe drains, where used, shall have a minimum diameter of 12
inches. In general, they shall be designed to flow full with the
hydraulic gradient at the crown. However, in flat slope areas
surcharge may be allowed. The minimum velocity at design flow
should be 2 1/2 feet per second and the maximum of 15 feet per
second.
(2)
Stone-paved channels shall be installed where requested. The
typical section of the channel shall have a flat bottom and side
slope at least one foot higher than the design water surface. The
(3)
A.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:307
maximum velocity allowed in any channel at design flow shall be six
feet per second. A coefficient of friction "n" equal to 0.030 should
be used for the stone-paved channel.
All stormwater shall be disposed of by subsurface leaching or
drainage easements [see Subsection A(5) below]. No paved surface
runoff shall be allowed to be directed to open stream channels or
vegetative wetlands as defined in the Harwich Wetland Bylaw.51
Leaching basins shall be of the radial block or precast concrete
type (Figure 5). These leaching basins shall be connected
[equalizing pipe by a twelve-inch diameter asphalt-coated
corrugated metal pipe (ACCMP) or high-density polyethylene pipe
(HDPE) of the proper gauge or reinforced concrete pipe of the
proper class]. Aluminum pipe under roadways will not be permitted
unless encased in six inches of cement concrete.
(4)
Catch basins shall be spaced so that storm runoff is received from a
maximum roadway distance of 250 feet. Catch basins located in low
points (sags) shall collect from a roadway for a distance not greater
than 200 feet. Runoff collected by catch basins will be piped to
suitable leaching facilities located in easements outside the rightof-
way. Said easements shall be at least 625 square feet in area
and shall be of a suitable configuration for the proposed facility.
Sufficient test pits shall be installed to determine the suitability of
the soils for subsurface disposal. The center of the catch basins
shall be located along the gutter line regardless of the percent
grade.
(5)
Frames and grates. The Massachusetts standard square catch
basin frame and grate shall be utilized for all catch basins and/or
leaching basins.
(6)
Water.
Water systems shall be installed in accordance with the standards
of the Harwich Board of Water Commissioners.
(1)
For all new subdivisions where access to Town water is available
within 500 feet of the point of intersection of any new subdivision
road with any Town or private road, the applicant shall be required
to hook up to Town water and provide Town water service to all
lots within said subdivision. For all new subdivisions where access
to Town water is not available within 500 feet of the point of
intersection of any new subdivision road with any Town or private
road, the applicant shall be required to provide the required piping
and hydrants within the entire subdivision to allow for hookup to
Town water at such time as a main reaches within 500 feet of the
point of intersection of said subdivision road.
(2)
B.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Wetlands Protection.
§ 400-13 HARWICH CODE § 400-13
1:308
§ 400-14. Required improvements and specifications for
construction.
The Board of Water Commissioners may grant a waiver to this
requirement following a written request from the applicant
explaining the reasons why neither option is feasible for the
proposed subdivision. The Board of Water Commissioners shall
provide written conformation of the grant of a waiver to the
Planning Board. In the case of the grant of a waiver, a water
easement shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of the Board of Water Commissioners. Said easement shall be
delineated on the subdivision plan and an agreement prepared and
submitted to the Board of Water Commissioners.
(3)
Easements.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
(1)
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, the Board may require that there be provided
a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width
to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel, or stream and to provide for construction or
other necessary purposes.
(2)
C.
General provisions.
Construction details and specifications shall comply with the
standards as shown on Figures 3 and 552 unless the Planning Board
grants waivers from the rules and regulations requirements.
(1)
All improvements specified on the definitive subdivision plan, road
profile plans, and road cross sections shall be constructed or
installed by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of the
Harwich Bylaws, this section of the rules and regulations, or as
directed by the Board. The applicant shall furnish all necessary
materials, labor, and equipment that may be required to complete
the work called for or implied on the definitive plan, including all
related expenses. Items not specifically mentioned herein shall be
constructed in accordance with the latest revision of the Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges of the Massachusetts
Department of Public Works (hereinafter referred to as the
"Department's Specifications") unless specifically directed
otherwise by the Board.
(2)
All work performed by the applicant as a consequence of these
rules and regulations will be subject to the review and acceptance
(3)
A.
52.Editor's Note: Figures 3 and 5 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:309
or approval of the Board. Therefore, the Town Engineer will act
as the Planning Board's agent for the inspection of the work. In
order that the Town Engineer may properly inspect the work as
it progresses, the applicant will keep the Town Engineer informed
of the progress of the work and shall, at any time, provide safe
and convenient access to all parts of the work for inspection by
members of the Board or the Town Engineer. No work will be
approved which has been covered prior to inspection by
subsequent work. Reference should be made to § 400-15 for
inspections required by the Board.
Subdivision layout.
The subdivision, including all ways, lot lines, drain lines and
utilities, shall be laid out as to line and grade by a professional land
surveyor and a certificate filed with the Board to this effect. Stakes
for line and grade, clearly marked with the proper station, shall be
maintained throughout construction.
(1)
In the event that the construction of the road deviates from the
plan and profile approved by the Board, the applicant must stop
work and notify the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer will review
the changes and consult with planning staff as necessary. If said
changes are deemed to be significant in nature, work shall not
resume until said changes are brought before the Board for review
and approval. If said changes are deemed to be minor in nature,
with the Town Engineer's approval, the work may proceed. All
changes must be shown on the as-built plan.
(2)
Any work which in the opinion of the Board has not been properly
laid out or does not conform to the plans may be checked by the
Town Land Surveyor or a land surveyor employed by the Board.
If the Board determines that such work does not conform to the
plan, the applicant shall pay all costs that the Board incurs in
connection with checking the work. No lots shall be released from
the covenant until such payment has been made in full. The Board
may require, at the applicant's expense, the removal and correct
replacement of any work which has been incorrectly laid out.
(3)
B.
Clearing, grubbing and excavation.
No clearing of vegetation or grading for the development of ways
or building sites shall commence until an approved, signed
definitive plan has been recorded with the Barnstable Registry of
Deeds or Land Court and evidence of such recording has been
returned to the Board. This shall not apply to limited clearing for
the purpose of surveying or performing percolation tests.
(1)
Proposed roadways shall be cleared, grubbed, and excavated to
a minimum width of 35 feet. All deleterious materials, such as
logs, stumps, branches, and brush, shall not be buried on any part
of the subdivision property and shall be removed from the site
(2)
C.
§ 400-14 HARWICH CODE § 400-14
1:310
and disposed of properly. Trees intended to be preserved shall be
protected from injury by suitable boxes, or fenders, or wells if in
fill.
The Town Engineer will make an inspection when this phase of the
work is completed.
(3)
Erosion control measures. Erosion control during and after
construction shall be accomplished using the following erosion control
measures recommended by the Unites States Soil Conservation
Service:
Erosion minimization. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and
regrading shall be accomplished so as to minimize erosion.
(1)
Duration of exposure. The duration of exposure of disturbed area
shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(2)
Temporary erosion control. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching
shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during development.
(3)
Permanent erosion control installation. Permanent (final)
vegetation and mechanical measures to stabilize the land surface
and control erosion shall be installed as soon as practicable after
construction ends.
(4)
Protection of permanent drainage facilities. Until a disturbed area
is stabilized, permanent drainage facilities, including but not
limited to catch basins, pipes, retention basins, grass swales, and
infiltration devices, shall be protected from sediment in runoff
water by the use of temporary drainage facilities such as debris
basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or other acceptable methods.
(5)
Dust control. During grading operations, methods of dust control
shall be employed wherever practicable. The Board may require
the implementation of reasonable soil erosion control measures
during construction if, in its opinion, such measures are warranted
but have not been implemented by the applicant.
(6)
D.
Drainage system.
Drainage specifications. All proposed drainage systems shall be
in compliance with Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection Phase II Stormwater Regulations Best Management
Practice.
(1)
Disposal of surface water. Adequate disposal of surface water shall
be provided. Catch basin/leaching basin systems shall be
constructed on both sides of the roadway and shall be
interconnected. Systems shall be located on both sides of the
pavement on continuous profile grades, at profile low points and
at intersections. Systems shall also be located at intersections of
proposed roads with existing roads. It is necessary that storm
(2)
E.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:311
runoff from existing roads and/or gutter flow not enter the
proposed subdivision drainage system and, therefore, disposal
must be provided for within the existing road right-of-way in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of Division of
Highways and Maintenance. [Amended 5-11-2010]
Inspection required prior to backfilling. The Town Engineer will
inspect the completed drainage system or sections thereof prior to
placing any backfill.
(3)
Backfill specifications. All trench backfill for the storm and
subsurface drains and other backfill within the limits of the way
shall conform to the base course requirements. Frozen earth/soil
shall not be used for backfill material.
(4)
Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground prior to the placing
of the bituminous concrete binder course.
Responsibility. The applicant shall provide and install all necessary
materials, appurtenances and equipment to complete the utilities
as may be required by these rules and regulations and as provided
on the definitive plan in a manner acceptable to the officials or
agency having jurisdiction over each service. All costs incurred
by the applicant as a consequence of installing and maintaining
such utilities as the Board requires shall be paid by the applicant,
including all costs which may be incurred for any reasons
whatsoever. The Board will not take any action to have the
applicant reimbursed for any costs so incurred.
(1)
Water distribution specifications.
General. Water distribution facilities shall be installed in
conformity with specifications and requirements of the
Harwich Board of Water Commissioners.
(a)
Hydrant and water main specifications. Water pipes and
related equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff valves,
shall be constructed to serve all lots on each roadway. In
addition, service connections shall be installed from the main
to the opposite side of the roadway right-of-way line. These
services shall be installed in accordance with Harwich Water
Department specifications, with a proper stopcock at the
approximate center of each lot. All stopcocks shall be located
by permanent ties, the location of which will be filed with the
Harwich Board of Water Commissioners.
(b)
(2)
All other utilities. All other utilities shall be installed in conformity
with specifications and requirements of the specific utility
company.
(3)
(4) Notification of backfill and paving.
F.
§ 400-14 HARWICH CODE § 400-14
1:312
All work in connection with the utilities shall be left uncovered
until the Town Engineer permits the backfill to be placed.
(a)
The applicant shall notify all companies with utilities installed
or to be installed within the ways as to the date and time
the applicant intends to place the gravel base course and the
paving so that such utility company may properly record the
location of pertinent features of the system so that they will not
be covered or lost as a result of the paving operation.
(b)
Backfill specifications. All trench backfill material for the utilities
within the way limits shall conform to the base course
requirements. Frozen earth/soil shall not be used for backfill
material.
(5)
Preparation of subbase.
Topsoil and stone dust, gravel, processed stone, or reclaimed
asphalt shall be stockpiled for future use on the site. The subbase
shall be prepared in order to accept the base, base leveling course,
and pavement in accordance with the approved plans and profiles.
Such preparation shall include compaction of the roadbed prior to
installation of the base leveling course.
(1)
All utilities including but not limited to storm drains, subdrains,
and drainage structures within the way lines shall be installed prior
to the completion of the subbase. This shall include the installation
of each service pipe, sleeve, or conduit to the front lot line of
each lot in the subdivision. Upon completion of the subbase and
the backfill of all service trenches, the work will be inspected by
the Town Engineer. Subsequent work shall not commence until
the Town Engineer has approved the fill as acceptable for the
application of the roadway foundation material.
(2)
G.
Base and base leveling course.
Upon completion of the subbase, four inches of processed stone
or reclaimed asphalt (T-base) shall be placed and compacted with
suitable equipment to a width of 28 feet. Four inches of densegraded
crushed stone conforming to the gradation shown in Table
2,53 or reclaimed asphalt, shall be placed and compacted to the
width of the first four-inch layer. Moisture content of the processed
material shall be sufficient to enable the material to be compacted
into a firm, dense surface.
(1)
Reclaimed base borrow material for subbase course shall consist
of crushed asphalt pavement, crushed cement concrete, and gravel
borrow (meeting Massachusetts Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges) free from loam, clay and
(2)
H.
53.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:313
deleterious materials, including but not limited to brick, reinforcing
steel, glass, wood, paper, plaster, lathing, and building rubble.
The coarse aggregate shall have a percentage of wear, by the Los
Angeles Abrasion Test, of not more than 50.
(3)
(4) The gradation shall meet the requirements as specified in Table 3.54
The approved source of reclaimed pavement borrow material shall
be processed by mechanical means. The equipment for producing
crushed material shall be of adequate size and with sufficient
adjustments to produce the desired materials. The processed
material shall be stockpiled in such a manner as to minimize
segregation of particle sizes. All reclaimed pavement borrow
material shall come from approved stockpiles.
(5)
The composite gradation and moisture content shall be controlled
to ensure a uniform product delivered to the job site.
(6)
Pavement.
The prepared base shall be paved in two courses of Type 1
bituminous concrete (Figure 3). The binder course shall meet the
requirements of Table 1. The bituminous concrete aggregate
gradation shall be as given in Table 4. All road pavement shall be
crowned in order to maintain a cross slope of 1/4 inch per foot to 3/
8 inch per foot.55
(1)
No bituminous work shall be done during rainy weather, upon any
surface where water is ponding, when the temperature is lower
than 34° and rising, or when frost is in the ground.
(2)
I.
Berms (Figure 8).56 Machined berms, where required, shall be placed
along both edges of all roads. The berms shall be 18 inches wide with
a three-inch minimum pitch. The berms shall be Type 1 bituminous
concrete.
J.
Side slopes (Figure 8). Side slopes, where necessary, shall be no steeper
than three horizontal on one vertical. In areas where fill has been
placed to acquire the needed elevation and the vertical fill distance is
six feet or greater, guardrails shall be placed. Rails and posts shall be
of a design approved by the Town Engineer and/or Director of Division
of Highways and Maintenance.
K.
Topsoiling and hydroseeding (Figure 8).
All areas which are disturbed by the construction shall be graded
to blend into undisturbed areas and shall be loamed to a depth of
four inches, fertilized, and hydroseeded. Loam obtained from the
(1)
L.
54.Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 4 and Figure 3 are included at the end of this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: Figure 8 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-14 HARWICH CODE § 400-14
1:314
stripping operations may be used and/or loam may be furnished
from off site by the contractor. All areas shall be given an
application of lime (dolomitic limestone) and commercial fertilizer
of an 8-6-4 mixture. The rate of application of lime shall be 45
pounds per 1,000 square feet and the rate of fertilizer application
shall be 20 pounds per 1,000 square feet.
The following hydroseed mixture will be required:
38.8% Rebel II Tall Fescue
38.3% Tribute Tall Fescue
9.7% Cowboy Perennial Rye Grass
9.5% Baron Kentucky Bluegrass
3.2% Other (weed, inert, crop grass, etc.)
(2)
The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the
(hydroseeded) areas until growth is established.
(3)
Sidewalks.
Sidewalk requirement (Figure 2).57 Sidewalks (Figure 9) of not
less than four feet in width shall be constructed on one side of
the roadway, or both sides of the roadway when required by the
Planning Board. The maximum grade for a sidewalk in a new
subdivision will be 5%. This number reflects the current Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirement for walks. Any steeper
grade would be considered in the same category with handicapped
ramps and would, therefore, require handrails and grades of
restricted length.
(1)
Subgrade (Figure 9). All materials shall be removed for the full
width of the sidewalk to subgrade 8 1/2 inches below finished
grade. All soft spots and other undesirable material below
subgrade shall be replaced with gravel or other good binding
material and rolled. This excavated area shall then be filled with
six inches of a good quality stone dust, gravel, processed stone,
or reclaimed asphalt and rolled with a pitch of 3/16 inch per foot
toward the gutter/roadway.
(2)
Surface (Figure 9). One of the following methods may be used:
forms shall be set to grade, filled with asphalt concrete and rolled
to a thickness of 1 1/2 inches. A second course of 1 1/2 inches
is then to be placed over the first one, in the same manner.
Alternatively, other material may be used for the sidewalk surface,
if approved by the Planning Board. In this case, specifications of
the Massachusetts Department of Public Works shall be complied
with.
(3)
M.
57.Editor's Note: Figures 2 and 9 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:315
Typical driveway/roadway intersection (Figure 9) The intersection
of a sidewalk with a driveway or a roadway shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications detailed in Figure 9. At any
point where a sidewalk meets a driveway or a roadway, the
sidewalk shall remain at its pitch of 3/16 inch per foot toward the
gutter/roadway.
(4)
Typical sidewalk retaining wall (Figure 9). If found to be necessary
due to the steepness of side slopes within the layout of a new
subdivision road, retaining walls shall be constructed along
sidewalks in accordance with the specifications detailed in Figure
9. The height of the retaining wall may vary according to the
finished grade of the side slopes. Six-inch by six-inch pressuretreated
timbers with one-half-inch thick steel rods at four foot on
center shall be installed at a depth of two feet. Lateral tiebacks
with a one-inch steel rod and concrete anchor shall be installed
when a retaining wall exceeds two feet in height. Filter fabric
shall be placed between the pressure-treated timbers and the side
slope. The disturbed area of the side slope shall be backfilled with
excavated material and loamed and hydroseeded in accordance
with Subsection L, Topsoiling and hydroseeding (Figure 8), above.
(5)
Maintenance of subdivision sidewalks during construction of
structures and driveways.
Where a sidewalk exists along a roadway in the Town of
Harwich, the condition and grade of the sidewalk shall not
be disturbed when a structure and its driveway are under
construction. When a driveway opening permit is applied for
from the Division of Highways and Maintenance, each property
owner shall provide a plan of the property, proposed driveway
curb cut, and any existing subdivision sidewalks which may
exist within the subdivision road layout. The Division of
Highways and Maintenance will note the existence of a
sidewalk on the permit and/or sign-off sheet that is submitted
to the Building Department and will inform the applicant that
the condition and grade of the sidewalk are to remain
undisturbed throughout the building process of the structure.
(a)
At the final inspection stage of the building process, the local
building official will note the condition of the existing sidewalk.
If the sidewalk is found to be altered or inadequate in anyway,
the local building official will notify the property owner of the
sidewalk's condition. The property owner will be responsible
for repairing any damage to the sidewalk and ensuring that it
will be restored to its former condition.
(b)
(6)
Waiver of sidewalk construction. The Planning Board may grant
a waiver of sidewalk construction at the applicant's request,
contingent on a finding that the location of the subdivision or
the rural nature of the subdivision would not benefit from the
(7)
§ 400-14 HARWICH CODE § 400-14
1:316
§ 400-15. Inspections during construction.
construction of a sidewalk as part of the subdivision. If a waiver of
sidewalk construction is granted, the applicant will pay, in lieu of
performance, an amount equivalent to the cost of constructing the
waived sidewalk to the Town of Harwich to be used for sidewalk
construction. The amount of the payment will be calculated by
the Town Engineer and provided to the Planning Board and the
applicant before the waiver request is considered.
Granite or concrete bounds.
Granite or concrete bounds shall be placed at all intersections of
roadway lines, angle points, and where there is a change in the
direction of curvature or at center line of road.
(1)
Granite or concrete bounds shall be no less than 2 1/2 feet in length
and a minimum of four inches square and shall be set as shown on
the approved drawings with a three-eighths-inch drill hole or steel
rod or brass cap set into the top to indicate the point. All concrete
bounds are required to have a No. 4 reinforcement bar. The top
of the granite or concrete bound when placed in a way shall be
set flush with or to finish grade. All monuments must be properly
placed, backfilled, and tamped with a good binding gravel or stone
dust.
(2)
N.
Lot corners. At all lot corners where a granite or concrete bound is not
required under Subsection N above concrete bounds shall be set.
O.
Roadway name signs. Roadway name signs, of a type, lettering, and
material approved by the Planning Board and the Director of the
Division of Highways and Maintenance, shall be placed at all
intersections. Signs may be ordered from the Harwich Division of
Highways and Maintenance. Signs shall be installed prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any structure within the
subdivision.
P.
Cleaning up. The entire area of the subdivision shall be cleaned up to
leave, in the opinion of the Board, a neat and orderly appearance, free
from debris and other objectionable materials. All catch basins shall be
cleaned out.
Q.
Roadway maintenance. If released from restrictions with regard to sale
of lots or buildings on lots by the posting of a performance bond or
other security, the applicant shall maintain the roadway for vehicular
traffic in a manner satisfactory to the Board. Further, the applicant
shall maintain the roadway in a subdivision in a condition that meets
all the above requirements to the satisfaction of the Board either until
acceptance of the way by a vote of the Town or for a period of one year
from the date of release.
R.
A. General provisions.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15
1:317
Responsibility.
All subdivision and road construction work performed in
connection with these rules and regulations shall be subject
to the review of the Planning Board, which shall approve or
reject each phase or portion of such work and at completion
shall recommend the acceptance of all work or disapproval
of the work with reasons therefor. The Town Engineer, or a
representative of the Engineering Department, will act as the
Planning Board's agent in the inspection of the work to ensure
compliance with these rules and regulations and will report to
the Board with recommendations as to approval or disapproval
of the work.
(a)
The applicant will engage the services of a professional
engineer throughout both the design and construction phases
of the work who will act as agent with the Town Engineer. The
Town Engineer shall make certain inspections as prescribed
herein prior to such work being covered by subsequent work.
However, the Board and the Town Engineer shall have the right
to inspect the work at any time. Therefore, the applicant shall
at any time provide safe and convenient access to all parts of
the work for inspection by the Board or its authorized agents.
(b)
(1)
Compliance. All work that has been disapproved or is not
acceptable to the Board shall be removed and replaced or
otherwise corrected to the point of complying with the
requirements of the Board for acceptance. Any work that has been
covered by subsequent work prior to acceptance or is otherwise
not available or obscured to the point of rendering inspection of
the work difficult shall be considered not acceptable to the Board.
Such subsequent work shall be removed as directed by the Town
Engineer to ensure availability of the work to be inspected as
required in this section. The release of the performance guarantee
shall depend upon the acceptance of all work prescribed herein and
on the definitive plan and as directed by the Board.
(2)
Inspection by the Town Engineer.
At points indicated in § 400-14 and as further described in
this section hereinafter, the Town Engineer or a representative
of the Engineering Department will inspect the construction
of the required improvements. Unless approval of the work
completed, including approval of the materials used, to each
point of construction has been given in writing, no further
work shall be commenced. Such inspections may include the
taking of certain samples for laboratory analysis or testing. In
such cases, the applicant shall ensure that the Town Engineer
is in no way hindered or obstructed in the course of obtaining
such samples. Where such samples are removed from the
completed work, the applicant shall replace and restore such
(a)
(3)
§ 400-15 HARWICH CODE § 400-15
1:318
work, to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, to its condition
prior to the taking of the sample.
The Town Engineer may require certified copies of delivery
receipt or bills of lading or other certification as to the
description of materials used or incorporated in the work. The
Town Engineer may also require a sample of any materials or
supplies which may be incorporated in the work; such samples
shall be furnished at the expense of the applicant, and the
applicant shall pay for all costs and fees incurred by the Board
as a result of transporting and testing such materials.
(b)
Notification to the applicant's engineer.
Applicant's procedure. After the approval of the definitive plan,
the applicant shall notify the Board as to the engineer who will
act as his agent and keep the Town Engineer fully informed as
to the status and progress of the work and shall notify the Town
Engineer directly in writing, at least 48 hours in advance, that work
has progressed to a stage that an inspection is required. Where
applicable the applicant shall also submit testing results.
(1)
Town Engineer procedure. In the event that the Town Engineer
makes an inspection of the work at the time designated and finds
that such work is not at the proper state of completion or that the
work has been covered or otherwise obscured, the Town Engineer
shall notify the applicant and the Board as to the additional steps
the applicant shall take to complete the work to the point required
or to the extent the work shall be uncovered or exposed to full view.
The applicant shall notify the Town Engineer again when the work
is ready as prescribed in Subsection B(1) above.
(2)
Liability. The applicant shall pay for all costs and fees incurred by
the Board as a result of requests by the applicant for inspection of
the work that, in the opinion of the Board, was not at an acceptable
stage of completion for such inspection.
(3)
B.
Lines and grades.
Deviation from plan and profile. The applicant's engineer will
advise the Board at any time during the construction if, in the
Engineer's opinion, the work has not been laid out to the lines
and grades as shown on the plan and profile associated with the
approved definitive plan. In such cases, the applicant will proceed
as described in § 400-14B.
(1)
Responsibility. Any costs that occur as a result of deviating from the
definitive plan during the construction phase of the subdivision are
the responsibility of the applicant in addition to any fees required.
(2)
C.
Inspection of required improvements. The following inspections of the
required improvements will be made by the Town Engineer. (Form B-5,
D.
§ 400-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15
1:319
Subdivision Road Construction Inspection Form, shall be used during
each inspection.) These inspections may be in addition to any other
inspection the Board may make or cause to be made. All sampling
and testing of materials shall be performed by qualified personnel
acceptable to the Town and shall be at the applicant's expense. At the
discretion of the Town Engineer or the applicant's engineer, additional
sampling may be required.
First inspection. An inspection will be made of the work upon
completion of all clearing, grubbing, and excavation and all work
incidental thereto as may be required in § 400-14C. No fill shall
have been placed at the time of this inspection.
(1)
Second inspection. An inspection will be made of the completed
drainage system (without backfill) as required herein or on the
definitive plan.
At the same time, or such other time as the work may be
available, an inspection will be made of the completed utilities
(without backfill) as required on the definitive plan. The
inspection of the required utilities will be made by the agency
responsible for the particular service as well as by the
applicant's engineer. The Town Engineer shall also be notified
so that he or she may inspect the utilities prior to backfill.
Each agency so involved will notify the Town Engineer of the
approval of such work.
(a)
Backfill of any portion of the drainage system or utilities shall
not be made until after receipt of notification of approval or
acceptance by the Town Engineer or agency responsible.
(b)
The inspection of the construction of the ways shall include
the inspection of the backfilling and compaction of all utility
trenches as may be installed by utility companies, and such
work shall be performed in the manner as required by these
rules and regulations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility
to ensure compliance with these requirements. If, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, the backfilling and compaction
of utility trenches and the patching of the pavement, if
required, have not been performed in accordance with these
rules and regulations, the Planning Board may not release
the bond or covenant applicable until such work has been
performed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(c)
(2)
Third inspection. An inspection will be made of the compacted fill
as specified in § 400-14G and as may be required to bring the
roadways to their proposed grades. The applicant shall notify the
Town and the Town Engineer as to the source of gravel for fill, as
soon as such information is known, so that samples may be taken
and analyzed by the Town and the Town Engineer. The applicant is
hereby advised not to proceed with the filling operation until the
(3)
§ 400-15 HARWICH CODE § 400-15
1:320
Town and the Town Engineer notify the applicant that the gravel
proposed for the fill is acceptable. If the applicant proceeds with
the fill prior to such notice this act shall be at the applicant's own
risk. The applicant shall not use a gravel source other than the
one designated without prior notice to the Board and the Town
Engineer. The applicant's engineer or the Town Engineer may also
require compaction tests.
Fourth inspection. An inspection will be made of the first layer
of compacted roadway foundation (stone dust, gravel, processed
stone, or reclaimed asphalt) as specified in § 400-14H. A gravel
sample or samples may be taken, at the option of the Town
Engineer, in the same manner as prescribed for the third
inspection. Compaction tests may also be required by the
applicant's engineer or the Town Engineer.
(4)
Fifth inspection. An inspection will be made of the final layer
of compacted roadway foundation (processed stone) prior to the
application of the concrete penetration as specified in § 400-14H,
and a gravel sample may be taken by the Town Engineer.
Compaction tests may also be required by the applicant's engineer
or the Town Engineer.
(5)
Sixth inspection. An inspection of the binder course (bituminous
concrete) will be made during placement and following completion.
If required, samples of the mix shall be taken by the applicant's
engineer or the Town Engineer for the purposes of performing
extraction tests, compaction tests, or pavement thickness tests.
Core drill samples may be required at the applicant's expense.
Certified paving slips indicating bituminous concrete quantities
shall be submitted to the applicant's engineer, who will tabulate the
quantities, check the correlation with the anticipated qualities, and
then forward the slips and a report to the Town Engineer.
(6)
Seventh inspection. An inspection of the finish course (bituminous
concrete) before, during, and following the placement of the mix
shall be performed. A tack coat shall be applied to the binder
course of mix prior to placement of the top coat where required by
the applicant's engineer or the Town Engineer. The requirements
regarding sampling, testing, and quantity slips indicated in
Subsection D(6) above for the binder course shall also apply to the
top course.
(7)
Eighth inspection. An inspection will be made of all work as
required on sidewalks, berms, topsoil, hydroseeding, open space,
side slopes, monuments, bounds, and roadway signs.
(8)
Ninth inspection. A final inspection will be made of all subsequent
work as required herein or on the definitive plan, which shall
include the final cleanup. An as-built plan shall be filed following
this inspection.
(9)
§ 400-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15
1:321
Town Engineer's report.
The Town Engineer will submit a completed certified report to the
Board for each way in a subdivision.
(1)
If the applicant submits a request for full or partial release from the
covenant with the Town, the Planning Board may request a report
from the Town Engineer prior to completion of the subdivision
road(s).
(2)
E.
§ 400-15 HARWICH CODE § 400-15
1:322
ARTICLE III
Special Permits, Including Site Plans
§ 400-16. General requirements.
Applicability. A site plan special permit from the Planning Board is
required for all activities outlined in § 325-55C of the Harwich Zoning
Bylaw. This is in addition to any special permit or variance required
under § 325-13 (Table of Use Regulations) of the Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
The Planning Board may waive strict compliance with these Rules and
Regulations Governing Site Plan Special Permits when, in its judgment,
such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent
or purposes of these rules and regulations or the Zoning Bylaw.
A.
Applications and plans. The following must be filed with the Town Clerk
for application for a special permit, including a site plan special permit:
Complete application.
A complete application shall include all items listed in
Appendix 458 respective to the nature of the special permit and
any other requirements as specified in § 400-17.
(a)
Failure to submit a complete application at the time of filing
may be grounds for denial of the site plan special permit.
Failure to submit the required site plan fee prior to the
scheduled public hearing may also be grounds for denial.
Failure to file a complete application with the Board may be
grounds for denial by the Planning Board (MGL c. 40A, §§ 9
and 14).
(b)
For uses that do not utilize a structure, the area of the parcel
covered by land areas must be expressed separately for each
parcel and for each zoning district affecting each parcel. These
numbers must also be shown as a project total for each zoning
district. Such use must be specified.
(c)
Plans for redevelopment of a site or modification of an
approved site plan must show all land on the subject parcel
and any other parcels relating to the subject use, including
all structures, parking areas, other appurtenant facilities, and
open space (undeveloped natural areas and landscaped areas).
Failure to show all property pertaining to the subject use(s)
may result in incomplete notification to all parties in interest,
which may invalidate any approval obtained.
(d)
(1)
Traffic study.
The Board may also require the applicant to submit
professionally prepared documentation of the environmental,
(a)
(2)
B.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16
1:323
traffic, or other impacts of a particular project (use) or project
element in order to determine compliance with the general
conditions for granting a special permit.
If the Board requires a traffic study for the proposed use/
project, the applicant shall document the traffic levels
expected for average daily traffic and a.m. and p.m. peak
hours. This data shall be presented for summer and
nonsummer periods.
(b)
Landscaping. See Table 7.59
When required, details of the proposed landscaping plan shall
include all proposed landscaping, including species names,
quantities, location, and size upon planting. Evergreen species
shall be specifically identified as such when used for screening.
(a)
The plan must also show with appropriate graphic symbols
the specific areas of landscaping which are counted as interior
landscaping. A dotted line shall be used to delineate the area
used for total parking lot area for the purpose of interior
landscaping computation, which should include parking
spaces, the maneuvering area for a single space or row of
spaces, the maneuvering area between two rows of spaces, all
loading areas, and the landscape islands. Areas to be excluded
from total parking area computations and interior landscape
area totals are driveway areas where there are no adjacent
parking spaces and areas beyond the perimeter of the parking
area, such as building yard areas, required parking setback
areas and non-island or non-peninsula landscape areas along
the perimeter of the parking area.
(b)
(3)
Utilities: water.
Location of existing waterlines, if any, and the location of any
existing hydrants within the site or within the layout of any way
adjacent to the site, if any shall be marked on the plan.
(a)
The location of proposed waterlines and hydrants is to be
determined pursuant to the requirements of the Board of
Water Commissioners and shall be shown on the site plan.
(b)
(4)
Revised site plans. A revised site plan is defined as any plan
showing a change in a filed site plan that is awaiting Board action.
For the purpose of this section, any plan showing a change in a site
plan which has received action by the Board to approve or deny will
be subject to all of the requirements for an initial site plan special
permit application. When a filed site plan is to be revised, six copies
of the revised site plan, which must show the latest revision date,
must be submitted to the Town Clerk's office no later than 10 days
(5)
59.Editor's Note: Table 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-16 HARWICH CODE § 400-16
1:324
§ 400-17. Additional requirements.
prior to the next scheduled discussion of the application by the
Board.
Accessory apartment or two-family dwelling.
In addition to the general requirements, the following must be filed
with the Town Clerk for application for an accessory apartment
special permit:
Two copies of a signed and notarized affidavit by the owner
stating that he or she will live in one of the units on a yearround
basis. In the case of a not-for-profit housing entity proof
of ownership must be filed.
(a)
Two copies of the required covenant for parcels in a Water
Resource Protection District.
(b)
Accurately drawn and scaled floor plans of both the existing
structure and the proposed apartment, showing floor area by
room and the common wall between the two units.
(c)
Building elevation drawings showing all existing and proposed
entrances to the main dwelling and the accessory apartment.
(d)
(1)
Parking spaces must have direct access to a roadway and may not
be lined up one behind the other.
(2)
A.
Drinking Water Resource Protection District.
In addition to the general requirements, the following must be filed
with the Town Clerk for application for a special permit in the
Drinking Water Resource Protection District:
A plan showing the location of all buildings, impervious
surfaces, subsurface disposal systems and boundaries of the
district where applicable.
(a)
A drainage plan for the property showing the method to be
used for disposing of all runoff from impervious surfaces. If dry
wells are to be used, evidence must be presented to show that
other methods of disposal are undesirable.
(b)
A complete list of the type and quantities of all chemicals,
pesticides, fuels and other potentially hazardous or toxic
materials to be stored, used, or disposed of on site.
(c)
A description of how and where the hazardous materials will be
stored, accompanied by a description of the provisions which
will be employed to protect all said materials from vandalism,
corrosion, leakage, and spills. The description should include
(d)
(1)
B.
§ 400-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-17
1:325
§ 400-18. Review procedure.
control measures and the degree of threat to the groundwater
quality should controls fail.
A description of potentially toxic or hazardous waste or waste
by-products to be generated, indicating storage and/or
disposal methods to be used.
(e)
Nitrogen loading calculation of wastewater to be disposed of
on site.
(f)
For any project where runoff other than typical runoff from parking
lots or driveways may occur and/or subsurface disposal of
materials other than typical septage waste may occur, the following
additional information shall be supplied:
Data developed from test borings and test holes or wells to
adequately indicate the elevation (mean sea level datum) of the
groundwater on site and the nature and composition of the soil.
(a)
A projection of groundwater flow conditions on site, including
a description of down-gradient water resources and an
evaluation of the impact of disposal of accidental spills on such
resources.
(b)
A description of mitigating measures which the applicant plans
to implement to eliminate the potential for groundwater
contamination and any backup measure should said measure
fail.
(c)
(2)
The Planning Board shall make findings with the guidance of the
Board of Health and/or Health Department consistent with the
requirements of § 325-51C of the Harwich Zoning Bylaw.
(3)
Public hearing. Following the submittal of a completed application and
plans, the planning staff will schedule a public hearing before the
Planning Board consistent with the requirements of MGL c. 40A, § 9,
which requires public notice of the time and place of the public hearing
and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification, as follows:
The Board shall give notice by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town of Harwich, once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication being not less than 14 days
before the day of such hearing;
(1)
The Board shall give notice by posting such notice in a conspicuous
place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than 14 days before
the day of such hearing; and
(2)
The applicant shall give notice by mailing a copy of such
advertisement via certified mail, return receipt, to property owners
within 300 feet abutting the subject property, which may also
(3)
A.
§ 400-17 HARWICH CODE § 400-18
1:326
include abutters to abutters, and properties across the roadway
from the subject property. The advertisement and list of abutters,
to include names and addresses of abutters certified by the
Harwich Board of Assessors, will be supplied to the applicant by
the Planning Department. Said notice shall be mailed out no less
than 10 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. A copy of the
certified mail receipts must be filed with the Planning Office and
the original returned "green cards" shall be submitted as well.
[Amended 5-11-2010]
Planning Board action. In accordance with MGL c. 40A, the Board shall
hold the public hearing within 65 days of the filing with the Town
Clerk. Following the closing of the hearing, the Planning Board shall
have 90 days to render a decision and file it with the Town Clerk.
Once the decision is rendered, the Board shall have 14 days to file said
decision with the Town Clerk, but within 90 days from the closing of the
hearing. The Planning Board may approve, approve with conditions or
modifications, or disapprove said plan as provided by MGL c. 40A by
a two-thirds vote. Said decision shall state specifically the reasons for
such action. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the applicant
and/or the representative.
B.
Effective date. No special permit shall be effective until the appeal
period has passed and a copy certified by the Town Clerk is recorded
together with any covenant made in connection with said special permit
at the Registry of Deeds in Barnstable County. The site shall not be
occupied or used until a certificate of completion has been issued by
the Planning Board.
C.
Appeal period and certificate of approval. Following the filing of the
decision with the Town Clerk there shall be a twenty-day appeal period.
Provided the application is approved or approved with conditions or
modifications and following the expiration of the appeal period the
applicant or the representative may request from the Town Clerk a
certification that no appeal was taken in this matter.
D.
Covenants and agreements. In any case where the Board, pursuant to
the authority conferred on it by the Zoning Bylaw, has voted to grant
a density bonus to an applicant, the Board shall require, prior to the
issuance of a special permit, that the applicant execute a covenant
in such form as the Board deems appropriate wherein the applicant
agrees to construct the amenities for which the density bonus has
been granted according to a specific timetable with such security
guaranteeing said construction as the Board and the applicant may
agree is appropriate. As a condition to the grant of a special permit,
the Board may require that, when constructed, said amenities will be
conveyed by the applicant or other person developing the project to any
of the individuals, groups, or corporations designated by the Town of
Harwich Zoning Bylaw or by MGL c. 40A, § 9. [Amended 5-11-2010]
E.
§ 400-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-18
1:327
§ 400-19. Other requests.
Recording of the special permit decision. Upon filing the special permit
decision with the Town Clerk, the Board shall send a copy of the
decision to the applicant notifying the applicant that the decision has
been filed with the Harwich Town Clerk and an appeal, if any, from
the Board's decision must be filed with the Superior Court or a District
Court of Barnstable County or the Massachusetts Land Court within
20 days. After the twenty-day appeal period has expired, the applicant
shall present the decision to the Town Clerk for certification that no
appeal has been taken. Once this certification is received, the decision
must be recorded at the Barnstable County Registry of Deeds. After
recording the decision, the applicant shall return copies of the decision,
stamped at the Registry, to the Board and the Town Clerk.
F.
Inspection, certificate of completion and as-built plan. The site shall not
be occupied or used until one of the following has been complied with:
The applicant shall notify the Planning Department/Planning Board
when all required site work has been completed. The Board shall
obtain in writing from the Planning Department, or other
designated Planning Board agent, a certification that all work
required by the rules and regulations and the approved site plan
special permit (with conditions, if any) has been inspected by it or
him or her and completed to the satisfaction of all Town agencies
involved in the site plan process. In addition, an as-built plan,
certified by a professional land surveyor or registered engineer,
shall be submitted to the Planning Department/Planning Board.
The as-built plan shall attest to the development's conformity with
the approved site plan by indicating landscaping, buildings,
structures, signs, drainage and all other site improvements. Until
the certification and as-built are approved, the site shall not be
occupied or used.
(1)
In the alternative, the applicant may submit a cost estimate to
cover the remaining site work to be performed and the cost to
prepare and submit an as-built plan. The Town Engineer shall
review said estimate and shall submit a report to the Planning
Board indicating the accuracy of the estimate and stating any
recommendations or discrepancies. The Planning Board shall
review the estimate and the Town Engineer's report and set the
amount for a cash bond or passbook account. An incentive factor
of 150% shall be calculated in to the final amount. The cash bond
or passbook account shall be released or reduced by the Planning
Board only after certification by the Planning Board that all of
the required improvements or those improvements requested for
release have been completed in conformance with the approved
plan and all applicable conditions and regulations. There shall
be no complete release until an as-built plan is submitted and
accepted by the Planning Board.
(2)
G.
§ 400-18 HARWICH CODE § 400-19
1:328
Waiver from site plan requirement. Pursuant to § 325-55F of the
Harwich Zoning Bylaw, the Planning Board may waive the requirement
of the filing of a site plan. When, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
the requirements of § 325-55C of the Harwich Zoning Bylaw do not
substantially change the relationship of the structure to the site and to
abutting properties and structures, the Planning Board my determine,
without a public hearing, that submission of a site plan for special
permit approval is not required.
Application requirements. The following must be filed with the
Town Clerk for application for a waiver from site plan special
permit requirements:
(a) All items as listed in Appendix 4.60
A clearly drawn plan to scale shall be prepared showing the
proposed changes and/or additions to the site. If an approved
site plan special permit exists the same plan shall be utilized
showing the proposed changes and/or additions to the site.
(b)
Site plan information may be superimposed on a valid survey
plan or a valid existing site plan, provided that the following
notation is included on the site plan: "[This site plan was
prepared by (name of preparer) using a (plan of land/site plan)
titled "____________________, dated ________ and last revised on
________, scale: ________, prepared by _______________.]"
(c)
(1)
Planning Board action.
Following the submittal of a completed application and plan,
the planning staff will schedule a public meeting before the
Planning Board.
(a)
A notice of said meeting shall be mailed to the abutters no less
than 10 days prior to the schedule meeting.
(b)
Failure to submit a complete application at the time of filing
may be grounds for denial of the site plan special permit.
Failure to submit the required site plan fee prior to the
scheduled public hearing may also be grounds for denial.
(c)
(2)
A.
Repetitive petition. Section 16 of MGL c. 40A provides for a repetitive
petition process before the Planning Board. The Planning Board has
the ability to refer cases back to the permit or special permit granting
authority within two years of an unfavorable action by said authority.
Application requirements. In addition to items listed in Appendix 4,
the following must be filed with the Town Clerk for application for
a special permit:
(1)
B.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 400-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19
1:329
§ 400-20. Earth removal and sand and gravel mining in Six Ponds
Special District. [Amended 5-11-2010]
Earth removal and sand and gravel mining within the Six Ponds Special
District require an operations permit in accordance with § 325-102 of the
Zoning Bylaw
Original plan presented to the special permit granting
authority or the permit granting authority which denied the
original request.
(a)
A revised plan showing, if applicable, showing the changes
and/or differences from the original plan.
(b)
Planning Board action. In order for the Planning Board to give its
consent for a case to return to said authority, the Board must make
a finding, with a vote of all but one member of the Planning Board,
that there are specific and material changes in the conditions upon
which the previous unfavorable action was based. Notice of the
consent proceedings shall be given to parties in interest of the time
and place of such proceedings.
(2)
§ 400-19 HARWICH CODE § 400-20
1:330
Appendix
Chapter A500
ACCEPTANCE OF GENERAL LAWS AND OTHER LEGISLATION
§ A500-1. Listing of laws accepted, special acts and important Town
Meeting votes.
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
1900 ATM 11 Ch. 254, Acts of
1897
Appointment of a Forester
1904 ATM 31 MGL c. 78, § 18 Securing money for the
perpetual care of
cemeteries
1908 ATM 15 MGL c. 28 Elect three Park
Commissioners
1911 ATM 23 Ch. 422, Acts of
1908
Not to receive the Public
Document Series
1913 ATM 26 MGL c. 48, § 85
7-14-1915
STM
2 375 Incorporation of Cape
Cod Water Co.
1916 ATM 33 Authorize Selectmen to
make ordinances
regarding any vendors of
wares on the streets of
Harwich
2-4-1929 ATM 37 MGL c. 48, §§ 42
to 44
Establishing a Fire
Department
1930 ATM 18 Ch. 357, Sec. 5,
Acts of 1928
One way traffic on Main
Street from beginning
and including Miles
Street at Beals Corner
and extending to and
including Snow Inn Road
1930 ATM 33 MGL c. 136 §§ 21
to 28
1931 ATM 19 MGL c. 142, §§ 1,
3, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16
Relative to the
Supervision of Plumbing
§ 400-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:331
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
1935 ATM 69 Proposed Acts of
1932 (Part One)
Authorizing Town of
Harwich to supply itself
and its inhabitants with
water
11-29-1938
STM
1 MGL c. 152, § 69
(as amended by
Ch. 403 of the
Acts of 1936)
Determine what
employees shall be
included in the terms
"laborers," "workmen"
and "mechanics" as used
in MGL c. 152, §§ 68 to 75
1939 ATM 20 Ch. 415, Acts of
1938
An act further regulating
liens for, and that
collection of, water rates
and charges
11-17-1939
STM
1 Ch. 807, Acts of
1913
Relating to Workmen's
Compensation
1944 ATM 14 MGL c. 152, § 69 Providing for Workmen's
Compensation
1944 ATM 25 MGL c. 144, §§ 22
to 26
Pertaining to powers,
duties and authority of
cemetery commissioners
1947 ATM 56 MGL c. 40, § 12 Public baths and wash
houses
1949 ATM 29 MGL c. 143, § 3 Gas Code
1949 ATM 60 Ch. 227, Acts of
1948
Concerning certain
cemetery associations
2-1949 ATM 40 Ch. 340, Acts of
1947
Improve the method of
municipal planning
1958 ATM 7 Ch. 223, Acts of
1957
Establishment of
Conservation Commission
1959 ATM 14 MGL c. 40A, § 20 Appeals unfavorably
acted upon by the Board
of Appeals shall not be
considered on their
merits by B.O.A. within
two years after date of
such unfavorable action
except with consent of all
members of the Planning
Board
§ A500-1 HARWICH CODE § A500-1
1:332
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
1959 ATM 22 Acts of 1958 An act to validate the
laying out, alteration,
relocation, or
discontinuation of certain
public ways in the Town
of Harwich
1961 ATM 19 MGL c. 121, § 26K Establishment of Housing
Authority
1961 ATM 20 Ch. 647, Acts of
1960
Increase pensions and
retirements payable to
certain former public
employees
11-1961 STM 3 Ch. 216, Acts of
1961
Town administers Island
Pond Cemetery
1962 ATM 52 MGL c. 40, § 6B Police and Fire uniforms
1963 ATM 35 Ch. 409, Acts of
1962
Pedestrian control
11-1963 STM 8 Authorize Selectmen to
petition General Court to
include disposal of
Exchange Building on
1964 ballot
1964 ATM 56 Ch. 697, Acts of
1963
Establish Historic
Commission
1965 ATM 11 MGL c. 85, § 11A
(Ch. 710, Acts of
1941)
Registration and
operations of bicycles
1965 ATM 77 Ch. 478, Acts of
1963
Relative to increasing
amount of pensions and
retirements for certain
former public employees
1966 ATM 120 Ch. 486, Acts of
1964
Increasing pensions and
retirements to certain
former public employees
1966 ATM 122 MGL c. 44, § 65 Make advances to pay any
officer or employee in
advance of his regular
vacation to the extent of
the pay he is entitled to
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:333
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
1966 ATM 123 MGL c. 32, § 95 Grant Horace Wixon or
surviving spouse an
annuity of $2,000
1966 ATM 129 MGL c. 58, §§ 7A
to 7E
Petition State Tax
Commission for
installation of state tax
assessment system
1968 ATM 10 MGL c. 184, § 8A Assessors shall request
names and addresses of
owners in real estate
transfers
1968 ATM 64 MGL c. 41, § 97A Establish Police
Department in certain
towns
12-1968 STM 2 Petition General Court for
legislation to create Park
and Recreation
Commission
1969 ATM 57 Continue or appoint
officials except select
police and fire
1969 ATM 57 MGL c. 152, § 69
(as amended by
Ch. 401, Acts of
1966)
Workmen's Compensation
Insurance for elect
1969 ATM 71 MGL c. 90, § 20C Parking violations, tags,
court appearances and
fines
1969 ATM 88 Act H-1680 of
1969
Authorization to acquire
land for skating rink
5-1970 STM 1 MGL c. 71, §§ 16
to 16I
School district
establishment
1972 ATM 72 MGL c. 41, § 100F Indemnify the
Harbormaster for
expenses/damages
incurred by him in scope
of his employment
1974 ATM 73 MGL c. 41, § 100G Provides funeral and
burial expenses for
firefighters and police
officers killed in the line
of duty
§ A500-1 HARWICH CODE § A500-1
1:334
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
4-9-1975 STM 14 82, § 34 Reserve spaces between
side lines of highways for
horses, bicycles, etc.
1978 ATM 15 MGL c. 40, § 22D Towing and illegally
parked cars - $500
1979 ATM 11 MGL c. 41, § 25A Assistant Assessor -
$16,321
1979 ATM 46 MGL c. 53, § 9A Nomination papers
1981 ATM 61 Place question on ballot -
C.C. Regional Transit
Authority
4-7-1981 ATM 25 MGL c. 40, § 4A Purchase up to $4,000
without bids
1982 ATM 68 MGL c. 32,
§ 9A-7A?
Town pays 75% insurance
premium
4-12-1982
STM
11 MGL c. 90, § 20 or
§ 20A 1/2
Parking fines
1985 ATM 37 MGL c. 138, §§ 12
and 15 (c. 138,
§ 17A as enacted
by statute 1978, c.
377, § 2)
Authorize the Board of
Selectmen to issue
additional alcoholic
beverages licenses
1986 ATM 20 Motel room tax
4-8-1986 ATM 117 MGL c. 148, § 26G Automatic sprinklers
4-6-1987 ATM 93 Ch. 140, Acts of
1985
$72,045 for state roads
4-6-1987 ATM 78 MGL c. 40, § 57 Revoke license for
nonpayment of tax
5-2-1988 ATM 67 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 41
Elderly tax exemptions
10-3-1988
ATM
9 MGL c. 40, § 58 Municipal charges lien -
unpaid moorings, etc.
10-2-1989
ATM
11 MGL c. 270, §§ 16
and 16A
Fine for litter or refuse
disposal (Health Agent
Enforcing Officer)
5-2-1989 ATM 24 MGL c. 59, § 57 Property tax $50 or less -
one payment
5-7-1990 ATM 8 Ch. 653, Sec. 40,
Acts of 1989
Assess building done
before June 30 (effective
FY 1991)
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:335
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
5-7-1990 STM 5 MGL c. 54, § 16A Town Clerk fills Election
Officer vacancy
10-1-1991
ATM
13 MGL c. 148, § 26E Smoke Detector Law
5-4-1992 ATM 19 Ch. 597, Sec. 1,
Acts of 1982
Exempt POWs
5-4-1992 ATM 16 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 41C
Elderly tax exemption
5-4-1994 STM 13 Ch. 70, School Aid
Schedule
Support for state aid
5-4-1994 STM 14 Support MMA School
Funding Act (new school
finance law)
5-7-1996 ATM 53 MGL c. 41, § 100B Medical bills: retired/
disabled firefighters/
police officers
5-1997 ATM 78 MGL c. 148, § 38A Approve annual permit
schedule (fire)
5-1997 ATM 79 MGL c. 148, § 26I Multiple dwelling units,
new construction/
automatic sprinkler
systems
5-4-1998 ATM 18 Change assessment date
for new growth
5-4-1998 ATM 48 Rescind Article 82, 1994
ATM
5-4-1998 ATM
(Town
Election,
5-18-1998,
Questions 6
and 7)
53 MGL c. 32B, §§ 9D
and 9 1/2
Surviving spouse
insurance contribution
5-3-1999 ATM 45 MGL c, 59, § 5,
Clause 17D
Widow's exemptions
5-3-1999 ATM 46 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 37A
Blind exemption
5-1-2000 ATM 12 Establish Workers
Compensation Trust Fund
5-1-2000 ATM 38 MGL c. 140,
§ 147A
§ A500-1 HARWICH CODE § A500-1
1:336
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
5-1-2000 ATM 42 MGL c. 138, § 126
(Acts of 1991)
Tax deferral
5-1-2000 ATM 44 Establish Recreation/
Youth Revolving Fund
5-5-2003 ATM 25 Ch. 184, Sec. 51,
Acts of 2002
(amending MGL c.
59, § 5, Clause
41C)
Change senior exemption
from $500 to $600
5-1-2006 ATM 42 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 41
Senior exemption
5-2-2006 STM 4 MGL c. 41, § 19K Additional annual
compensation for Town
Clerk
5-2007 ATM 61 MGL c. 50, § 5L Deferral of taxes for
National Guard overseas
5-2007 ATM 63 MGL c. 39, § 23D An act further regulating
meetings of municipal
boards
5-2007 ATM 64 MGL c. 40, § 22F
5-2007 STM 12 MGL c. 148, § 52 Senior Citizen Property
Tax Work Off Program
5-5-2008 ATM 58 MGL c. 41, § 38A Create Town Collector
2-5-2009 STM 11 MGL c. 59, § 57C Quarterly taxes
2-5-2009 STM 12 MGL c. 59, § 2A(A) Change growth date from
January 1 to June 30
2-5-2009 STM 10 Caleb Chase Legislation
5-5-2009 STM 12 MGL c. 60, § 15 Setting demand fees for
delinquent local taxes
11-12-2009
STM
11 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 54
Personal property
exemption
5-3-2010 ATM 5 MGL c. 64L,
§ 2A(a)
Local Meals Tax
5-4-2010 STM 14 MGL c. 32B, § 18 Medicare extension plans
5-4-2015 ATM 37 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 41D
Annual increase in
income (gross receipts)
and asset (whole estate)
limit for senior
exemptions
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:337
Town
Meeting
Action Date
Article
Number Legislation Subject
5-2-2016 ATM 42 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 56
Personal property tax
abatement for National
Guard and Reservists
5-1-2017 ATM 36 MGL c. 44,
§ 53F3/4
PEG Access And Cable
Related Fund acceptance
5-1-2017 ATM 52 MGL c. 44, § 20 Municipal Modernization
Act - uses of bond
premiums
5-7-2018 42 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 5k
Senior Work Off Program
– Angel Provision
5-7-2018 43 MGL c. 59, § 5,
Clause 56
Personal property tax
abatement for National
Guard and Reservists
5-7-2018 65 MGL c. 60, § 15B Establish annual tax title
collection revolving fund
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2004 General Bylaws to 2010 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Article/Part From 2004 General
Bylaws Location in 2010 Code
Article I, Town Meeting Ch. 271
Article II, Town Administration
Part 1, General Provisions Ch. 7, Art. IV
Part 2, Town Clerk Ch. 7, Arts. II and IV
Part 3, Town Treasurer Ch. 7, Art. II
Part 4, Selectmen Ch. 7, Art. I
Part 5, Town Counsel Ch. 7, Art. II
Part 6, Building Code Board of
Appeals
Ch. 7, Art. III
§ A500-1 HARWICH CODE § DT-1
1:338
Article/Part From 2004 General
Bylaws Location in 2010 Code
Part 7, Board of Health REP
Part 8, Planning Board Ch. 7, Art. III
Article III, Public and Private Ways Ch. 255
Article IV, Public Safety
Part 1, Licenses, Permits and Fees Ch. 164
Part 2, Inspection of Gas Piping and
Gas Appliances
Ch. 110
Part 3, Rental of Dwellings -
Regulations
Ch. 230
Part 4, Fences, Hedges and Shrubs
§ 4-401 REP
§ 4-402 REP; see now § 325-17
Part 5, Boating and Water Skiing Ch. 47, Art. I
Part 6, Launching, Operation and
Beaching of Boats
Ch. 47, Art. II
Part 7, Beach Parking Ch. 40
Part 8, Crimes and Punishments
§§ 4-801, 4-801A, 4-802 and
4-803A
Ch. 247
§ 4-803 Ch. 164
§§ 4-804, 4-805 and 4-810 Ch. 214
§ 4-806 Ch. 18, Art. I
§§ 4-807 and 4-808 Ch. 189
§ 4-809 Ch. 293
§ 4-811 Ch. 47, Art. I
§ 4-812 REP
§ 4-813 REP
§ 4-814 Ch. 40
§ 4-815 Ch. 176, Art. I
Part 9, House Numbering Ch. 53
Part 10, Mechanical Protection
Devices and False Alarms
Ch. 14
Part 11, Fire Prevention Ch. 100
Part 12, Water Supply Emergency Ch. 300, Art. I
Part 13, Parking for People with
Disabilities
Ch. 208, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:339
Article/Part From 2004 General
Bylaws Location in 2010 Code
Part 14, Water Use Restriction Bylaw Ch. 300, Art. II
Part 15, Prohibition on the Storage
and Use of Materials Containing
Perchlorate
Ch. 122, Art. I
Article V, Historic District Commission Ch. 131
Article VI, Alarm Systems, Regulations
and False Alarms
Ch. 14
Article VII, Wetlands Protection
Part 1 Ch. 310
Part 2, Water Dependent Structures Ch. 304
Article VIII, Noncriminal Disposition of
Violations
Ch. 1, Art. I
Article IX, Cultural Council REP
Article X, Animal Control Bylaw Ch. 26
Article XI, Community Preservation
Committee Bylaw
Ch. 7, Art. III
Article XII, Harwich Right to Farm
Bylaw
Ch. 89, Art. I
Article XIII, Public Display and/or
Consumption of Marijuana
Ch. 171
Article XIV, Harbor Dredging
Betterment Cost Allocation
Ch. 43, Art. I
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date
Adopted by Subject Disposition
5-3-2010 ATM, Art. 64 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-3-2010 ATM, Art. 65 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-3-2010 ATM, Art. 66 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 131
5-4-2010 STM, Art. 7 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
§ DT-1 HARWICH CODE § DL-1
1:340
Adoption
Date
Adopted by Subject Disposition
5-4-2010 STM, Art. 8 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-4-2010 STM, Art. 9 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-4-2010 STM, Art. 13 Secondhand dealers and
collectors of precious
metals and gems
Ch. 241
5-11-2010 Planning
Board
Adoption of Planning Board
Rules and Regulations
Ch. 350, Art. I
6-22-2010 Planning
Board
Subdivision of land and site
plan special permits
amendment
Ch. 400
5-2-2011 ATM, Art. 41 Petition for Charter
amendment
NCM
5-2-2011 ATM, Art. 42 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 131
5-2-2011 ATM, Art. 43 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-3-2011 STM, Art. 19 Petition for Charter
amendment
NCM
5-3-2011 STM, Art. 20 Noise amendment Ch. 189
5-3-2011 STM, Art. 22 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NCM
5-3-2011 STM, Art. 23 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-3-2011 STM, Art. 24 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-7-2012 ATM, Art. 22 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-7-2012 ATM, Art. 23 Noise amendment Ch. 189
5-8-2012 STM, Art. 3 Parking for people with
disabilities amendment
Ch. 208, Art. I
5-8-2012 STM, Art. 4 Administration amendment Ch. 7
5-8-2012 STM, Art. 5 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-16-2012 Ch. 97, Acts
of 2012
Charter amendment
(elected Town officers and
Town agencies)
Charter, Ch. 6
5-23-2012 Ch. 103, Acts
of 2012
Charter amendment
(financial provisions and
procedures)
Charter, Ch. 9
5-6-2013 ATM, Art. 38 Petition for Charter
amendment
NCM
5-6-2013 ATM, Art. 39 Town Meeting amendment Ch. 271
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:341
Adoption
Date
Adopted by Subject Disposition
5-7-2013 STM, Art. 12 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-7-2013 STM, Art. 13 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
11-6-2013 Ch. 127, Acts
of 2013
Charter amendment (dates
for submission of and action
on budget)
Charter, Ch. 9
5-5-2014 ATM, Art. 51 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-5-2014 ATM, Art. 56 Licenses, permits and fees
amendment
Ch. 164
5-5-2014 ATM, Art. 57 Wetlands protection
amendment
Ch. 310
5-6-2014 STM, Art. 1 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-6-2014 STM, Art. 3 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
10-9-2014 Ch. 345, Acts
of 2014
Charter amendment (Board
of Selectmen prohibitions)
Charter, Ch. 3
5-4-2015 ATM, Art. 37 General law acceptance Ch. A500
5-4-2015 ATM, Art. 40 Hazardous materials: singleuse
plastic bags
Ch. 122, Art. II
5-5-2015 STM, Art. 3 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-5-2015 STM, Art. 4 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 42 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 45 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 214
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 46 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 47 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 48 Charter amendment (Board
of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator, Town
administrative organization,
additional provisions)
Charter, Chs. 3,
4, 5, 10
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 49 Charter amendment (Board
of Selectmen)
Charter, Ch. 3
5-2-2016 ATM, Art. 50 Charter amendment
(appointed Town agencies)
Charter, Ch. 7
6-3-2016 Ch. 117, Acts
of 2016
Charter amendment
(elected Town officers and
Town agencies)
Charter, Ch. 6
§ DL-1 HARWICH CODE § DL-1
1:342
Adoption
Date
Adopted by Subject Disposition
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 13 Sewer use Ch. 295
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 36 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 37 Zoning amendment Ch. 325
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 38 Charter Amendment Ch. C
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 48 Departmental revolving
funds
Ch. 8
5-1-2017 ATM, Art. 52 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 32 Stretch Energy Code Ch. 115
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 33 Zoning Amendment Ch. 325
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 34 Zoning Amendment Ch. 325
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 35 Marijuana Amendment Ch. 171
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 36 Zoning Amendment Ch. 325
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 39 Administration Amendment Ch. 7
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 40 Affordable Housing Trust Ch. 140
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 42 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 43 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 44 Architectural Advisory
Committee
NCM
5-7-2018 ATM, Art. 65 Acceptance of General Laws
and Other Legislation
Amendment
Ch. A500
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:343