TOWN OF LUDLOW
BYLAWS
As amended through May 14, 2018
TOWN OF LUDLOW
COUNTY OF HAMPDEN
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Herewith are the approved Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow arranged in two parts and according to
subject as follows:
Part 1
Chapter 1 Regulating the Government of the Town of Ludlow
Chapter 2 Regulating the Conduct of Town Business
Chapter 3 Regulating Certain Occupations
Chapter 4 Regulating the Conduct of Citizens
Chapter 5 Regulating the use of Land (Zoning)
Chapter 6 Regulating the Construction of Buildings (Building Code)
Chapter 7 Regulating Salaries and Wages (Classification Plan)
Chapter 8 Regulating Unregistered Cars
Chapter 9 Dog Licensing Control & Regulations 11/25/85
Chapter 10 Council on Aging 4/5/76
Chapter 11 Regulating the use of the Sanitary Landfill-Mandatory
Recycling Bylaw
Chapter 12 Regulating Mobile Home Parks 4/2/84
Chapter 13 Non-Criminal Disposition and Enforcement
Chapter 14 Regulations of Class I, II, and III Motor Vehicle Licenses
Chapter 15 Conservation Commission Bylaws
Chapter 16 Commission on Disability
Chapter 17 Prohibiting Smoking in Public Places
Chapter 18 Policy on the Removal of Non-Hazardous Public Shade Trees
By Individuals or Agencies other than the Town of Ludlow
Chapter 19 Community Preservation Committee
INDEX
CHAPTER I (1)
Regulating the Government of the Town of Ludlow Chpt/Page
Sec 1-9 1 1
Sec 10-16 1 2
Sec 17-30 1 3
Sec 31-35 1 4
Sec 36 1 5
CHAPTER II (2)
Regulating the Conduct of Town Business Chpt/Page
Sec 1-9 2 1
Sec 10-19 2 2
Sec 20-23 (23) fees for fuel storage permits 2 3
Sec 23/cont/24 2 4
Sec 24/cont/25 2 5
Sec 26-30 2 6
Sec 31 (31) enumeration fees Town Clerk 2 7
Sec 31/cont 2 8
Sec 31/cont/33 (32) enumeration fees Bd of Health 2 9
Sec 33/cont/35 (35) temporary repairs of private ways 2 10
Sec 36-37 (36) provisions of Ch 40, § 22 f, § 37 2 11
Sec 37/cont/38 (38) creation of spec property tax assmt 2 12
Sec 38/cont 2 13
Sec 38/cont/39 (39) Town Administrator 2 14
Sec 39/cont 2 15
Sec 40 (40) right to farm 2 16
Sec 40/cont/41 (41) criminal history check auth 2 17
Sec 41/cont 2 18
Sec 41/cont/42 (42) departmental revolving funds 2 19
Sec 42/cont 2 20
Sec 42/cont 2 21
Sec 42/cont 2 22
CHAPTER III (3)
Regulating Certain Occupations Chpt/Page
Sec 1-4 (4) Licensing of Solicitors and Canvassers 3 1-3
Sec 4/cont/5 (5) Permitting of Ice Cream Truck Vendors 3 4
Sec 5/cont/6 (6) Pawn Shops Buyers & Sellers of Gold 3 5-6
Sec 6/cont/7 (7) Regulating Certain Occupations 3 7
CHAPTER IV (4)
Regulating the Conduct of Citizens Chpt/Page
Sec 1-7 4 1
Sec 8-15 (15) handicapped pkg spaces required 4 2
Sec 15/cont 4 3-8
Sec 16-21 4 9
Sec 22-24 (23) regulation of boats on Chapin Pond 4 10
Also known as Haviland Pond
Sec 25 (25) fire lane rule and regulations 4 11-12
Sec 26 (26) firearms 4 13
Sec 27 (27) prohibiting use of recreational and/or all 4 13
Terrain vehicles in the Stony Brook Wetlands area
Sec 28-30 (30) regulating sale of mercury term 4 14
Sec 30cont/31 (31) regulating automatic amusement dev 4 15
Sec 32 (32) false burglar alarms 4 16
Sec 33 (33) consumption of marihuana 4 16
Sec 34 (34) solicitations 4 16
Sec 35 (35) vacant and unkempt properties 4 16-18
CHAPTER V (5)
Regulating the Use of Land (Zoning) Chpt/Page
Separate book, “State Building Code” 5 1
CHAPTER VI (6)
Regulating the Construction of Buildings (Building Code) Chpt/Page
Separate book, “State Building Code” 6 1
CHAPTER VII (7)
Bylaw Town of Ludlow Regulating salaries and Wages Chpt/Page
(Personnel Policy) See Separate booklet, “Town of Ludlow 7 1
Personnel Policy Bylaw and Classification and Comp Plan”.
(Amended 5/9/16 ATM)
CHAPTER VIII (8)
Chpt/Page
Regulating Unregistered Cars 8 1-2
CHAPTER IX (9)
Regulating the licensing, control and keeping of dogs Chpt/Page
Sec 1-5 9 1
Sec 6-7 9 2-3
CHAPTER X (10)
Council on Aging Chpt/Page
Sec 1-7 10 1
CHAPTER XI (11)
Regulating the use of the Sanitary Landfill Rules Chpt/Page
and regulations
Chpt 1 definitions 11 1
Chpt 2 refuse disposal 11 2
Chpt 3 disposal privileges 11 3 -4
Chpt 4 time periods for use of refuse disposal 11 4
Chpt 5 penalties 11 4
Chpt 6 amendments, etc. 11 4
Chpt 7 unconstitutionality clause 11 4
Chpt 8 mandatory recycling by-law 11 5
CHAPTER XII (12)
Regulating Mobile Home Parks
Sec 1 (definitions/maximum rent) 12 1
Sec 2 (adjustment of maximum rent) 12 2
Sec 3 (rent adjustment processing) 12 2-4
Sec 4 (limitation of petitions) 12 4
Sec 5 (rule making) 12 5
CHAPTER XIII (13)
Non-Criminal Enforcement of By-laws and Regulations Chpt/Page
Sec 1 13 1-2
CHAPTER XIV (14)
Chpt/Page
Regulation of Class I, II, and III Motor Vehicle Licenses 14 1-3
CHAPTER XV (15)
Chpt/Page
Conservation Commission By-law 15 1-4
CHAPTER XVI (16)
Commission on Disability Chpt/Page
Sec 1-2 16 1
Sec 3-6 16 2
CHAPTER XVII (17)
Chpt/Page
Prohibiting Smoking in Public Places 17 1-4
CHAPTER XVIII (18)
Policy on the removal of Non-Hazardous Public Shade Trees Chpt/Page
by individuals or agencies other than the Town 18 1-3
CHAPTER XIX (19)
Community Preservation Committee Chpt/Page
Sec 1 (1) establishment 19 1
Sec 2 (2) duties 19 2
Sec 3 (3) quorum estimates 19 2
Sec 4 (4) amendments 19 2
Sec 5 (5) severability 19 3
Sec 6 (6) effective date 19 3
CHAPTER I
REGULATING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TOWN
SECTION 1: The following provisions shall constitute the General Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow, which
shall be in lieu of all Bylaws, amendments, and changes heretofore in force; except Bylaws or other
regulations relating to the use of land (CH.5) By-laws regulating the construction of building (CH.6) and
regulating salaries (CH.7); said Chapters 5,6 and 7 are Bylaws presently in force and printed in separate
booklets. The term “Annual Town Meeting” used in the By-Laws shall only apply to the Annual Town
Meeting regularly held on the second Monday of May. The Fall Town Meeting held annually in October is
classified as a “Special Town Meeting” (amended October 6, 2003 art 2 )
SECTION 2: The Selectmen shall insert in every Spring Annual Town Meeting Warrant an article calling
for the report of all outstanding committees.
SECTION 3: After acceptance of these or any Bylaws by the Town and the Attorney General's Office,
posting of same on the official bulletin board at the Town Hall, and posting on the bulletin boards on the
exterior of the polling places in each of the Town precincts, also notice inserted once a week for three
consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation within the Town, stating that "such Bylaws
have been posted according to the Bylaws and copies are available at the Town Clerk's Office" shall
constitute necessary procedure for adoption unless otherwise specifically outlined in the General Laws.
The Town Clerk shall certify that such procedure has been followed.
SECTION 4: The invalidation of any section or paragraph in these Bylaws shall not invalidate any other
section or paragraph.
SECTION 5: Such repeal of the presently existing Bylaws as above mentioned is not to be effective until
the effective date of these Bylaws which shall be 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the month following the
certification date by the Town Clerk as required in "Section 3" of this chapter.
SECTION 6: The Annual Town election will be held on the forth Monday in March on which day shall be
held the Annual Election of Town officers and the determination of such matters as are required to be
determined by ballot.(amended 10/4/99)
SECTION 7: The polls shall be opened not later than ten o'clock in the morning and shall not be closed
earlier than eight o'clock in the evening. This provision shall also apply to all elections and primaries, unless
otherwise provided by General Laws.
SECTION 8: The Annual Town Meeting shall meet regularly on the second Monday of May at 7:30 p.m. to
consider and adopt an annual operating and capital budget, and to act upon such other business as may
properly come before the meeting, except the election of officers and the determination of such matters as
are required by law to be determined by ballot. The October Special Town Meeting shall meet regularly on
the first Monday of October at 7:30 p.m. to consider and act on matters of planning, zoning, subdivision
control, and all other matters of a bylaw nature, as well as to consider and act upon such other business as
may properly come before the meeting. (Added 10/4/99)
SECTION 9: Notice of every Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be given by a constable of the Town
by posting attested copies of the warrant on the bulletin boards as provided for in "Section 3" of this chapter
at least seven days before the day fixed for the meeting and fourteen days before any Special Town
Meeting.
1-1
SECTION 10: The Town Clerk shall deliver, by mail or otherwise, a copy of these Bylaws to each Town
Meeting Member within seven (7) days of his election to such office for the first time, as shown on the
records of the Town Clerk.
SECTION 11: Any article inserted in the warrant for a Town Meeting under which an appropriation of money
may be made, other than the ordinary annual budget article, shall have appended to such article the name
of the first person signing such request and the words "and others". Each article inserted in the warrant
shall be accompanied by supporting documentation clearly explaining the purpose of the Article. The Town
Clerk shall deliver, by mail or otherwise, a copy of all supporting documentation to each Town Meeting
Member, concurrent with delivery of the warrant.
This provision shall not apply to articles which are placed on the warrant pursuant to petition provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws, Ch. 39, S. 10.
SECTION 12: The time for filing of written requests with the Selectmen by ten (10) or more registered
voters for insertion of subjects in the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting shall close not more than ninety
(90) days before the time of holding said meeting.
a. The Selectmen shall insert in the Warrant for every Special Town Meeting all subjects the insertion
of which shall be requested by them in writing by one hundred registered voters or by ten percent
of the total number of registered voters of the town, whichever is the lesser.
b. The Selectmen shall call a Special Town meeting upon request in writing, of two hundred (200)
registered voters or of twenty per cent of the total number of registered voters of the town,
whichever number is the lesser; such meeting to be held not later than forty-five days after the
receipt of such request, and shall insert in the warrant therefore all subjects the insertion of which
shall be requested by said petition.
The written requests of registered voters for the insertion of subjects in Town Meeting Warrants shall not
be valid unless the required number of registered voters not only sign their names but also state their
residence, with street and number, if any. (added Oct 6, 2003 art 4)
Copies of all articles in the warrant for an Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be immediately forwarded
by the Selectmen to the Finance Committee for their consideration.
SECTION 13: The Finance Committee shall be composed of nine (9) members, (amended from 15 to 9
members 10/07/02) the term of office to be three years. The terms of one-third of the members shall expire
at the dissolution of the Spring Annual Meeting. The Moderator shall forthwith appoint sufficient members
to fill the vacancies. The Moderator shall fill all vacancies caused by resignation of a Finance Committee
Member. Upon notice to the Town Clerk by the Finance Committee that a member has missed three
consecutive meetings, for reasons other than sickness, the Town Clerk shall certify to the Moderator that
the member is presumed to have resigned.(amended 10/07/02)
SECTION 14: No action shall be taken at any meeting appropriating or involving the expenditure of money,
the creation of a debt or the disposal of property of the Town, except under Ch. 11, S. 19 of these Bylaws,
until the proposition has been referred to the Finance Committee, a public hearing held and a report made
thereon.
SECTION 15: The Selectmen shall publish as early as possible a notice of their intent to call a Special
Town Meeting. The notice shall state the intended date of the Special Town Meeting and the date on which
the warrant for same shall be closed.
SECTION 16: No motion, the effect of which would be to dissolve the meeting, shall be in order until every
article in the warrant for such meeting has been disposed of.
1-2
SECTION 17: An elected officer of the Town shall hold only one elective office at any one time, unless
provided otherwise in these Bylaws.
SECTION 18: All motions having to do with the expenditure of money shall be in writing if so directed by
the Moderator.
SECTION 19: Deleted March 22, 1965.
SECTION 20: An amended amendment shall not be amended and no motion or proposition of a different
subject from that under consideration shall be entertained under color of an amendment.
SECTION 21: All voting in Town Meeting shall be by show of hands. If the result is in doubt, or if a vote
declared by the Moderator is immediately questioned by seven or more Town Meeting Members, the
Moderator shall divide the meeting by taking a standing vote.
If a two-thirds (2/3) vote for an action at a Town Meeting is required by statute, the moderator in accordance
with General Laws Chapter 39, Section 15, as amended, may dispense with the requirement for taking a
count of the vote if the moderator, in his discretion and without taking a count, determines that two-thirds
of those voting supported the action. (added 10/2/00)
SECTION 22: The Moderator may decline to entertain obviously frivolous motions.
SECTION 23: Any person who is employed as an attorney by another interested in any matter under
discussion at a Town Meeting shall disclose the fact of his employment before speaking thereon.
SECTION 24: Immediately after the dissolution of any Annual or Special Town Meeting the Town Clerk
shall release to the press a list of those Town Meeting Members absent from said Town Meeting, identifying
them by name and precinct.
SECTION 25: The Moderator may direct to any person in the hall a specific request by a Town Meeting
Member for information pertaining to the question under consideration.
SECTION 26: In conducting Town Meetings, when a motion for reconsideration is decided, that decision
shall not be reconsidered. Notice of reconsideration and/or a motion for reconsideration may be made by
any Town Meeting Member.
SECTION 27: The Moderator, while occupying the chair, shall not participate in any discussion during the
meeting.
SECTION 28: Every voter speaking upon a subject in a meeting shall confine his remarks to the question
before the meeting, avoid personalities and be seated when he has finished.
SECTION 29: No person shall speak more than twice upon a question except to correct an error or make
an explanation without first obtaining leave of the meeting nor until others who have not spoken upon the
question shall speak if they so desire.
SECTION 30: When a motion is readily susceptible of division it shall be divided and the vote upon each
part taken separately, provided the Moderator deems it best or seven Town Meeting Members present so
request.
1-3
SECTION 31: The duties of the Moderator and the government of the Town Meeting not specifically
provided for by law, may be determined by rules of practice contained in "Town Meeting Time" by Johnson,
Trustman and Wadsworth.
SECTION 32: All committees, except as otherwise provided by law or by bylaw or by vote of the Town,
shall be appointed by the Moderator as soon as may be after the passage of the vote creating the
committee. Unless otherwise provided, the first named member of a committee shall immediately call all
members of the committee together for the purpose of organization, and each committee shall thereafter
proceed with its duties and report to the Town at the next Spring Annual Town Meeting. All members of a
committee which fails or neglects to make a report at such Annual Town Meeting shall by such failure be
held to have resigned and without further action or vote new members shall be appointed by the original
appointing power, unless other action is taken by express vote of the Town Meeting. The member of any
committee who fails to attend any three consecutive meetings called by the committee may have his name
certified to the Town Clerk by the remaining members of the committee. The Town Clerk shall notify the
said member and the appointing authority that a vacancy exists by reason of absence. (Amended 4/8/96
ATM)
All committees shall file with the Town Clerk the minutes of all regularly called meetings, together with the
names of all members in attendance, except any portion thereof held in "Executive Session". The minutes
are to be filed within l0 days after being accepted by its committee.
SECTION 33: A vote to accept a report of a committee (except a vote of progress) shall unless otherwise
provided, discharge the committee, but it shall not operate as an adoption of the recommendations of such
committee without an express vote duly passed to that effect.
SECTION 34: Registered voters who are not Town Meeting Members shall conduct themselves under the
following rules:
Rule 1: These rules shall be read by the Moderator to the assembled voters of the Town at every
Annual Meeting, every Special Meeting and at any adjournment thereof, before any meeting shall
proceed to the business of the Town Meeting.
Rule 2: Any voter who is not a Town Meeting Member may speak, subject to the same limitations
and restrictions that apply to Town Meeting Members.
Rule 3: Any voter of the Town, not a Town Meeting Member, may present a motion or an
amendment to a motion providing he reduce said motion or amendment to writing and hand it to a
Town Meeting Member elected from the precinct in which the mover resides. It shall be the duty
of the Town Meeting Member who receives such motion or amendment to a motion to present said
motion or amendment to the meeting for its action; but he shall not be considered the sponsor
thereof and shall be free to speak, vote and act as he may deem proper under the circumstances.
SECTION 35: The Town Meeting shall, by by-law, provide for the establishment of standing committees,
a majority of the members of which shall be composed of persons elected to the Town Meeting. Such
committees as Town Meeting deems expedient shall be created and said committees shall be assigned all
articles, the subject matter of which comes under their jurisdiction, for a recommendation before final action
is taken. All committees shall conduct open public hearings on matters assigned to them to provide the
public with the opportunity to discuss their views concerning such matters. Committees established under
these provisions shall consist of an odd number of persons appointed for fixed terms. (Added 4/13/92 ATM)
1-4
SECTION 36: Display of flag, Pledge of Allegiance
1. Display of the Flag: In all meetings of elected or appointed Town committees and Boards that are
subject to the Massachusetts Open meeting Law, M.G.L. Ch. 39, s 23A-24, an American flag shall be
displayed.
a. Such flag shall be a suitable size for the room so as to be visible by all persons attending the
meeting, but in no instance shall it be smaller than two square feet in size. In design and construction it
shall conform to the requirements of title 4, Sec 1 & 2 of the United States code, and Executive order 10834,
of august 21, 1959.
b. Such flag shall be displayed with suitable dignity, and in accordance with official flag protocol, 4
U.S.C. s 5-8.
c. If the meeting is televised on Cable Access, the flag shall be placed so as to be within camera view.
2. Pledge of Allegiance: In all meetings of elected or appointed Town Committees and boards that are
subject to the Massachusetts Open Meeting law, M.G.L. Ch. 39, s 23A-24, upon calling the meeting to
order and prior to conducting any business, shall recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. The Pledge
shall be delivered in the manner specified by 4U.S.C. s 4.
[see ATG disapproval of deleted underlined sections in permanent record book located in Town Clerk’s
office)
(added 10/04/2004)
1-5
CHAPTER II
Regulating the Conduct of Town Business
SECTION l: The Town Clerk shall furnish for publication in the Annual Town Report an abstract of the
official records of all Town Meetings held during the preceding year. The Town Clerk shall also furnish an
abstract of the vital statistics for the preceding year.
SECTION 2: All meetings of every Town board, commission and committee, including the School
Committee, shall be open to the public and to the press unless such board, commission, committee or
School Committee shall vote to go into executive session.
SECTION 3: The Selectmen shall cause to be printed and ready for distribution at least seven (7) days
before the Spring Annual Town Meeting, a report giving detailed statements of the receipts and
expenditures of all Town officers, committees, commissions and boards, who have had the charge of
expenditures of Town funds for the financial year immediately preceding. Said report shall also contain the
records and reports to the Selectmen of all official boards, committees, commissions, town officers and
librarian for the preceding year.
SECTION 4: (Amended 5/8/2017, Art 13 ATM)
SECTION 5: The Town Clerk shall on or before the tenth of January prior to each Spring Annual Town
Meeting, notify in writing the chairman of any committee which has made no report to the Town since the
last Spring Annual Town Meeting that some report will be expected at the coming Spring Annual Town
Meeting.
SECTION 6: Whenever any report of any committee is presented to the Town, the Clerk shall cause to be
entered upon the regular records of the meeting such portions of the report only, if any, as may be
necessary for the understanding of the action taken by the Town, and unless the report has been printed
in full in the Town Report, the Clerk shall cause same to be entered in full, in a book provided for the
purpose, which shall be called the book of reports. The regular record of the meeting shall also make
references to the number of the report as entered in the Book of Reports.
SECTION 7: The Board of Selectmen shall determine and establish charges to be made to residents and
non-residents for copies of the Town Bylaws, Zoning Bylaws and any or all other Town documents for
which, in their opinion, a charge should be made.
SECTION 8: All boards, officers, commissions, committees or departments which adopt or promulgate
rules or regulations or have heretofore adopted or promulgated the same, shall within ten days file a copy
thereof with the Town Clerk for a permanent record. Whenever there are additions to or amendments of
any such rules and regulations, the board, officer, commission, committee or department responsible
thereof shall file with the Town Clerk a new and complete copy of such rules and regulations in substitution
for the copy already on file.
SECTION 9: Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land or any other instrument
required to carry into effect any vote of the Town, the same shall be executed by the Treasurer on behalf
of the Town, unless the Town shall otherwise vote in any special case.
2-1
SECTION 10: The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all bonds and insurance policies belonging to the
Town, except that the surety bonds of the Treasurer and Tax Collector shall be in the custody of the Town
Clerk.
SECTION 11: The Treasurer, with the approval of the Selectmen, is authorized to sell at public auction all
or any of the Town property acquired by virtue of sale for nonpayment of taxes, which sales have been
confirmed by the Land Court or the Tax Commissioner, and to give deeds therefor.
SECTION 12: The Town Treasurer shall be a member, ex-officio (without vote) of any Board or Committee
appointed by or on behalf of the Town, for the purpose of planning a project which involves the borrowing
of money on behalf of the Town.
SECTION 13: The Town Accountant shall be an ex-officio member (without vote) of the Finance
Committee.
SECTION 14: The Town Accountant shall keep a listing by department, board, committee, commission
or officer, of all:
a. For internal control, fixed assets owned by the Town that have a value of $1,000.00 or more.
b. For accounting purposes, assets greater than $5,000.00 in value, i.e. vehicles, machinery,
equipment;
c. For accounting purposes, the Town will also include in its inventory, infrastructure in excess of
$150,000.00 including land, buildings, building improvements and facilities.
The Town Accountant shall formulate and set up such procedures as deemed necessary to complete such
inventory. The Town Accountant shall require an inventory each year, and all boards, or officers of the
Town shall comply with such request. The Town Accountant shall be notified immediately by all boards,
committees, commissions or officers of any disposal or acquisition of capital items such as those described
in items a,b,c, above. (amended 11/18/2002)
SECTION 15: No board or officer shall make any contract on behalf of the Town, the execution of which
shall necessarily extend beyond three years from the date thereof, except as otherwise provided by law,
unless specific authority to do so has been given by vote of the Town.
For Example see Art. 11, Special Town Meeting, February 11, 1991 RE: Agreement for recycling,
composting of solid waste.
SECTION 16: No officer or board of Town Officers having the power or authority to appoint any Town
Officer or agent shall appoint himself or any member of such board to a salaried office or position, but this
shall not prohibit any Town Officer from being chairman or clerk of the board of which he may be a member.
SECTION 17: See Article 4, Special Town Meeting, June 4, 1990 - Uniform Procurement Act, Chapter
30B.
SECTION 18: Every contract for construction work, whether for alterations, repairs or original construction,
shall comply with bond requirements as outlined in Massachusetts General Laws, c. 149-Building
Construction Contracts and c.30,sec 39M-Public Works (Non-Building) Construction Contracts (with
labor).(amended 05/11/2015)
SECTION 19: Any board or officer in charge of a department of the Town may, with the approval of the
Selectmen and the Town Accountant, sell any personal property of the Town within the possession or
control of the department which has become obsolete or is not required for further use by the department,
and which does not, in the opinion of the Selectmen, exceed $500.00 in value.
2-2
SECTION 20: All registered vehicles owned by the Town of Ludlow shall display a permanently displayed
decal of the Town Seal and designated department on a clearly visible exterior location of said vehicle,
within thirty (30) days after receipt of said equipment.
SECTION 21: The Building Commissioner/Inspector may order numbers to be affixed to any dwelling or
building, on all streets, at his discretion. The owner of every building shall comply with such order within
ten days after notice thereof.
1. Numbers must be not less than four (4”) inches high in blocked face and shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place on the building. If the building has a set back of seventy-five (75”) feet or more from the
road or view is concealed from the road, numbers must be displayed on a sign post approximately five feet
(5’) high, at the beginning of the driveway. The signpost shall not interfere with road maintenance or snow
plows. 10/04/1999
SECTION 22: (Amended 5/8/2017, Art 19 ATM)
SECTION 23: The Board of Selectmen shall charge the following fees for storage permits granted under
the authority of Chapter 148, Sections 9 and 13 of the Massachusetts General Laws as amended:
(a) To manufacture, keep, store and use crude petroleum or any of its products, any explosive of
inflammable fluid or any inflammable compound not for resale:
Original Lisc Fee Annual Reg Fee
Up to 2,000 gals. or up to
16,000 lbs. $ 15.00 $ 7.50
2,001; to l0,000 gals. or
16,001 to 80,000 lbs. 30.00 15.00
2-3
10,001 to20,000 gals. or
80,001 to 160,000 lbs. 45.00 22.50
20,001 to 100,000 gals.
or 160,001 to 800,000 lbs. 60.00 30.00
Over 100,000 gals. or
over 800,000 lbs. 75.00 37.50
(b) To manufacture, keep, store and use crude petroleum or any of its products, any explosive or
inflammable fluid or any inflammable compound for resale:
Original Annual
License Registration
Fee Fee
Up to 5,000 gals. or
up to 40,000 lbs. $ 30.00 $ 15.00
5,001 to 10,000 gals
or 40,001 to 80,000 lbs. 50.00 25.00
10,001 to 30,000 gals.
or 80,001 to 240,000 lbs. 75.00 37.50
30,001 to 100,000 gals.
or 240,001 to 800,000 lbs. 150.00 75.00
100,001 to 200,000 gals.
or 800,001 to 1,600,000 lbs. 250.00 125.00
Over 200,000 gals. or
over 1,600,000 lbs. 500.00 250.00
SECTION 24: Capital Improvement Planning Committee
1. The Board of Selectmen shall establish and appoint a committee to be known as the Capital
Improvement Planning Committee, composed of one member of the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator, one member of the Finance Committee, one member of the Planning Board, the
School Superintendent or his designee and one private citizen. The Board of Selectmen shall
appoint one administrative officer who shall be an ex-officio committee staff member without right
to vote. The committee shall choose its own officers. (amended 5/12/2008)
2. The Committee shall study Capital Projects, improvements asset purchases involving major
non-recurring tangible assets and projects. They shall study Departmental Capital Outlay requests
for:
a. Single or combined asset purchases or lease purchases for additional and/or
replacement items which are purchased at intervals of at least five (5) years, and amount
to $20,000 or more, and have a useful life of at least five (5) years. Equipment to be used
for school student educational training purposes and/or equipment to be acquired through
grants or gifts shall be exempt from this by-law.
2-4
Capital Projects, improvements and/or repairs to fixed assets amount to $20,000 or
more.
By November l5th of each year, all Officers, Boards and Committees shall submit information
concerning all Capital Projects and purchases requiring Town Meeting action during the ensuing
six (6) years. Said information shall be submitted on forms devised and distributed by the Capital
Improvement Planning Committee. The Committee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing
and cost of these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of the Town.
No appropriation shall be voted for a Capital Project, purchase or improvement which comes under
this by-law unless the proposed Capital Project, purchase or improvement is considered in the
Committee's report, or the Committee shall first have submitted a report explaining the omission to
the Board of Selectmen.
3. The Committee shall prepare an annual report recommending a Capital Improvement Budget
for the next fiscal year, and a Capital Improvement Program including recommended capital
improvements for the following five fiscal years. The report shall be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for its consideration and approval. The Board shall submit its approved Capital Budget
to the Annual Town Meeting for adoption by the Town.
4. Such Capital Improvement Program, after its adoption, shall permit the expenditure on projects
included therein of sums from departmental budgets for surveys, architectural or engineering
advice, options or appraisals; but no such expenditure shall be incurred on projects which have not
been so approved by the Town through the appropriation of sums in the current year or in prior
years, or for preliminary planning for projects to be undertaken more than five years in the future.
5. The Committee's report and the Selectmen's recommended capital budget shall be published
and made available in a manner consistent with the distribution of the Finance Committee report.
The Committee shall deposit its original report with the Town Clerk.
SECTION 25: The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to defend all litigation to which the Town is
a party, and to employ special counsel to assist the Town Counsel whenever in their judgement necessity
therefore arises and the Town has allocated funds therefore. All Boards, Officers and Departments shall
have authority to prosecute all litigation to which their board, office or department is a party through the
Town Counsel. The Town Counsel shall draft or approve as to form all bonds, deeds, leases, obligations,
conveyances and other legal instruments, and perform every professional act necessary for the protection
of the Town’s interest which may be requested of him by vote of the Town or of any Board, Officer or
Department of the Town. Each Board, Office or Town Department shall designate a person (preferably the
Chairman or Department Head) who shall be designated as the contact person with Town Counsel and
through whom all inquiries of that Board, Office, or Department to Town Counsel shall be channeled. The
contact person shall contact the Board of Selectmen’s Office when he/she wishes to forward an inquiry to
Town Counsel and upon receipt of approval by the Executive Secretary, shall forward such request to Town
Counsel. The contact person can appeal a negative decision of the Executive Secretary to the full Board
of Selectmen. Upon receipt of Town Counsel’s written reply, copies shall be filed forthwith with both the
Board of Selectmen’s Office and the Town Clerk. This procedure need not be followed when a board or
committee member has a question about the legality of an action of either the board or committee on which
he/she serves or of the Board of Selectmen. The Town Counsel shall be present at all Town Meetings and
shall appear at any and all hearings on behalf of the Town whenever his services may be required.
(Amended 4/14/97 ATM)
2-5
SECTION 26: The Board of Selectmen shall annually appoint an attorney-at-law to act as Town Counsel,
who shall fulfill such duties as are required of him by the General Laws and these Bylaws. The Town
Counsel shall have the authority to compromise all litigation to which the Town is a party, so long as the
compromised sum does not exceed $l,000.00. Prior approval of the Board of Selectmen shall be necessary
before any litigation may be compromised.
SECTION 27: The Board of Public Works shall annually in April appoint a Town Engineer who shall have
authority over Town Engineering work under the supervision of the Board of Public Works. The Town
Engineer shall have charge of all Town engineering. The Town Engineer shall act as assistant clerk of the
Planning Board. He shall have charge of and preserve, arrange and index, so as to be readily accessible
to the public, all plans, surveys, field notes, records, documents and inventories connected with the
Engineering Department of the Town. The Town Engineer shall act as "Clerk of the Works" on Town
property; real and personal, when the cost of the alteration, repair, or original construction exceeds $500.00
excluding alteration, repair to school buildings, except when authorized by vote of the School Committee.
He shall keep accurate records showing in detail the operation and cost of his department, and a fair and
equal distribution of such cost among the several departments in proportion to the amount of work done for
and/or by each. (Amended 4/13/92 ATM)
SECTION 27A: The Board of Public Works shall have, in addition to the powers and duties outlined in
M.G.L. Ch. 41, S. 69D, all the powers and duties of the Engineering Department, which provides for the
furnishing of all services related to engineering, and to further transfer all monies from Engineering
Department No. 344 to the Department of Public Works, and to give the authority of paying any bills incurred
by the Engineering Department prior to this date to the Department of Public Works. (Added 4/13/92 ATM)
SECTION 27B: The Board of Public Works shall have, in addition to the powers and duties outlined in
M.G.L. Ch. 41, S. 69D, all the powers and duties of the operation of the Town's sanitary landfill, which
provides for the furnishing of all services related to the sanitary landfill, and to further transfer all monies
from Department 451, Waste Collection and Disposal to the Department of Public Works and to give the
authority of paying any bills incurred by the sanitary landfill prior to this date to the Department of Public
Works.
SECTION 28: All boards, officers, commissions and committees shall on July 1st each year notify, in
writing, the Town Engineer of new buildings, repair and alterations they anticipate within ten (10) years.
SECTION 29: Whenever a sewer bill remains outstanding after sixty (60) days from billing date, a penalty
of 10% or $5.00 whichever is greater, shall be charged, such penalty to be added to the sewer bill and then,
if the bill remains unpaid, it shall be added to the Real Estate Tax Bill as a sewer lien.
SECTION 30: The Town Collector shall, in the collection of accounts due the Town for departmental
services, licenses, permits, fees, and in lieu of tax payments, assess an interest charge at the prevailing
rate being charged for late property tax payments. Said interest to be charged for all accounts remaining
outstanding over sixty (60) days from date of mailing.
2-6
SECTION 31: Enumeration - Fees to be charged by the Town Clerk’s Offi9ce pursuant to the authority of
Ch 262 s 34 of the Massachusetts General Laws as follows (amended 10/5/09)
CLAUSE # FEE
1. For filing and indexing assignment 10.00
for the benefit of creditors
11. For entering amendment of a record 10.00
of the birth of a child born out
of wedlock subsequently legitimized
12. For correcting errors in a record 10.00
of a birth
13. For furnishing certificate of birth 10.00
13A. For furnishing an abstract copy of 4.00
a record of birth
14. For entering delayed record of birth 10.00
20. For filing certificate of a person 25.00
conducting business under any title
other than his real name
21. For filing by a person conducting 15.00
business under any title other than
his real name of a statement of
change of his residence, or of his
discontinuance, retirement or
withdrawal from or change of
location of such business
22. For furnishing certified copy of 5.00
certificate of person conducting
business under any title other
than his real name or a statement
by such person of his discontinuance,
retirement, withdrawal from such
business
24. For recording the name and address, 20.00
the date and number of the certificate
issued to a person registered for the
practice of podiatry in the
Commonwealth
29. For correcting errors in a record 10.00
of death
2-7
30. For furnishing a certificate of death 10.00
30A. For furnishing an abstract copy of
a record of death 4.00
42. For entering notice of intention of
marriage and issuing certificates
thereof 15.00
43. For entering certificate of marriage
filed by persons married out of the
Commonwealth 5.00
44. For issuing copy of certificate of
marriage 10.00
44A. For furnishing an abstract copy of
a record of marriage 4.00
45. For correcting errors in a record
of marriage 10.00
54. For recording power of attorney 10.00
57. For recording certificate of
registration granted to a person
to engage in the practice of
optometry or issuing a certified
copy thereof 20.00
58. For recording the name of the
owner of a certificate of
registration as a physician or
osteopath in the Commonwealth 20.00
62. For recording order granting
locations of poles, piers,
abutments or conduits, alterations
or transfers thereof, and increase 40.00
in number of wires and cable or flat rate
attachments under the provisions 10.00
of Section 22 of Ch. l66 add'l.
streets
66. For examining records or papers
relating to birth, marriage or
deaths upon the application of
any person, the actual expense
thereof, but not less than 5.00
2-8
67. For copying any manuscript or
record pertaining to a birth,
marriage or death 5.00
per page
69. For receiving and filing a complete 10.00 first page
inventory of all items to be included
in a "closing out sale", etc.
2.00
ea. add'l.
page
For filing a copy of written instrument
or declaration of trust by
trustees of an association or trust,
or any amendment thereof as provided
by Section 2, Ch. 182 20.00
78. For recording deed of lot or plot in
a public burial place or cemetery 10.00
9. Recording any other documents 10.00 first page
2.00
ea. add'l.
page
Voter's Certificate 4.00
Burial Permit 10.00
SECTION 32: ENUMERATION - In accordance with enabling legislation enacted as part of the Fiscal Year
1982 Budget of the Commonwealth. The following fees shall be charged and collected by the Board of
Health:
Description Fee
Manufacture or Bottling of Carbonated Non-Alcoholic
Beverages, Soda Water, Mineral or Spring Waters $ 40.00
Inspector of Pasteurizing Plants 40.00
License for Mobile Home Parks, Motels, etc. 50.00
Milk Inspection 10.00
SECTION 33: 1. The Planning Board of the Town of Ludlow is hereby authorized to appoint one (1)
associate member pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 9.
2-9
2. Said associate member shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Planning Board for a term of one
year or to fill a vacancy occurring during a term caused by the death, resignation, or other form of removal
from said position.
3. Said terms shall commence on the third Monday in April each year.
4. Said associate member shall serve only for the purposes of acting on a special permit application, in the
case of absence, inability to act or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the Planning Board, or
in the event of a vacancy on the Board when so designated by the Chairman of the Planning Board.
SECTION 34: No person shall be employed as Superintendent of the Department of Public Works unless
said person has attained a Bachelor's Degree in Civil Engineering from an accredited college or university,
has demonstrated five years of successful experience in the field of engineering and holds a professional
engineer registration from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. (Added 2/11/91 STM)
SECTION 35: Temporary Repairs on Private Ways (Added 4/13/93 ATM)
;
The Town may make temporary repairs on private ways which have been open to the public use for a
period of six (6) years or more, provided the repairs are for the protection of the health and safety of the
general public using such roads.
Such repairs shall include the filling of holes in the subsurface of such ways and repairs to the surface
materials thereof. Materials for such repairs, where practical, should be of the same as or similar to those
used for the existing surfaces of such ways, but may include surfacing the ways with bituminous materials,
including but not limited to bituminous concrete.
Drainage, as determined by the Department of Public Works to be necessary as a result of the repairs, may
also be done. Drain repairs shall be made only if petitioned for by all of the abutters who own frontage on
such ways, if necessary, and if the Department of Public Works declare that they are required by the public
necessity and convenience to make such repairs. Drainage easements shall, if necessary, be the
responsibility of the petitioners. The cost of such repairs shall be paid by the abutters by a cash deposit as
herein provided.
No repairs shall be commenced unless and until a cash deposit equal in amount to the estimated cost of
such repairs, as determined by the Department of Public Works is paid over to the Town. No betterment
charges shall be assessed.
The Town shall not be liable on account of any damage whatsoever caused by such repairs, and Ch. 84
S. 25 Massachusetts General Laws shall not apply. The Board of Public Works may require an indemnity
agreement executed by the petitioning abutters, indemnifying the Town for all claims and damages which
may result from changing such repairs.
The Town may, subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works, make temporary minor repairs
to private ways not to exceed $500.00 in total, provided the private way has been open to public use for a
period of six (6) years or more. The repair shall be limited to minor work such as filling, patching and not
more than grading or scraping twice per year.
No such repairs shall be done unless there is a unanimous agreement by all abutters that the work shall
commence and the Town of Ludlow shall be held harmless from any and all damages or claims arising out
of such repairs. Massachusetts General Laws, Ch. 84, S. 25 shall not apply.
2-10
SECTION 36: Provisions of Chapter 40 (Added 4/13/93 ATM)
(a) The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes,
assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector, shall
annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing
authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation,
or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve (12) month
period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or
a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
(b) The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and
transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax
Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days
after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license
or permit to any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with
respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with
respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such
proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal
from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked
under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued
by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments, or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance
of said certificate.
(c) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the
licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of
said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply
with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided,
however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
(d) The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct
or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his
immediate family, as defined in Ch. 268, S. 1 in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning; Ch. 48, S. 13; bicycle
permits; Ch. 85, S. 11A ; sales of articles for charitable purposes, Ch. 101 S. 33; children work permits, Ch.
149, S. 69; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, Ch. 140, S. 21E; dog licenses, Ch.
140 S. 137; fishing, hunting, trapping license, Ch. 131 S. 12; marriage licenses, Ch. 207 S. 28; and theatrical
events, public exhibition permits, Ch. 140 S. 181.
SECTION 37: Provisions of Chapter 40, Section 22F
Any municipal board or officer empowered to issue a license, permit, certificate or to render a service or
perform work for a person or class of persons may, from time to time, fix reasonable fees for all such
licenses, permits, or certificates issued pursuant to statutes or regulations wherein the entire proceeds of
the fee remain with such issuing city or town, and may fix reasonable charges to be paid for any services
rendered or work performed by the city or town or any department thereof, for any person or class of
persons.
2-11
A fee or charge imposed pursuant to this section shall supercede fees or charges already in effect, or any
limitations on amounts placed thereon for the same service, work, license, permit or certificate, provided
that this section shall not supersede the provisions of Ch. 6A S 31 through 77, Ch 80, Ch. 83, or Ch. 138
The fee or charge being collected immediately prior to acceptance of this section for any license, permit,
certificate service or work will be utilized until a new fee or charge is fixed under this section.
The provisions of this section may be accepted in a city by a vote or the City Council, with the approval of
the Mayor if so required by law, and in a town by vote of the Town Meeting, by vote of the Town Council in
towns with no Town Meeting.
SECTION 38: (Added 4/14/97 ATM )- Town Meeting article refers to Section 36 in error)
1. Creation of Special Property Tax Assessment
A special property tax assessment is created for substantial rehabilitation of owner-occupied residential
property listed on the State Register of Historic Places (State Register). The increase in assessed value
resulting from substantial rehabilitation of eligible properties shall be phased in one-fifth increments over a
period of five (5) years to the full assessed value of the property. The Special assessment shall extend
only to the building(s) or structure(s) that are rehabilitated.
2. Eligible Properties
In order to be eligible for the special assessment, property must meet the following criteria:
a. The property to be rehabilitated must be occupied by the owner exclusively for residential
purposes and be listed on the State Register which is maintained by the Massachusetts Historical
Commission (MHC) pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 9, S. 16C, either individually or as a contributing
element within an historic district.
b. The cost of rehabilitation, as that term is defined in 950 C.M.R. 72.04, must be no less
that 25% of the assessed value of the property prior to rehabilitation. Not less than 10% of the cost
of rehabilitation shall be dedicated to rehabilitation of the exterior of the historic building.
c. The property owner must present to the Assessor a certificate from the MHC stating that
the proposed rehabilitation meets the Secretary of the Interior’s standards.
3. Application Process
The requirements listed in subsection 1 (a-d) are the minimum information required by 950 C.M.R. 72.08
(3).
(1) A property owner must submit an application, on a form provided by the Assessor, which
includes the following information:
(a) Certification from the MHC that the rehabilitation as proposed meets the
Secretary of the Interior’s guidelines;
(b) Proof of the applicant’s ownership and occupancy of the subject property;
(c) The total cost of rehabilitation; and
(d) The property’s assessed value prior to rehabilitation.
2-12
(2) Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application, the Assessor shall determine
whether the proposed rehabilitation meets the eligibility criteria set forth in Section 2, and will notify
the owner of its decision in writing. The Assessor will grant final approval of the special assessment
upon receipt of the certification described in subsection 3 of Section 3.
(3) Within ninety (90) days of completion of the rehabilitation, the property owner shall
provide to the Assessor a certification that the completed work conforms with the proposed
rehabilitation and meets the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards. The owner shall obtain such
certification from the MHC, or from the appropriate local preservation commission if the property is
in an historic district, or is a designated landmark, or is otherwise subject to a preservation
restriction or ordinance.
4. Effective Date of Special Assessment
The special assessment will take effect on the first day of the next fiscal year after the assessment is
approved by the Assessor.
5. Time Limits
(1) An owner shall apply for the special assessment no later than two (2) years after
completion of the rehabilitation certified by the MHC.
(2) In order to be included in the total cost of rehabilitation as defined in 950 C.M.R. 72.04,
all rehabilitation work must be completed within a three (3) year period.
6. Other Provisions
The following provisions outline policies for ensuring that the owner who received the special assessment
maintains the property in the manner intended by the enabling legislation.
(1) An owner who applies for the special assessment shall agree in writing to maintain the subject
property in accordance with the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for the duration of the special assessment.
Failure to maintain the property in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the agreed
period of time shall result in revocation of the special assessment. In the event that the local preservation
commission informs the Assessor that the owner has failed to maintain the subject property in accordance
with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards, the Assessor shall notify the owner in writing and the owner
shall have thirty (30) days in which to demonstrate that the property has been maintained in accordance
with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards or, if not, to remedy such failure.
(2) An owner who received the special assessment shall annually, for the duration of the special
assessment, provide the Assessor with written certification that he or she still owns and occupies the
property which is the subject of the special assessment, and that the subject property is still listed on the
State Register.
(3) The date of any of the following occurrences shall be considered the date of the end of the special
assessment:
(a) written notice from the owner to the Assessors requesting removal of the special
assessment;
2-13
(b) sale or transfer of ownership during the five (5) year period, except in the course of
probate proceedings; or
(c) removal of the property from the State Register.
SECTION 39: Town Administrator
Powers and Duties
Appointment, Qualifications of the Town Administrator: The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Town
Administrator and shall annually appraise the performance of the Town Administrator. The Town
Administrator shall be a person of proven administrative ability, especially qualified by education and
experience. The Board of Selectmen may from time to time establish such additional qualifications as
deemed necessary and appropriate.
Relationship of the Board of Selectmen and Town Administrator: The Town Administrator shall be the
primary officer responsible for the implementation of policy directives and guidelines adopted by the Board
of Selectmen. The daily administration of the affairs of the town shall be the responsibility of the Town
Administrator.
General Responsibilities of the Town Administrator: The Town Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the town, shall act as the agent for the Board of Selectmen and shall be responsible
to the Board of Selectmen for the proper operation of town affairs for which the Town Administrator is given
responsibility under the provisions of this Article. The Town Administrator, under the policy direction of the
Board of Selectmen, shall supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all officers
appointed by the Board of Selectmen and their respective departments and of all functions for which the
Town Administrator is given responsibility, authority or control by this Article, by By-Law, by Town Meeting
vote, or by vote of the Board of Selectmen. The Town Administrator shall have the power to delegate,
authorize or direct any subordinate or employee of the town to exercise any power, duty or responsibility
which the office of town Administrator is authorized to exercise under this Article. All actions that are
performed under such delegation shall be deemed to be the actions of the Town Administrator.
Administrative Powers and Duties: The Town Administrator shall be the administrative officer of the
town and shall be responsible to the Board of Selectmen for the proper operation of town affairs for which
the Town Administrator is given responsibility under this Article. The powers, duties and responsibilities of
the Town Administrator shall include, but are not intended to be limited to, the following:
a. To supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all officers appointed
by the Board of Selectmen and their respective departments, and of all functions for which the
Town Administrator is given responsibility, authority or control by this Article, by By-Law, by
Town Meeting vote, or by vote of the Board of Selectmen;
b. To administer and enforce either directly or through a person or persons supervised by the
Town Administrator, in accordance with this Article, all provisions of the laws of the
Commonwealth or special laws applicable to the town, all By-Laws, and all regulations
established by the Board of Selectmen.
c. To attend all regular and special town meetings of the Board of Selectmen, unless excused;
d. To attend all sessions of the town meeting and to answer all questions addressed to the Town
Administrator and which are related to the warrant articles and to matters under the general
supervision of the Town Administrator;
e. To keep the Board of Selectmen fully informed as to the needs of the town, and to recommend
to the Selectmen for adoption such measurers requiring action by them or by the town as the
Town Administrator deems necessary or expedient;
f. To ensure that complete and full records of the financial and administrative activity of the town
are maintained and to render reports to the Board of Selectmen as may be required;
2-14
g. To be responsible for the rental, use, maintenance, repair and the development of a
comprehensive maintenance program for all town facilities, except those under the jurisdiction
of the School Committee, Board of Public Works and Library Trustees.
h. To serve as the Chief Procurement Officer and be responsible for the purchase of all supplies,
materials, and equipment, except books and other educational materials for schools and
approve the award of all contracts for all town departments;
i. To develop and maintain a full and complete inventory of all town owned real and personal
property;
j. To administer personnel policies, practices, or rules and regulations and any compensation
plan and any related matters for all municipal employees and to administer all collective
bargaining agreements, except for School Department agreements entered into by the town;
k. To be responsible for the negotiation of all contracts with town employees over wages, and
other terms and conditions of employment, except employees of the School Department.
Contracts shall be subject to the approval of the “Board of Selectmen”.
l. To prepare and submit an annual operating budget and capital improvements program;
m. To share with the Board of Selectmen and the Finance Committee any information obtained by
the Town Administrator as to the financial condition of the Town.
n. To investigate or inquire into the affairs of any town department or office;
o. To delegate, authorize or direct any subordinate or employee of the town to exercise any
power, duty, or responsibility which the office of Town Administrator is authorized to exercise,
provided that all acts that are performed under such delegation shall be deemed to be the acts
of the Town Administrator;
p. To perform such other duties as necessary or as may be assigned by this Article, by By-Law,
by Town Meeting vote or by vote of the Board of Selectmen.
(amended October 6, 2003 art 7)
2-15
SECTION 40: (Added 5/11/2009) Ludlow Right to Farm
Section 1 Purpose and Intent
The Town of Ludlow understands that farming is an essential and valued activity, which provides fresh food,
clean air, economic diversity, local employment and open spaces to all the citizens of our town. This bylaw
is intended to encourage the pursuit of agriculture, promote agricultural based economic and
employment opportunities, and protect farmland within the Town of Ludlow. The purpose is to allow
agricultural uses and related activities to function in harmony with the community, town agencies and
others. This by-law shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the town.
This by-law restates for Ludlow the Right to Farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as stated under the Constitution and General Laws and Regulations including but not limited
to Article 97 of the Constitution, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1: (The
Zoning Act) Chapter 90, Section 9, Chapter 111, Section 125A and Chapter 128, Section 1A.
Section 2 Definitions
“Farm shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose
of commercial agriculture, or accessory thereto. Commercial shall be defined by the minimum acreage
requirement (1) or the gross sales and program payment requirement (2) specified in Massachusetts
General Law Chapter 61A, Section 3, as amended. “Farm” shall include youth related agricultural activities,
such as but not limited to 4-H, irrespective of minimum acreage or gross sales and program payment
requirements.
“Farming” or “agriculture” shall include, but not be limited to the following: *Farming in all its branches and
the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
*Dairying;
*Orchards;
*Production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural or
horticultural commodities;
*Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry or lumbering operation;
*Raising livestock including horses;
*keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise;
*Keeping and raising poultry, sheep, goats, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus, ostrich and rheas),
camelids (such as llamas and camels) and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees.
1. In 2005 the minimum acreage requirement was not less than 5 acres.
2. In 2005 the gross sales or program payment requirement was not less than $500 per year.
Section 3 Right to Farm Declarations
*All these guidelines are subject to applicable local, state and federal regulations.*
“Farming” shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the following:
*Operation and transportation of slow moving farm equipment over roads within town;
*Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organisms of plants
and animals;
*Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
*Conducting agriculture related educational and farm based recreational activities, including agri-tourism,
provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm;
*Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a farmer’s market or
farm stand including signage thereto;
*Maintenance, repair or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner
or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management are sale of the
agricultural products;
2-16
*On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations;
*Revitalizing draining or irrigation ditches, picking stone, erecting, repairing or maintaining fences, and
clearing, rejuvenating and maintaining pastures;
*Herding of livestock from area to area, including along roads.
Section 4 Notification to Real Estate Buyers
In order to allow prospective purchasers to make informed decisions prior to a real estate transaction and
to promote harmony between farmers and their new neighbors after a transaction, the Town of Ludlow
requests selling landholders and/or their agents (and assigns) provide written notice to prospective
purchasers substantially as follows:
“it is the policy of the Town of Ludlow to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and
improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other agricultural products, and also
for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers that the property
they are about to acquire lies within a Town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities
may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors.”
Written notification may occur in one of several ways including but not limited to a disclosure form,
addendum to a Purchase and Sale Agreement and should include an acknowledgement by the buyer that
they received notification.
Within 30 days after this by-law becomes effective the Board of Selectmen shall make available for use by
selling landowners or their agents (and assigns) copies of example written notifications.
Within 30 days after this by-law becomes effective, the Board of Selectmen shall prominently place in the
Town Hall the above disclosure.
Section 5 Resolution of Complaints
Any person having a complaint about a farm activity or practice is encouraged to seek an amicable
resolution to the complaint, including talking directly with the involved farmer. Such person may,
notwithstanding pursing any other available remedy, request resolution assistance from the Board of
Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen may refer such a request to the Ludlow Agricultural Commission as
well as other applicable Boards. The Agricultural Commission shall review and facilitate the resolution of
such a request, and report its recommendations to the Board of Selectmen within the agreed upon time
frame.
Section 6 Severability Clause
If any part of this by-law is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remainder of this by-law. The Town of Ludlow hereby declares the provisions of this by-law to
be severable.
SECTION 41: Criminal History Check Authorization
A. The Police Department shall, as authorized by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 6, Section 172
B1/2, conduct State and Federal Fingerprint Based Criminal History checks for individuals applying for the
following licenses:
. Hawking and Peddling or other Door to Door Salespeople (Selectboard or Police Chief)
. Manager of Alcoholic Beverage License (Selectboard)
. Owner or Operator of Public Conveyance (Selectboard)
. Dealer of Secondhand Articles (Selectboard)
. Pawn Dealers (Selectboard)
. Hackney Drivers (Selectboard)
2-17
. Ice Cream Truck Vendors (Police Chief)
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify the individual fingerprinted that the
fingerprints will be used to check the individual’s criminal history records. The Police Chief shall periodically
check with the Executive Office of Public Safety and Security (EOPSS) which has issued an Informational
Bulletin which explains the requirements for town bylaws and the procedures for obtaining criminal history
information, to see if there have been any updates to be sure the Town remains in compliance.
Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fee, the Police Department shall transmit the fingerprints
it has obtained pursuant to this bylaw to the Identification Section of the Massachusetts State Police, the
Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS), and/or the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) or the successors of such agencies as may be necessary for the purpose of conducting
fingerprint based state and national criminal records background checks of license applicants specified in
this bylaw.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the DCJIS, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), and their successors, as may be applicable, to conduct fingerprint based state and national criminal
record background checks, including FBI records, consistent with this bylaw. The Town authorizes the
Police Department to receive and utilize State and FBI records in connection with such background checks,
consistent with this bylaw. The State and FBI criminal history will not be disseminated to unauthorized
entities.
Upon receipt of a report from the FBI or other appropriate criminal justice agency, a record subject may
request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record from the Police Department. Should the record
subject seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must take appropriate action to correct said record,
which action currently includes contacting the DCJIS for a state record or the FBI for records from other
jurisdictions maintained in its file. An applicant that wants to challenge the accuracy or completeness of
the record shall be advised that the procedures to change, correct, or update the record are set forth in Title
28 CFR 16.34. The Police Department shall not utilize and/or transmit the results of the fingerprint based
criminal record background check to any licensing authority pursuant to this bylaw until it has taken the
steps detailed in this paragraph. Municipal officials should not deny an applicant the license based on
information in the record until the applicant has been afforded a reasonable time to correct or complete the
information, or has declined to do so.
The Police Department shall communicate the results of fingerprint based criminal record background
checks to the appropriate governmental licensing authority within the Town as listed above. The Police
Department shall indicate whether the applicant has been convicted of, or is awaiting final adjudication for,
a crime that bears upon his or her suitability or any felony or misdemeanor that involved force or threat of
force, controlled substances or a sex related offense.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to adopt policies and procedures to effectuate the purposes of this
bylaw and promulgate regulations for the implementation of the bylaw, but in doing so it is recommended
that the Selectboard consult with the Chief of Police, Town Counsel and the Massachusetts Executive
Office of Public Safety and Security (or its successor agency) to ensure that such regulations are consistent
with the applicable law, the FBI’s requirements for access to the national database and other applicable
state laws.
B. Use of Criminal Record by Licensing Authorities: Licensing authorities of the Town shall utilize the
results of fingerprint based criminal record background checks for the sole purpose of determining the
suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection with the license applications specified in this bylaw.
A Town licensing authority may deny an application for a license on the basis of the results of a fingerprint
based criminal record background check if it determines that the results of the check render the subject
unsuitable for the proposed occupational activity. The licensing authority shall consider all applicable laws,
regulations and Town policies bearing on an applicant’s suitability in making this determination.
2-18
The Town or any of its officers, departments, boards, committees or other licensing authorities is hereby
authorized to deny any application for, including renewals and transfers thereof, for any person who is
determined unfit for the license, as determined by the licensing authority, due to information obtained
pursuant to this bylaw.
C. Fees: The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of conducting fingerprint-based
criminal record background checks shall be one hundred dollars ($100). The Town Treasurer shall
periodically consult with Town Counsel and the Department of Revenue, Division of Local Services,
regarding the proper municipal accounting of those fees.
A portion of the fee, as specified in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 6, Section 172B1/2, shall be
deposited into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the remainder of the fee may
be retained by the Town to be expended by the Police Department to help offset costs associated with the
administration of the fingerprinting system.
D. Effective Date: This bylaw shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General, so long as the
requirements of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40, Section 32 are satisfied. (added 10/7/2013)
SECTION 42: Departmental Revolving Funds (added 5/8/17 ATM, Art 13)
1. Purpose. This by-law/ordinance establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by town departments,
boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that
generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by General Laws Chapter 44, §53E
½.
2. Expenditure Limitations. A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities
against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this by-law without
appropriation subject to the following limitations:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid
from the fund, (except for those employed as school bus drivers).
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by town meeting on
or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the selectboard and finance committee.
3. Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this by-law shall be
credited to the general fund.
4. Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, §53E ½ and this by-law,
the laws, charter provisions, by-laws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and
custody of town monies and the expenditure and payment of town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving
fund established and authorized by this by-law. The town accountant shall include a statement on the
collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance
available for expenditure in the regular report the town accountant provides the department, board,
committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
2-19
5. Authorized Revolving Funds.
Table Establishing Funds
The Table establishes:
A. Each revolving fund authorized for use by a town department, board, committee, agency or office,
B. The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from each fund,
C. The fees, charges, and other monies charged and received by the department, board, committee,
agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the fund is established that
shall be credited to each fund by the town accountant,
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used,
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund,
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund, and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this by-law.
2-20
Table: Revolving Funds
A
Revolving
Fund
B
Department, Board,
Committee,
Agency
Or Officer
Authorized to
Spend from Fund
C
Fees, Charges or
Other Receipts
Credited to Fund
D
Program or
Activity Expenses
Payable from
Fund
E
Restrictions or
Conditions On
Expenses,
Payable from
Fund
F
Other
Requirements/
Reports
G
Fiscal
Years
CPR Training Board of Health Fees charged for
CPR, Hands-only
CPR and First Aid
Training
Purchase of
certification
cards, manuals
and supplies
that will be
needed for each
participant.
The balance in
the revolving
account shall not
exceed
the approved
expenditure limit
set at the Annual
Town Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance with
M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent fiscal
year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years
On-site
Sewage System
Board of Health Fees collected for
percolation tests,
reviewing of
septic
plans and final
inspection of
septic
systems
Pay the salary of
the sewage
system
Inspectors and to
pay other
expenses of the
inspection
program.
Payment to the
On-site Sewage
Disposal System
Inspectors
who witnesses
percolation tests,
reviews septic
system plans and
performs final
Inspections of
septic
systems
The balance in
the revolving
account shall not
exceed
the approved
expenditure limit
set at the Annual
Town Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance with
M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent fiscal
year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years
Vaccine Board of Health Fees collected for
vaccines
provided to
residents
Payment to
vaccine providers
to purchase
vaccines to
replenish supply
The balance in
the revolving
account shall not
exceed
the approved
expenditure limit
set at the Annual
Town Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance with
M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent fiscal
year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years
2-21
Consultants Conservation
Commission
Consultant fees
collected by Con
Com per Chapter
XV, § 6, of the
Town of Ludlow
Bylaws
Commission may
require an applicant
to pay for the cost of
enlisting the
services
of an independent
consultant in an
amount estimated to
be sufficient to
cover
the fee for any given
project
Only to pay
Independent
consultants for
services related
to the specific
project for which
they were
collected
The balance in
the revolving
account shall
not exceed
the approved
expenditure
limit set at the
Annual Town
Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance
with M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent
fiscal year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years.
Wetlands
Conservation
Commission
Fees collected
per Chapter XV, §
6 of the Town of
Ludlow Bylaws
For expenses,
attributable to the
administration and
enforcement of the
Wetlands Protection
Act, Ludlow
conservation
Commission Bylaws
and maintenance
and Improvements
of Ludlow’s natural
resource areas.
MA Dept pf
Revenue require
that Wetland fees
imposed through a
Town Bylaw must
be kept separate
from wetland fees
imposed by the
State Regulation
The balance in
the revolving
account shall
not exceed
the approved
expenditure
limit set at the
Annual Town
Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance
with M. G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent
fiscal year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years.
Purple Bags Board of Public
Works
Receive
revenues
From the sale of
“Purple” Bags
under the
Sustainable
Materials
Recovery
Program
Purchase purple
bags, recycling bins
and recycling
decals.
The balance in
the revolving
account shall
not exceed
the approved
expenditure
limit set at the
Annual Town
Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance
with M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent
fiscal year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years.
Dog Park Conservation
Commission
Receive
Additional
$5.00 for dog
licensure that
was increased
pursuant to
A.5, STM,
May 9, 2016
Care and
maintenance of dog
park
The balance in
the revolving
account shall
not exceed
the approved
expenditure
limit set at the
Annual Town
Meeting or
subsequently
approved by the
Board of
Selectmen in
accordance
with M.G. Laws
Transfer end of
year balance to
subsequent
fiscal year.
Fiscal Year
2018 and
subsequent
years.
(Dog Park added 10/2/17 STM, Art 5) (Section F language added 5/14/18 ATM, Art 6) 2-22
CHAPTER III
Regulating Certain Occupations
SECTION 1: No person shall hawk or peddle fish, fruit or vegetables within the limits of this Town, except
as authorized by law, without first obtaining a license thereto from the Board of Selectmen upon payment
of a fee of Five ($5.00) Dollars annually.
SECTION 2: No person shall be a pawnbroker, collector of or a dealer in junk, old metals, or secondhand
articles, or a keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Board of Selectmen upon payment of a fee of at least onehundred
($100.00) dollars annually. (amended 5/12/2014)
SECTION 3: The annual fee for any automatic amusement device license issued or renewed under Ch.
140, S. 177A of the Massachusetts General Laws shall be one-hundred ($100.00) dollars. The fee for any
license issued after January 3lst in any year shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months in
which the license is to be in force compared with twelve months. The fee for every change of premises
shall be two dollars ($2.00).
SECTION 4: Licensing of Solicitors and Canvassers
(a) Purpose. This section, adopted pursuant to M.G.L. c. 43B, section 13 and Article 89 of the Amendments
to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, establishes registration requirements and
specific operation requirements for persons intending to engage in door-to-door canvassing or solicitation
in the Town of Ludlow in order to (1) protect its citizenry from disruption of the peaceful enjoyment of the
residences and from the perpetration of fraud or other crimes; and (2) to allow for reasonable access to
residents in their homes by persons or organizations who wish to communicate either commercial or
noncommercial messages.
(b) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this Bylaw:
(1) “Soliciting” shall mean and include any one or more of the following door-to-door activities;
(a) selling or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or services for any kind of consideration
whatever;
(b) selling or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application to purchase insurance of any kind;
(c) seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, or any other type of
publications;
(d) seeking to obtain gifts or contributions money, clothing, or any other valuable thing for the support or
benefits of any association, organization, corporation or project;
(e) seeking to obtain information on the background, occupation, economic status political affiliation,
attitudes, viewpoints, or the like of the occupants of a residence for the purpose of selling or using such
data, wholly or in part for commercial purposes.
(2) “Canvassing” shall mean and include any one or more of the following door-to-door activities conducted
for commercial purposes:
(a) person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals, or other printed materials, but shall not include
placing or dropping off printed materials on the premises;
(b) seeking to enlist membership in any organization;
(c) seeking to present, in person, organizational information
(3) “Residence” shall mean and include every individual dwelling unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons.
3-1
(4) “Registered solicitor” shall mean any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the
Town as required by this Bylaw.
(c) Registration. Every person or organization intending to engage in commercial soliciting or canvassing
door-to-door in the Town of Ludlow must register with the Police Department at least three (3) days in
advance by filing a registration application form with the Chief of Police.
(1) Organization application forms shall’ include the following information:
(a) The name and the address of the organization applying for registration, and the names and address of
the organization applying for registration, and the names and addresses of the organizations’ principal
officers.
(b) The name, title and telephone number, IRS taxpayer identification number of the persons filing the
application form
(c) The names and addresses of the person(s), if any, who will be directly supervising the solicitation or
canvassing operation in the Town of Ludlow.
(d) A list of the names, addresses, dates of birth of all individuals who will be employed in solicitation or
canvassing by the applicant.
(e) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note: no certificate may be granted for
longer than a 90 day period).
(f) Names of the last three communities (if any) in which the organization has conducted a solicitation or
canvassing operation.
(2) Individual registration forms shall be required for all individuals, including those who are affiliated with
an organization registered under I (c) (1). Individual registration forms shall contain the following
information:
(a) Names and address of the present place of residence and length of residence at that address; if less
than three years residence at a present address, the address of residences) during the past three years.
(b) Date of birth.
(c) Name and address and telephone number of the person or organization whom the applicant represents
and the length of time the applicant has been associated with or employed by that person or organization.
(d) Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than listed in I (c).
(e) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note: no certificate may be granted for
longer than a 90 day period).
(f) Name of the last three communities (if any) in which the applicant has solicited or canvassed door-todoor.
(g) Social Security Number. (Optional)
(h) Recent passport-sized photograph of the applicant to be affixed to the registration card.
(i) Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant while soliciting or
canvassing.
(d) Registration Fee. Each applicant for registration or re-registration shall pay a fee of $5.00 to the Town.
(e) Registration Cards.
(1) The Police Chief shall complete his or her review and shall either issue a registration card or deny a
registration card within three (3) business days after receiving all the information described in Subsections
(a) through (e) above.
(a) The name of the person.
(b) A recent photograph of the person.
(c) The name of the organization (if any) which the person represents.
(d) A statement that the individual has been registered with the Town of Ludlow Police Department but that
registration is not an endorsement of any individual or organization.
(e) Specific dates or period of time covered by the registration.
3-2
(2) Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing must carry the registration card at all times and present
the card to any person solicited or upon the request of any police officer.
(3) Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time period specified thereon and in no case
for longer than 90 days
(4) The Police Chief shall refuse to register an organization or individual whose registration has been
revoked for violation of this by-law within the previous two year period, or an individual who at any time has
been convicted of murder, manslaughter, rape, robbery, arson, burglary/breaking and entering, assault,
larceny or an individual who is a sex offender required to register with the Sex Offender Registry Board, or
its equivalent in any other state, and who is finally classified as a level two or level three sex offender.
(f) Exceptions.
(1) Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of the Town, county, State or Federal
governments when on official business.
(2) Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the age of 18 except in connection with
canvassing or soliciting on behalf of a profit organization, newspaper carriers excepted.
(3) Registration shall not be required for individuals seeking to engage in exclusively noncommercial
communication or solicitation for support of candidates for public office
(g) Duties of Solicitors:
(1) It shall be the duty of every solicitor or canvasser, upon going into any residential premises in the Town
of Ludlow, to first examine any notice which may be posted prohibiting solicitation. If such a notice is
posted, the soliciting or canvasser shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
(2) Any solicitor or canvasser who has gone onto any residential property or gained entrance to any
residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(3) Immediately upon going onto any residential property or gaining entrance to any residence, each
registered solicitor or canvasser must do the following:
(a) Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant.
(b) Request that the occupant read the registration card.
(c) Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and purpose of his business and, if he is representing
an organization, the name and nature of that organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘in
clear language’ shall mean words spoken in the language spoken by the occupant and which are
reasonably expected to be understood by a person of ordinary intelligence.
(4) It shall be the duty of every organization employing solicitors or canvassers to notify the Police
Department daily as to what areas) of the Town they will be operating in.
(h) Restrictions on Methods of Solicitation: It shall be unlawful for a solicitor or canvasser to do any of
the following:
(1) Falsely represent; directly or by implication, that the solicitation or canvassing is being done on behalf
of a governmental organization.
(2) Solicit or canvass at any residence where there is a posted sign prohibiting solicitation, without express
prior permission of an occupant.
(3) Solicit or canvass any residence without express prior permission of an occupant, before 9:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. where there is no sign posted otherwise limiting solicitation or the hours of solicitation.
(i) Penalty.
3-3
(1) Any person or organization who, after being advised and given a copy of this Bylaw, violates any of the
provisions of the By-law shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300.00 for each offense.
(2) Any person or organization who for himself, itself, or through its agents, servants or employees violates
any provision of sub-sections I (a) or I (h) of this Bylaw, or who knowingly provides false information on the
registration application, or who is found, after investigation by a police officer, to have conducted himself or
itself in a threatening, abusive, or illegal fashion, shall have his, her, or its registration revoked by the Chief
of Police by written notice delivered to the holder of the registration in person, or sent to the holder by
certified mail at the address set forth in the application.
(j) Appeals.
Any person or organization who is denied registration or whose registration has been revoked may appeal
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Select Board. Such appeal must be filed within 5 days after
receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Select Board shall hear the appeal at its next scheduled
meeting after the filing of the written notice of appeal, provided, however, that if the Select Board fails to
make determination within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, the registration shall be deemed granted
or reinstated as the case may be.
(k) Severability.
Invalidity of any provision of this section shall not affect the validity of the By-law as a whole.
(added 5/09/2010) (amendment 5/10/2010)
5. Permitting of Ice Cream Truck Vendors
A. Pursuant to 520 CMR 15.00, the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety requires each municipality
to issue permits to persons engaging in ice cream vending. For the purpose of this bylaw, the following
definitions shall apply:
. Ice Cream, any frozen dairy or frozen water-based food product.
. Ice Cream Truck, any motor vehicle used for selling, displaying or offering to sell ice cream.
. Ice Cream Truck Vending, the selling, displaying or offering to sell ice cream or any other
prepackaged food product from an ice cream truck.
. Ice Cream Truck Vendor/Operator, any person who owns, sells, displays, or offers to sell ice cream
from an ice cream truck or any person who drives or operates such a vehicle.
B. No person shall engage in ice cream truck vending within the Town of Ludlow unless the applicant
has been issued a valid permit to do so by the Chief of Police or his designee. Said permit shall
only be valid for use within the town limits. A separate permit is required for every person who
engages in ice cream truck vending/operation.
C. All permits issued shall be conspicuously displayed and clearly visible on the windshield dash of
any ice cream truck operated or from which ice cream is sold.
D. Only the uniform application and permit form approved by the Police Department shall be utilized.
The permit shall include a current color photograph of the applicant encased in plastic.. Permits
shall be numbered in order as granted and be encased in plastic.
3-4
E. In order to obtain an initial permit or to renew a permit, each applicant shall submit the following to
the Permitting Authority:
.A completed uniform application form
.A copy of their fingerprints
.Two (2) current, 1 ½ “X2” (color) photographs
.Valid driver’s license
F. The police department shall collect an administrative fee in the amount of $50.00 upon the issuance
of each permit.
G. Both initial and renewal permits shall expire annually on January 1st.
H. Upon receipt of the permit application or application for renewal, the Chief of Police or his designee
shall conduct an investigation into the criminal history of a permit applicant to determine eligibility.
The investigation shall include performing a state and national criminal history records check as
authorized by Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 6 Section 172B ½. As part of this
investigation, the Chief of Police or his designee shall ensure that the identity of the applicant is
true and accurate and, in the case of a renewal, that the applicant is linked to the original permit
number.
I. The Chief of Police or his designee may deny issuance of a permit or revoke a permit for just cause.
Pursuant to 520 CMR 15.05, no permit shall be issued to any person who is a Sex Offender, as
defined by Massachusetts General Law Chapter 6, Section 178C. Upon denial of the issuance or
the revocation of a permit, an applicant shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen.
All such appeals must be made in writing, and addressed to the Town of Ludlow Board of
Selectmen Office. Appeals will be heard at the next regularly scheduled Board of Selectmen
meeting. The decision of the Board shall be final and binding. No such right of appeal shall attach
for the denial of a permit to an applicant who is a Sex Offender.
J. Whoever conducts themselves as an ice cream vendor/operator without a valid Town issued permit
or with an expired permit; or whoever improperly displays a permit shall be subject to a fine of no
more than $100 dollars for the first offense, $200 for a second offense and $300 for a third or
subsequent offense.
K. Every ice cream vendor/operator shall comply with all State Motor Vehicle Laws, regulations
specific to the operation of Ice Cream Trucks, Town Bylaws, Health Codes, as well as any zoning
or state or local regulations that may restrict or prohibit vending in certain areas. Violation of any
such law, Regulations, Bylaw or Health Code shall be grounds for the revocation of the vendor’s
permit. (added 10/07/2013).
Section 6: Pawn Shops Buyers & Sellers of Gold
Purpose: This section, adopted pursuant to Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140, Section 70: “The
Police Commissioner of Boston, the License Commission of Lowell, the Aldermen of any other city, or the
Selectmen of any Town, if ordinances or Bylaws therefore have been adopted in such city or town, may
license suitable persons to carry on the business of pawnbrokers in such city or town, subject to sections
two hundred and two to two hundred and five, inclusive, and may revoke such licenses at pleasure.
A. Computerized Records
The license holder shall keep a computerized record of any and all transactions in a format to be determined
by the Ludlow Police Department.
3-5
B. Identification of Customer
The license holder shall require positive identification from any and all persons or entities who sell, pawn,
pledge or otherwise deposit any item with the license holder. The license holder shall identify the type of
identification provided and record the name, residence, date of birth, and social security/identification
number on a form to be approved by the Ludlow Police Department. Positive identification shall mean any
picture identification card issued by a governmental entity.
The license holder shall photograph any person pawning, selling, pledging or otherwise depositing any item
with the license holder. The required photo shall be clear and of such quality that the person shall be clearly
identified. A photo shall be required each time a person makes a separate transaction. Said photographs
shall be stored in a digitized format, the image must be retrievable, and a clear copy provided to police
upon request. The license holder for a minimum of three years shall maintain the above-described photo.
The license holder shall transmit this digitized identification information to the Ludlow Police Department
in format to be determined by the Ludlow Police Department and as often as required by the Ludlow
Police Department.
C. Transaction Records
The license holder shall accurately describe all items pawned, sold, pledged, or otherwise deposited with
the license holder. This description shall include, but shall not be limited to, all distinguishing marks,
etchings, engravings, model names, model numbers and serial numbers. Any jewelry with an affiliation to
any institution or organization shall include the name of said institution or organization, year and inscribed
initials, if any. All descriptions of items of jewelry shall include the material, ring size (if applicable), weight,
length (if applicable), shape and color. Descriptions of coins, stamps, collectible cards, autographed items,
figurines or other collectibles of any description shall include any identifying features such as the name of
the item, date, denomination, color, size, brand name, vintage and image represented.
The license holder shall photograph all items pawned, sold, pledged or otherwise deposited with the license
holder. The required photo shall be clear and of such quality that the item(s) shall be clearly identified. The
photos shall be stored in a digitized format, the image must be retrievable, and a clear copy provided to
police upon request. The license holder for a minimum of three years shall maintain the above-described
photos.
The license holder shall transmit this digitized transaction information to the Ludlow Police Department in
a format to be determined by the Ludlow Police Department and as often as required by the Ludlow Police
Department.
D. Reporting of Stolen Items
The license holder shall immediately report to the Ludlow Police Department all incidents where a person
claims that articles stolen or wrongfully taken from him are in the possession of the license holder or located
within his place of business. In the event that a person makes such a claim, the license holder shall ask
the complaining party to remain in the licensed premises and immediately contact the Ludlow Police
Department and request that a police report be taken. The item(s) in question shall be tendered to the
Ludlow Police Department or stored in a safe place in the licensed premises until such time as otherwise
directed by the Ludlow Police Department. If the complaining party does not wish to wait for the arrival of
the Ludlow Police Department, the license holder shall secure as much information as possible from the
complaining party and immediately provide the same to the Ludlow Police Department.
3-6
All unusual or suspicious activity, which may involve criminal behavior that occurs in or near the licensed
premises, shall immediately be reported to the Ludlow Police Department.
No article purchased or received by the license holder shall be sold, altered, or removed from the premises
until a period of at least thirty (30) days has elapsed from the date of its purchase or receipt.
E. Violations
Persons or entities violating the provisions of this section are subject to the suspension or revocation of the
license granted. The Town of Ludlow may in addition to or in lieu of a suspension or revocation, impose a
fine of not more than three hundred $300.00 dollars per violation. Persons or entities violating this bylaw
may also be subject to prosecution under Massachusetts or Federal Laws. (added 10/07/2013)
F. License
1. License: Pawnbrokers shall not be authorized to engage in business in the Town of Ludlow
until obtaining a pawnbroker’s license certificate.
2. License Certificate: The License certificates are issued by the Board of Selectmen. The
license certificate fee is as set by Chapter III, “Regulating Certain Occupations”, Section 2.
The license year begins July 1st annually. All licenses expire June 30th following the date of
issuance regardless of the date of issuance. The license certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the office of the licensee so that it will be in full view of the public at all
times. If a pawnbroker operates more than one place of business, additional licenses may
be obtained by filing a separate application for each additional place of business. Such
license may not be transferred or assigned. Said application fee shall not be charged for
those businesses legally operating on the effective date of this chapter’s enactment.
3. Renewal of License: All licenses expire on June 30th next following the date of issuance and
must be renewed by the applicant on or before the date of expiration at the Town of Ludlow’s
Board of Selectmen for a fee as set by Chapter III, “Regulating Certain Occupations”, Section
2. Said renewal fee shall not be charged for those businesses legally operating on the
effective date of this chapter’s enactment. (added 05/12/2014)
Section 7. Prohibition on Marijuana Establishments (added 11/6/17 STM, Art 3)
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 3(a)(2), all types of marijuana
establishments, as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 1 and as may
otherwise be defined by Massachusetts law or regulation, to include, without limitation, all marijuana
cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers, on-site
consumption at a business location, any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, and the
conducting of any such activity for commercial purposes by whichever name used, shall be prohibited
within the Town of Ludlow. This prohibition shall not be construed to affect the medical use of marijuana
as expressly authorized by the provisions of Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and 105 CMR 725.000 (as
the same may be amended from time to time).
3-7
CHAPTER IV
Regulating the Conduct of Citizens
SECTION 1: No opening or obstruction shall be made in, nor, except as provided in Section 12 of the
Chapter, shall any material be placed on a public way or a way under control of the Town of Ludlow, either
by a department of the Town or a private individual or corporation, unless a permit therefor shall first be
obtained from the Board of Public Works. Before such a permit is granted, an applicant, other than a Town
Department, may be required to file a bond in a sum satisfactory to the Board of Public Works, conditioned
upon the faithful discharge and performance of every duty and requirement imposed by statute, Bylaws of
the Town or regulation of the Board of Public Works applicable thereto, and upon conformance to all
directions of the Board of Public Works relating to the work to be done under such permit and upon the
payment of all expenses and damages incurred by the Town or recovered from it by reason of or in
connection with such occupation, opening or work. Each applicant for a permit to open a street shall deposit
with the Town Treasurer an amount prescribed by the Board of Public Works as condition to the issuing of
the permit to cover the cost of resurfacing after the opening has been closed, provided, however, that an
applicant may be excused from making such payment in advance when a satisfactory guarantee is given.
SECTION 2: No person shall throw, place or cause to be thrown or placed upon any street or sidewalk in
the Town, any dirt, ashes, stones, hoops, boards, or other wood with nails projecting therefrom, shavings,
sawdust, manure, nails, spikes, screws, glass, tin cans, filth, rubbish or any noxious or refuse liquid or solid
matter of substances, except as provided in Section 17 of this Chapter. No person or entity shall cause to
be discharged on any street, way or sidewalk in the Town of Ludlow the liquid from any sump or cellar pump
or swimming pool or other like or similar source.
(a): No riding of horses shall be allowed on sidewalks of the Town.
SECTION 3: No person shall fire or discharge any gun, fowling piece, pistol or other firearms within any
street, public way, place or square in the Town, except with the permission of the Board of Selectmen;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any firing by a Police Officer in the line of duty.
SECTION 4: No person shall allow any gate or door on premises under his control, and adjoining any
public way, to swing on, over or into said public way.
SECTION 5: No person shall place, or cause or allow to be placed, posters, handbills, placards or other
advertising matter of any nature upon any wall, fence, pole, structure or tree, in any highway or street, and
in or upon any sidewalk, safety or footwalk in the Town, except upon property owned or occupied by such
a person so advertising. Penalty for failure to remove any posters, handbills, or other advertising matter
shall be assessed against the person or persons named therein, after notice to the person or persons
named.
SECTION 6: No person shall be permitted to kick a football or play or be permitted to play at any game in
which a ball or other missile of any kind is used, or thrown or be permitted to throw any stones or other
missiles, or use or be permitted to use a bow and arrow or air gun in any public street of the Town.
SECTION 7: No person shall coast or permit coasting upon or across any sidewalk or street in the Town
except at such times and in such places as may from time to time be designated by the Selectmen.
4-1
SECTION 8: Three or more persons shall not stand together or near each other in any street, or any
sidewalk, safetywalk or footwalk, or upon any land left open and used as a sidewalk in the Town, so as to
obstruct the free passage for foot passengers, after being ordered to move by any constable or Police
Officer of the Town.
SECTION 9: No person shall loaf or loiter upon any public way after having been requested by a constable
or Police Officer to move.
SECTION 10: No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his duties shall enter upon the
premises of another or upon any public property with the intention of peeping into the windows of a house
or other building, or of spying in any manner upon any person or persons therein.
SECTION 11: No person shall remove, extinguish, injure or destroy any light lawfully in a public way.
SECTION 12: No person shall place, or cause to be placed upon any sidewalk, any coal, bale, box or trunk,
crate, barrel, garbage can, package or anything, so as to obstruct the same for more than one hour, or for
more than ten minutes after being notified by a constable, Police Officer or Selectman to move it. Nothing
in this section shall prohibit the placing in suitable locations at the edge of the street or sidewalk of suitable
containers filled with rubbish for disposition in connection with a duly authorized public rubbish collection,
provided that said container shall be reasonably removed from the street or sidewalk after being emptied.
SECTION 13: No person intending to erect, repair or take down any building on land abutting on any street
or way which the Town is required to keep in repair, and desiring to make use of any portion of said street
or way for the purpose of placing therein building materials or rubbish, shall not do so until he shall have
given notice thereof to the Selectmen and obtained their permit therefor. The Selectmen may grant a permit
to occupy a portion of said street or way, and if such permit be granted, it shall be on the condition that the
licensee shall keep a sufficient number of lighted lanterns at or near the parts of the street or way obstructed
or unsafe, and shall keep a railing or guard around the same while such obstruct shall continue. If such
obstruction is more than a temporary condition, the licensee shall place a good temporary walk around said
obstruction, and at the completion of the work shall restore the street or way to its former condition. Before
issuing a permit as herein-above provided, the Selectmen shall require the person applying for the same a
written agreement (and may require a bond) to indemnify and save harmless the Town against and from
all damages, by reason or any claim or damages or by reason of any proceeding, criminal or civil, on
account of the existence of such obstruction or excavation.
SECTION 14: The Selectmen shall from time to time make reasonable rules and regulations as to the use
of Town ways and ways under the control of the Town.
SECTION 15: Parking of Vehicles of Handicapped Persons (Amended 10/5/98)
15A HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES REQUIRED, PENALTY.
15A.1 General
Any person who has lawful control of improved or enclosed private property used as off-street
parking for businesses, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, or general
public where the public has the right of access as invitees or licensees, shall cause such parking
areas to comply with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 521 Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board Rules and Regulations.
4-2
15A.1.1 Residential and Transient Lodging Facilities
Where parking spaces are assigned to individual units, said spaces
designated for accessible units shall have signage reserving said space. An international
symbol of accessibility need not be used.
15A.1.2 Dwelling Unit Occupants
The number of accessible spaces shall not be limited in number, but shall be provided in
sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the dwelling unit occupants. If parking spaces are
assigned to individual units, those spaces designed for accessible units shall have signage
reserving said spaces. An international symbol of accessibility need not be used.
15A.1.3 Garages
In multi-level garages where no elevator is provided, such spaces shall be located near the
accessible entrance.
15A.1.4 See special van requirement in 15A.4.7.
15A.1.5 Existing Building(s) & Parking Lot(s)
Change of use of the business, alterations, additions to existing Building or Parking Lots
shall comply with this Bylaw. If a permit is required by the local or state inspector, these
Bylaws shall comply.
15A.2 Number
Accessible spaces shall be provided as follows:
TABLE
15A.2.1 Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number
of Accessible Spaces
15-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1,001 2% of total
1,000 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
15A.2.2 One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be van
accessible, See 15A.4.7
4-3
15A.2.3 Spaces required by table 15.2.1 need not be provided in a particular lot.
They may be provided in a different location if equivalent or greater accessibility, in terms
of distance from an accessible entrance, cost and convenience, is ensured.
15A.2.4 Specialized Medical Facilities: At facilities providing medical care for
persons with mobility impairments, parking spaces shall comply with the following:
a) Outpatient units and facilities: 10% of the total number of parking spaces
provided to serve each such outpatient unit or facility shall be accessible.
b) Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services for persons with
mobility impairments: 20% of the total number of parking spaces provided, serving
each such unit or facility, shall be accessible.
15A.3 Location
Accessible parking spaces shall be located as follows:
15A.3.1 Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on
the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance.
15A.3.2 In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible
parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible
pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
15A.3.3 In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking,
accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the accessible
entrances.
Exception: Where accessible spaces cannot be located within 200 feet (220’=61m) of an
accessible entrance, an accessible passenger drop-off area shall be provided within 100
feet (100’=30m) of an accessible entrance.
15A.4 Parking Spaces
Shall comply with the following:
15A.4.1 Width: Accessible parking spaces shall be at least eight feet (8’=2438mm)
wide, plus the access aisle.
15A.4.2 Length: The length of accessible parking spaces shall be at least the
same as for parking spaces generally in accordance with 780 CMR: the State Building
Code or local Zoning requirements. Parked vehicles shall not reduce the clear width of an
accessible route by overhanging or protruding into it.
15A.4.3 Slope: Parking spaces shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding
1:50 (2%) in all directions.
15A.4.4 Surface: Spaces shall have a uniform, paved, or hard packed smooth
surface.
4-4
15A.4.5 Delineation: Accessible spaces shall be marked by high contrast painted
lines or other high contrast delineation, and the words “NO PARKING” are to be painted
inside this area.
15A.4.6 Access aisles: All accessible spaces shall have access aisles that comply
with the following:
a) Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building
or facility entrance and shall comply with 521 CMR 20, Accessible Route.
b) Access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be five feet
(5’=1524mm) wide minimum, except adjacent to van accessible spaces, the
access aisle shall be a minimum of (8’=2438mm) wide.
c) Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. See
Fig. 15-1 and Fig. 15-2.
d) Access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 (2%)
in all directions.
e) Access aisles shall be clearly marked by means of diagonal stripes.
15A.4.7 Van Accessible spaces shall comply with the following:
a) Provide minimum vertical clearance of nine feet, six inches
(9’6”=2896mm) at the parking space and along at least one vehicle access route
to such spaces from site entrance(s) and exit(s). See Fig. 15.3.
b) Each space shall have a sign designating it “Van Accessible” as required
by 15A.6, Signage.
c) All such spaces may be grouped on one level of a parking structure.
d) Eight foot minimum (8’=2438mm) wide space.
e) Provide an access aisle of eight feet (8’+2438mm).
Exception: Van accessible spaces do not have to be separately provided if all required
accessible parking spaces are 11 feet wide (11’=3353mm) with a five foot (5’=1524mm)
access aisle.
15A.5 Sidewalks
15A.5.1 Where sidewalks are provided at accessible parking spaces, a curb cut
shall be installed at the access aisle of each accessible space or pair of spaces.
15A.5.2 Crosswalk shall be clearly marked in any parking lot(s) where any
handicapped person has to cross a drive through area to gain access to the
accessible entrance.
15A.5.3 Delineation: Crosswalk shall be marked by high contrast painted lines or
other high contrast delineation, and the words “NO PARKING” are to be painted inside
this area.
4-5
15A.6 Signage
15A.6.1 Accessible parking spaces shall be identified by signs indicating that they are
reserved.
15A.6.2 A sign shall be located at the head of each space and no more that ten
feet (10’=3048mm) away, and at accessible passenger loading zones.
15A.6.3 The sign shall show the international symbol of accessibility.
15A.6.4 Van accessible spaces shall include the words: “Van-Accessible”.
15A.6.5 Such signs shall be permanently located at a height of not less than five
feet (5’=1524mm), nor more that eight feet (8’=2438mm) to the top of the sign.
15A.7 Passenger Loading Zone
15A.7.1 If passenger loading zones are provided, at least one of them shall comply
with the following:
15A.7.2 Wherever a passenger loading zone or parking area is provided, an
accessible route to an accessible entrance is required.
15A.7.3 Passenger loading zones shall provide an access aisle at least 60 inches
(60”=1624mm) wide and 20 feet (20’=609mm) long, adjacent and parallel to the vehicle
pull-up space.
15A.7.4 If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space,
then a curb cut complying with 521 CMR 21, Curb Cuts, shall be provided.
15A.7.5 Vehicle standing spaces and access aisle Vertical Clearance: A minimum
of nine feet, six inches (9’ 6”=2896mm) of vertical clearance shall be provided at accessible
passenger loading zones and along at least one vehicle access route to such areas from
site entrance(s) and exit(s).
15A.8 Valet Parking
15A.8.1 Valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone complying
with 15A.7, Passenger Loading Zone located on an accessible route to the entrance of the
facility. 15A.4.7 Van Accessible Spaces, does not apply to valet parking facilities.
15A.9 Snow Removal
15A.9.1 Snow shall be removed from Handicap Parking Spaces, access aisles,
sidewalks and all locations noted as the shortest routes of travel to an accessible pedestrian
entrance. Snow must be removed within 24 hours after it has fallen.
15A.9.2 If Handicap Signs are removed during snow removal operations, signs
must be replaced at the completion of the snow removal.
4-6
15A.9.3 No snow shall be piled or left on any handicap parking spaces, access
aisles or crosswalks.
15A.10 Exemptions
15A.10.1 This Bylaw shall not apply to off street parking areas owned or controlled
by the United States of America or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
15A.10.2 This Bylaw shall not apply to vehicles owned by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or a political subdivision thereof or by the United States or an
instrumentality thereof or vehicles registered by a member of a foreign diplomatic corps
or by a foreign consular officer who is not a citizen of the United States and bearing a
distinctive number plate or otherwise conspicuously marked as so owned.
15A.11 Enforcement for Handicapped Requirements
15A.11.1 Any person licensed for an open air parking business under the provisions
of G.L. c. 148 s 56 shall, if parking is to be done by customers of the licensed business,
reserve and mark parking spaces as required in this Bylaw for parking of vehicles of the
handicapped. These persons shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $25.00 per
day.
15A.11.2 Enforcement Officer for all new building(s) alterations or modification to
any parking areas as per 15.1.4 of this Bylaw shall be the Board of Selectmen or their
designee. For this Bylaw the Building Inspector shall be the principle Enforcement Officer
and shall be authorized to use the Non-Criminal Enforcement Bylaw and Regulations for
the Town of Ludlow Bylaws under Chapter XIII.
15B Violation – Parking in Handicapped Spaces
15B.1 No person or persons will be allowed to permit or suffer any vehicle registered in
his or her name to stand or park in the spaces designated as reserved for handicapped
persons under Chapter IV, Section 15A of this Bylaw.
15B.2 Allowable License Plates and Placards:
Any License Plates displaying a disabled veteran identification or a distinctive
handicapped number plate or placard which is issued through the Registry of Motor
Vehicles to people with disabilities eligible under M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 2.
15B.3 Other Allowable License Plates and Placards:
Any allowable license plates or placards that have been officially issued by any other
State guidelines for parking in handicap spaces. The person or persons must be present
when parking the vehicle in the allowable handicap spaces.
15B.4 Enforcement:
Any Police officer who is cognizant of a violation of this Bylaw shall affix to the motor vehicle
a notice of such violation in conformity with Chapter 90 of the M.G.L. Persons
parking in spaces designated as reserved for handicapped persons, are in violation of
this Bylaw and shall be punished by a fine of ($100.00) one hundred dollars.
4-7
INSERT DIAGRAM FOR “REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING” HERE
4-8
SECTION 16: All owners of land whereon is located an abandoned well or well in use shall provide a
covering for such well capable of sustaining a weight of three hundred (300) pounds or shall fill the well to
the level of the ground. Whosoever violates the provisions of this section shall be liable to a penalty of not
less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.
SECTION 17: Snow shall be removed from the sidewalk within street limits within 24 hours after it has
fallen. Snow so removed shall not be placed in any way, street or road to which the public has access.
Snow removed from one’s property, whether public or private, shall not be placed in any way, street or road
to which the public has access.( Added 10/7/96) Ice shall be removed or sanded on all sidewalks in public
ways forthwith. Public ways for the purposes set forth in this section shall be sidewalks, safetywalks, or
footwalks whether concrete or blacktop on streets accepted by the Town. The Board of Selectmen shall
determine and establish safetywalks in Town and authorize snow removal by the Town on said walks. The
Town Clerk shall certify to the Police Department annually on November 1st each year a list of publicly
accepted streets of the Town to be used for enforcement of this bylaw. The penalty for the violation of this
Bylaw shall apply to the owner of the abutting property or his agent having charge thereof.
SECTION 18: Fees, rentals, reimbursements of all Town Officers received by them by virtue of their office
must be monthly turned in to the Town Treasurer and reported to the Town Selectmen who shall publish
same in the Town Report.
SECTION 19: Any Town bylaw which imposes a duty and affixes a penalty for the neglect or violation
thereof, if not complied with, shall be performed under direction of the Board of Selectmen and a charge
not exceeding the penalty shall be recovered in contract by the Town from the person liable to perform
same.
SECTION 20: Whoever violates any Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow shall, unless otherwise provided by
such Bylaws, or the laws of the Commonwealth, be liable to a penalty of not more than twenty ($20.00)
dollars for each offense.
SECTION 21: No procession or parade shall be allowed on public streets or sidewalks of the Town without
written permission of the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen is not required to give its written
permission unless notice of that procession or parade showing the time, place, route and duration of the
procession or parade is filed with the Board of Selectmen at least thirty (30) days prior to the starting time
and date to allow enough time for proper review, as each request will be forwarded to the Police Department
for review and comment. The Board of Selectmen shall issue its decision within thirty (30) days of its receipt
of the notice of the procession or parade. A permit, if timely sought, shall be granted unless (a) the time,
route and size of the parade or procession will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other
traffic; (b) the parade or procession is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number
of police officers of the Town to properly police the line of movement and the area contiguous thereto that
allowing the parade or procession would deny reasonable police protection to the Town: (c) such parade
or procession will interfere with another parade or procession for which a permit has been issued; or (d) by
reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the Board of Selectmen determines that the
safety of the public or property required such denial. Nothing in this Section will prohibit at any time the
movement of troops or armed forces of either the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Government of
the United States.
The purpose of this Section is to prevent disorder and to allow the public streets and sidewalks of the Town
to be open for the convenience of its citizens and to prevent interruption and interference with the known
existing traffic conditions in the streets and sidewalks of the Town for which any permit is sought. (amended
10/05/2015)
4-9
SECTION 22: No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on the frozen surface of Chapin Pond, better
known as Haviland Pond, or any other frozen pond or waterway under the jurisdiction of the Town of Ludlow.
Vehicles owned and operated by an agency of the United States Government, State, County or a
municipality are exempt from this section.
In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the words "Motorized Vehicles" shall mean any motor
vehicle, motorcycle or motorized bicycle as defined under Ch. 90, S. 1 of the Massachusetts General Laws;
or any recreational vehicle and snow vehicle as defined under Ch. 90B, S. 29 of the Massachusetts General
Laws; or any vehicle which is motor driven.
REGULATION OF BOATS ON CHAPIN POND ALSO KNOWN AS HAVILAND POND.
SECTION 23: In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the
following meanings: (Amended 10/7/96 ATM)
"Machinery" - All inboard or outboard engines and all other types of motors or mechanical devices capable
of propelling vessels.
"Motorboat" - Any vessel propelled by machinery.
"Vessel" - Watercraft of every description which is capable of being used as means of transportation on
water.
“Trolling Motor” – Any type of machinery, other than machinery propelled by an internal combustion
engine which is capable of propelling a vessel at a speed of no greater than 5 MPH.
a: No person shall operate a motorboat on Chapin Pond better known as Haviland Pond, or Wade
Pond, except for vessels owned by an agency of the United States Government or by a State,
County, City or Town. (Amended 4/14/97 ATM)
SECTION 24: Consuming Intoxicating Beverages on Public Property; Penalties.
1. Whoever shall, on a public way within the Town, whether that public way be a Town way, County
highway, State highway, or a private way open to the public, or in any other place where the public shall
have access, consume intoxicating beverages shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.00. This
section shall also be construed so as to prohibit the consumption of intoxicating beverages by any person
while such person is standing, sitting, walking, running, or otherwise present within such way or public place
as hereinabove defined, or within any vehicle, whether parked or moving, which is within the limits of such
public way or place as herein defined.
2. Whoever shall consume any intoxicating beverages in any public building, or on any public property,
including parks, cemeteries, schoolhouses and school grounds, public squares, or in any private way or
parking area regulated under the provisions of General Laws, Ch. 90, S. 18, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $50.00.
3. The foregoing paragraphs l and 2 shall not apply to any activity duly licensed by the Board of
Selectmen under the applicable provisions of the General Laws. A violation of this by-law shall be deemed
to be a breach of peace.
4. It shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the Town to arrest any person who violates the provisions of
paragraphs 1 or 2, and to cause such persons to be detained until he can be taken before a court having
jurisdiction of the offense.
4-10
SECTION 25: Fire Lane Rules and Regulations
1. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes within the limit of any private way, parking area, or driveway
for the access of fire apparatus, ambulances or other emergency vehicles to multiple-family dwellings,
stores, schools and places of public assembly.
3. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block any area designated as a Fire Lane with a vehicle or by any
other means.
4. The registered owner of any vehicle parked or left unattended within the limits designated as a Fire Lane
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifteen ($15.00) dollars for each offense.
5. False Fire Alarm calls as follows:
An alarm user whose fire alarm system transmits or otherwise causes more than three (3) false alarms in
any calendar year shall be assessed a fine according to the following schedule:
A. Fourth false alarm $25.00.
B. Fifth and any subsequent false alarms $50.00.
Definition: For the purpose of this Article, the term "false alarm" means the activation of a fire alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of an alarm system
or of his employees or agents. Excluded from this definition are activations of alarm systems caused by
power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar conditions.
6. Installation of Key Boxes on Property Protected by automatic Fire Alarm Systems or automatic
Sprinkler Systems
A. Whenever an automatic fire alarm system or automatic fire sprinkler system protects a structure
or area within the Town, a secured key box rapid entry system approved by the Fire Chief shall
be installed on the property in a location approved by the Fire Chief or his designee. For
standardization, a Knox Box is the only approved key box rapid entry system. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, lessee, tenant or other party in control of the structure or area (1)
to assume all costs associated in the installation of the key box, (2) to ensure that all keys
contained therein are those currently in use in the structure or area, (3) to keep the key box in
good repair.
The following are exempt:
. Structures or areas that are occupied twenty four hours a day, seven days a week where personnel
on site have keys and access to aforementioned areas
. Buildings containing five (5) or less dwelling units
. Buildings containing six (6) or more dwelling units that do not utilize common corridors to access
living units.
B. Such key boxes shall contain current keys for the following:
(1) Locked points of ingress or egress whether on the interior or exterior of the building
(2) Fire alarm panel and room
(3) Mechanical rooms, if any
(4) Elevator controls and firefighter switch if applicable
(5) Any area with hazardous conditions or materials
(6) Other areas as directed by the Fire Chief or his designee.
4-11
C. All structures or areas required to install a key box shall have one (1) year from the effective
date of this by-law to comply. Failure to comply with any portion of this by-law will result in a
penalty of $50.00 for each thirty (30) day period of non-compliance. (added 5/13/2002)
7. Fire Department notification and the hiring of a fire watch for large public gatherings.
A. Whenever there is a public event in a place of assembly, theater, auditorium, or sports complex or any
event which requires a special permit from the Town or any Town Department, the Fire Department shall
be notified at least thirty (30) days in advance of the start of such event. This notification shall be in writing
and include, but not limited to: the location of the event; the time and date the event will take place; the
event organizer; the expected attendance; and a brief description of the event and any special
considerations for the event.
B. The definition of a public event for this bylaw shall be any event which members the general public are
invited to attend or an event to which tickets are sold to the general public. This shall not include places of
worship.
C. Any public event with an expected attendance of over 1000 people, or any indoor event at which 85%
of the occupancy load is expected to be met, may require a firefighter to serve as a fire watch. The fire
watch is at the discretion of the Fire Chief or his designee. The cost associated with this fire watch shall
be the sole responsibility of the event organizer or group. This cost will be paid to the Fire Department at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the event.
D. The Fire Chief or his designee may require an ambulance at a public event if the attendance is expected
to be greater than 2000 people, or it is in the best interest of public safety at the discretion of the Fire Chief
or his designee. The ambulance staffed with two firefighters will serve as the fire watch for that event. All
costs associated with the two firefighters providing the coverage shall be the sole responsibility of the event
organizer or group. This cost will be paid to the Fire Department at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
event.
E. All public events regardless of attendance will require a pre-event safety inspection conducted by the
Fire Department in the interest of public safety. There shall be no cost associated with this inspection. The
inspection will be conducted with the event organizer or his/her designee present. At the time of the
inspection, the Fire Department has the right to order a fire watch if it is in the best interest of public safety.
(added 10/5/09)
(see attorney general’s remarks in approving the amendments adopted under Article 3 we remind the Town that any
fees paid pursuant to this by-law must be paid into the general fund as required by G.L. c. 44 sec 53 and cannot be
held separately by the Fire Department)
4-12
SECTION 26: Regulating the Use of Firearms in the Stony Brook Wetlands Area (Amended 10/5/98)
In this section the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Firearm” A pistol, revolver or other weapon of any description loaded or unloaded, from which a shot
or bullet can be discharged and of which the length of the barrel or barrels is less than sixteen (16) inches
or eighteen (18) inches in the case of a shotgun as originally manufactured and the term “length of barrel”
shall mean that portion of a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or machine gun through which a shot or bullet is driven,
guided or stabilized, and shall include the chamber.
“Rifle” A firearm having a rifled bore, fired from the shoulder, with a barrel length equal to or
greater than sixteen (16) inches capable of discharging a shot or bullet for each pull of the trigger. For the
purposes of this Bylaw, a shotgun with a rifled bore shall be considered to be a shotgun.
“Shotgun” Means a firearm having a smooth bore, fired from the shoulder, with a barrel length equal
to or greater than eighteen inches with an overall length equal to or greater than twenty-six (26) inches,
capable of discharging a shot or bullet for each pull of the trigger. For the purposes of this Bylaw, a shotgun
with a rifled bore shall be considered to be a shotgun.
“Bow Means those types of bows and arrows which meet standards generally accepted
for bows and arrows used for hunting purposes, but shall not include a crossbow except
and by those disabled persons specified in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, Section
69, nor an arrow gun, so-called, the purpose of which is to discharge an arrow
Arrow” from the bore of a firearm.
1. No person shall discharge any firearm as defined in this section other than a “shotgun” or a “bow
and arrow” in the or “primitive firearm” in the Stony Brook Wetlands Area and such use is to occur only
during a duly authorized hunting season of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife within the dates of
September 1st through January 31st inclusive. A violation of this bylaw is subject to a fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) for the first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent offense.
2. No target shooting or siting of any firearm, including Bow and Arrow allowed in this area at any
time.
SECTION 27: Prohibiting the Use of Recreational and/or All Terrain Vehicles in the Stony Brook Wetlands
Area.
In this section, the following words shall have the following meaning:
Recreational Vehicle or All Terrain Vehicle.
Any motor vehicle designed or modified for use over unimproved terrain if used for recreation or pleasure
off or on a public way as defined in Chapter 90 of the Massachusetts General Laws, and all legally
registered motor vehicles when used off a way, as defined under Chapter 90; provided, however, that for
the purpose of vehicles used for agriculture, forestry, lumbering, golf, or construction shall be excluded from
this definition when used for such purpose; provided, further, that in any complaint brought under this Bylaw,
the burden of proof shall be upon the alleged violator to prove such use. A violation of this Bylaw is subject
to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent
offense. (Added 10/5/98)
4-13
SECTION 28: It is hereby prohibited to feed any non-domesticated goose or duck of any breed within the
town borders. Any person who feeds such waterfowl will be subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine for
the first offense and a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fine for each subsequent offense. Any town of Ludlow Police
Officer who witnesses the feeding of these waterfowl shall be authorized to issue said fines pursuant to the
non-criminal disposition provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D.
Children under the age of sixteen (16) shall not be subject to said fines, however, any adult supervising a
child, who is engaged in the feeding of these waterfowl shall be subject to said fines. (Added 10/5/98)
SECTION 29: No commercial vehicle shall be parked on any street in Ludlow for more than two (2) hours
(Exception: emergency and servicing vehicles) unless said street is equipped with a sidewalk. No
commercial vehicle shall be parked on any street in the Town between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Amended 5/8/00)
REGULATING THE SALE OF MERCURY THERMOMETERS
SECTION 30:
In this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:
Mercury Thermometer: A mercury-containing product that is used to measure body temperature. A
mercury-containing product is a product, device, instrument or equipment into which elemental mercury or
mercury compounds are intentionally added during its formulation or manufacture and in which the
continued presence of mercury is desired to provide a specific characteristic or to permit a specific function.
Basal Thermometer: An ultra sensitive mercury-containing product or digital device that is used to measure
the body’s exact temperature.
Health Care Facility: Any hospital, nursing home, extended care facility, long term facility, clinic or medical
laboratory, state or private health or mental institution, clinic, physician’s office or health maintenance
organization.
Manufacturer: Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, organization,
combination or joint venture that produces a mercury fever or basal thermometer.
Disposal Site: An area at the Department of Public Works Transfer Station specifically designated for all
mercury-bearing equipment.
1. Retail Sale Prohibited. No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail
commercial establishment shall sell at retail or offer for sale or supply (including online retail)
mercury fever or basal thermometers to consumers and patients, except by prescription. The
manufacturers of mercury fever thermometers shall supply clear instructions on the careful
handling of the thermometer to avoid breakage and proper cleanup should a breakage occur
with all mercury fever or basal thermometers sold through prescriptions.
2. Manufacturing Prohibited: No person in Town shall manufacturer any thermometer containing
mercury.
3. Importation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any facility to import, purchase, or distribute any
thermometer containing mercury in Town except in the sale of medical necessity as determined
by a licensed physician.
4. Disposal of a mercury or basal thermometer is prohibited in the Town of Ludlow except at the
designated disposal site. At this site, thermometers must be hand delivered to the appropriate
Department of Public Works employee responsible for the disposal of mercury and basal
thermometers.
4-14
5. Penalty: Any person who violates this By-Law shall be subject to a fine of not less than $20.00
for a first offense and not more than $50.00 for subsequent offenses.
(Added 10/1/01)FSTM
REGULATING AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION 31: Regulating Automatic Amusement Devices
The following provisions shall apply to automatic amusement devices as defined in Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 140, Section 177A (“Section 177A”):
1. In accordance with Section 177A, as amended from time to time, any individual or business
desiring to keep and operate an automatic amusement device for hire, gain or reward shall
secure an annual license from the Board of Selectmen which shall design a license application
to be completed by the applicant for each device and each location where such device is to be
kept and operated. The fee for each device licensed pursuant to this By-Law shall be $100.00.
The Board of Selectmen shall not grant a license for any automatic device which presents a
risk of misuse as a gaming device. Automatic amusement devices which present a risk of
misuse as gaming devices are those devices which simulate actual gaming devices, including
so-call”video poker”, and games which involve matching forms, shapes or random number
combinations.
2. The maximum number of automatic amusement devices allowed on any single business
premises shall be four with no such device able to accept a bill larger than $1.00. Any individual
or business desiring more than four automatic amusement devices on a single business
premises shall require authorization from the Board of Selectmen.
3. All licenses for automatic amusement devices granted by the Board of Selectmen shall be
subject to inspection by the Ludlow Police Department to ensure conformance with submitted
application information and the requirements of this By-Law and Section 177A.
4. Any unlicensed automatic amusement device or any automatic amusement device used in
violation of the By-Law or Section 177A shall be subject to immediate seizure by the Ludlow
Police Department.
5. A violation of this By-Law or Section 177A shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued
by the Town of Ludlow and held by the violator, including a license to sell alcoholic beverages.
Added(10/01/01)FSTM
4-15
FALSE BURGLAR ALARMS
SECTION 32: Any property owner with a Burglar Alarm system installed on their premises is required
to take reasonable care and undertake necessary maintenance to ensure that the system does not produce
“false alarms.” A twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee will be assessed for each false alarm after the first three
(3) false alarms which occur in a single calendar year. For purposes of this By-law a “false alarm” is defined
as any activation of the alarm system, either intentionally, by human error, or by malfunction, which results
in the dispatch of an emergency vehicle when no emergency exists. (added 10/04/2004).
PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF MARIHUANA OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
SECTION 33: No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marihuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in G.L. c. 94C, sec 1; as amended) while in or upon any street, sidewalk,
public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing.
Public buildings, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by or under the
control of the town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier;
or any place accessible to the public.
This by-law may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity including, but not limited to,
enforcement by criminal indictment or complaint pursuant to G.L. c. 40; sec 21, or by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to G.L. c. 40, sec. 21D; by the Board of Selectmen, the Town Administrator, or their duly authorized
agents, or any police officer. The fine for violation of this by-law shall be three hundred dollars ($300) for
each offense. Any penalty imposed under this by-law shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under
G.L. c., 94C, sec. 32L. (added 5/11/09 ATM, Art 14)
SOLICITATIONS
SECTION 34: No person shall solicit donations or conduct fundraising activities in the traveled portioned
of a public way in a manner which, in the reasonable judgment of a police officer, endangers the safety of
persons engaging in such conduct or persons using the public way. (added 5/10/2010)
VACANT AND UNKEMPT PROPERTIES
SECTION 35:
Sec. 1 Regulations of Inadequately Maintained Vacant or Unkempt Properties
(a) Purpose: The purpose of this ordinance is to help protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens by preventing
blight, protecting property values and neighborhood integrity, protecting the Town’s resources, avoiding the creation
and maintenance of nuisances and ensuring the safe and sanitary maintenance of dwellings. Inadequately maintained
vacant buildings or unkempt properties are at an increased risk for fire, unlawful entry, and other public health and safety
hazards. This ordinance will help secure the welfare of the Town’s residents and neighborhoods by requiring all
residential property owners, including lenders, trustees, and service companies and alike, to properly maintain vacant
and/or unkempt residential and commercial properties.
(b) Definitions:
Enforcement persons: Building Commissioner, Fire Chief or his designee, Police Chief or his designee, Representative
of the Board of Health.
Owner: every person, entity, service company, property manager or real estate broker, who alone or severally with others:
(1) Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; or
(2) Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity including
but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or
4-16
(3) Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or
(4) Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control; or
(5) Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium; or
(6) Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgage backed securities transactions and has initiated
a foreclosure process.
Each such person is bound to comply with the provisions of these minimum standards as if he or she were the owner.
Property: any real, residential or commercial property, or portion thereof, located in the Town of Ludlow, including
buildings or structures situated on the property. For purposes of this section, property does not include property owned
or subject to the control of the Town or any of its governmental bodies.
Residential Property: any property that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be occupied
for living purposes.
Commercial Property: any property that contains one or more structures or units used, intended, or designed to be
occupied for any business type activity that is owned or leased by a corporation, LLC, partnership or any other legal
holding entity.
Vacant property: any residential or commercial property that is unoccupied for a period greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days by a person or persons with legal right to reside therein.
Unkempt property: any residential or commercial property that has any type of overgrown vegetation or plantings that
have overgrown to a point that rodents, animals, or vermin can dwell within. Any property on which debris, trash, junk,
or garbage has accumulated on the ground, driveway, sidewalks etc. for longer than sixty (60) days shall be determined
as unkempt.
(exception): Any vegetation used as a buffer between abutting neighbors or any wooded/wetlands areas.
(c) Requirements for adequate maintenance: owners of vacant or unkempt properties as defined in section (b), must
fulfill the following minimum adequate maintenance requirements for any such property they own:
(1) Maintain vacant or unkempt properties subject to this section in accordance with the relevant sanitary, building and
fire codes.
(2) Secure vacant properties subject to this section to prevent unauthorized entry and exposure to the elements.
(3) Maintain vacant or unkempt properties subject to this section in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
Enforcement Persons pertaining to the external/visible maintenance of the property, including but not limited to the
maintenance of major systems, the removal of trash and debris, and the upkeep of lawns, shrubbery, and other landscape
features.
(4) Repair or replace broken windows or doors within thirty (30) days. Boarding up any doors or windows is prohibited
except as a temporary measure for no longer than thirty (30) days.
(5) For properties vacant for one hundred eighty (180) days or more , whose utilities have been shut off, remove or cut
and cap such utilities to prevent accidents within ten (10) days after the 180th day of vacancy.
(6) Compliance with this subsection shall not relieve the owner of any applicable obligations set forth in any other codes,
regulations, covenant conditions or restrictions, and/or homeowner or condominium association rules and regulations.
(d) Notice of failure to adequately maintain vacant or unkempt property: Upon identifying a vacant or unkempt property
as failing to meet the minimum maintenance requirements set out in section (c), any Enforcement person shall notify the
Zoning Enforcement Officer who will then notify the owner in writing of maintenance deficiencies at the owner’s last
known address. If any maintenance deficiency is not corrected within 30 days of said notice, or if a maintenance plan is
not approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer within 30 days of said notice, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may take
action pursuant to subsection (f) below.
4-17
(e) Inspections: Any Enforcement Person shall have the authority to periodically inspect any property subject to this
section for compliance. Any Enforcement person shall have the discretion to determine when and how such
inspections are to be made, provided that the time and manner of such inspections are reasonably calculated to ensure
that this section is enforced.
(f) Penalties: This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means, including, but not limited to, by non-criminal
disposition pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D. For the purpose of noncriminal enforcement, the Enforcing
Persons shall be the enforcement persons as defined in subsection (b) of this bylaw. If enforced pursuant to noncriminal
disposition, the civil penalty for each such violation shall be as set forth in Chapter 13, section 2 of the Town of Ludlow
Bylaws.
(g) Enforcement: Any Enforcement Person shall enforce all provisions of this section; including any regulation
promulgated hereunder, and shall institute all necessary administrative or legal action to assure compliance.
(h) Regulatory Authority: The Board of Selectman has the authority to promulgate rules and regulations necessary to
implement and enforce this section.
(i) Severability: If any provision of this section is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction then such
provision shall be considered separate and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and
effect.
Appeal process
Any owner, as outlined in definitions, issued a non-criminal penalty may appeal by requesting a hearing before the Town
of Ludlow Municipal Hearing Officer within thirty (30) days from the date of offense. (added 5/11/2015)
4-18
CHAPTER V
Regulating the Use of Land (Zoning) - See separate booklet "Zoning Bylaws for the
Town of Ludlow."(amended 5/14/07)
5-1
CHAPTER VI
Regulating the Construction of Buildings (Building Code). - See separate book,
"State Building Code”(Revised 10/02/00)
6-1
CHAPTER VII
(Amended 5/9/16, Art 18 ATM)
7-1
CHAPTER VIII
REGULATING UNREGISTERED CARS
This article shall not apply to off-road recreational vehicles. This Bylaw shall not apply to vehicles used
for farming purposes.
1. No person not licensed to do so, shall keep, store or park any unregistered,
junked or dilapidated motor vehicle, as defined in the General Laws, which
are required to be registered in order to be operated upon the ways of the
Commonwealth.
2. For the purposes of this Bylaw a “junked or dilapidated motor vehicle” shall
also include a motor vehicle which is registered for which no current
Massachusetts Inspection Sticker has been issued.
3. Motor vehicles that are unregistered, whether assembled or disassembled.
a. Shall not be kept on any premises within the Town unless such vehicle(s) are either:
i. Stored within a totally enclosed and lawfully permitted building with sidewalls and a roof.
ii. Stored out of sight (including covered with an appropriate “car cover”) from abutting properties
and public ways.
b. Any open air storage of more than two (2) unregistered or inoperable vehicles is prohibited on
any lot where the principal use of such lot is residential in nature.
c. For the purposes of this Bylaw, all contiguous parcels of land in common ownership will be
considered one lot.
4. No motor vehicle may be offered for sale on any premises except in
accordance with a license granted under M.G.L. Ch. 140 s.57. A motor
vehicle may be offered for sale by owner if:
a. The motor vehicle is legally owned by the owner or tenant of the premises.
b. The owner of the motor vehicle and property has sought and received permission from the
Police Department
c. Permission may be issued by the Police Department at its discretion for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days.
d. No more than two (2) vehicles will be permitted to be posted for sale on the same premises
within a calendar year.
e. No more than one (1) vehicle will be permitted to be posted for sale at one time.
5. Enforcement:
a. Any person that continues to violate any sections of this Bylaw after seven (7) calendar
days following receipt of written notice of violation for each offense shall be liable for a fine
of not more than one-hundred ($100.00) dollars for each offense.
b. Each day that a violation continues after said seven (7) calendar day period shall be treated
as a separate offense.
8-1
c. Any violation that is corrected and then recurs within one year following the written notice
of the original violation shall be considered a repeat violation subject to an immediate
penalty not more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars for each offense and each day the
repeat violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
6. The notice of violation may be issued by any Police Officer or Zoning Enforcement Official, and
such violations shall be subject to non-criminal disposition pursuant to Article XIII of the Ludlow
General Bylaws. (added 10/05/2015)
8-2
CHAPTER IX
REGULATING THE LICENSING, CONTROL AND KEEPING OF
DOGS
SECTION 1: The provisions of Ch. 140 of the Massachusetts General Laws shall govern the regulation of
dogs in the Town of Ludlow unless otherwise stated in these Bylaws and authorized by the acceptance of
Ch. 308 of the Acts of 1985.
SECTION 2: Notwithstanding the provisions of Ch. 140, S. 137 of the General Laws and any other provision
of law to the contrary, the registration, numeral listing, description and licensing of dogs, if kept in the Town
of Ludlow, shall be conducted by the Town Clerk.
SECTION 3: Notwithstanding the provisions of Ch. 140, S. 139 of the General Laws or any other provision
of law to the contrary, the annual fees to be charged by the Town of Ludlow for the issuance of licenses for
dogs shall be established by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 4: Notwithstanding the provisions of Ch. 140, S. 147 of the General Laws or any other provision
of law to the contrary, all money received for licenses or from the sale of dog licenses by the Town of
Ludlow, or recovered as fines or penalties by said Town under the provisions of said Ch. 140 relating to
dogs shall be paid into the Town Treasury and shall not thereafter be paid over to Hampden County.
SECTION 5: Dog Leash Law - No person owning or keeping a dog in the Town shall permit such dog to
be at large in the Town, elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or keeper, except if it be on the
premises of another person with the knowledge and permission of such other person. Such owner or
keeper of a dog in the Town which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises of another
person with the knowledge and permission of such person shall restrain such dog by a chain or leash not
exceeding six feet in length. In any prosecution hereunder the presence of such dog at large upon premises
other than premises of the owner or keeper of such dog shall be prima facie evidence that such knowledge
and permission was not had. Any dog found to be at large in violation of this section shall be caught and
confined by the dog officer, who shall notify forthwith the licensed owner or keeper of such dog. Return of
the dog to the licensed owner or keeper shall be dependent upon admission of ownership or the keeping
of the dog and the assumption of responsibility by the licensed owner or keeper. The dog officer shall enter
and prosecute a complaint against the owner or keeper of any dog taken into his custody under this section;
provided, however, that if within the twelve months next preceding this offense the owner or keeper has not
been convicted for violation of this section or a dog owned or kept by him has not been taken into custody
for violation of this section the dog officer may waive prosecution. The park department may designate
times and places on public park property where dogs may be exercised or trained off leash while under the
control and supervision of their masters.
A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than forty dollars ($40.00) for each
offense. (Amended 10/3/94)
9-1
SECTION 6: Barking/Nuisance Dogs – Under the authority of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
140, Section 157, the Board of Selectmen shall take action in response to written complaints “that any dog
owned or harbored within the Town of Ludlow is a nuisance by reason of vicious disposition or excessive
barking or other disturbance.” For the purposes of the section, causing a nuisance shall include but not be
limited to:
1) Having a vicious disposition;
2) Engaging in excessive barking;
3) Chasing Cars;
4) Running in packs with other dogs;
5) Breaking or damaging shrubbery, crops, or gardens;
6) Breaking or damaging personal property;
7) Biting or attacking by other means a person or persons;
8) Biting or attacking by other means a pet or other animal; or
9) Entering unrestrained onto the property of persons other than the
owner or keeper of the dog.
10) Three verified complaints of continued barking by the Police
Department or Dog Officer.
First Offense fine (1-6) $25.00
Second Offense fine $50.00
SECTION 7: Formal complaints; hearings; action by Board of Selectmen; criminal complaint.
The Dog Officer or any resident may file a written complaint and request an adjudicatory hearing with the
Board of Selectmen if aggrieved by any unresolved complaint of nuisance behavior, which cannot be
otherwise resolved by the action of the Dog Officer acting alone. All parties shall be served with written
notice at least ten days prior to the scheduled hearing. In the case of an emergency, determined by the
chairman of the Board of Selectmen, the hearing may be held as soon as one hour after the notice is
delivered.
The complainant shall testify. The dog owner or keeper may testify. Any party may be represented by
private legal counsel. The Board of Selectmen may call such other witness to present evidence or testimony
which the Chairman shall determine to be relevant.
The Board may order any of the following resolutions:
a) restraint of the dog exclusively to the property of the owner or keeper;
b) removal and restraint of the dog into the town impound facility;
c) muzzling of the dog at specific times or places;
d) evidence of completion of a dog obedience or behavior program for the dog and the owner or
keeper;
e) construction of a new, or inspection of an existing fenced, concrete floor, mesh wire covered
enclosure for the dog on the property of the owner or keeper, deemed suitable, safe and secure
by the Dog Officer;
f) removal of the dog from the town;
g) transfer of the dog into the care of a bona fide rescue or adoption shelter program;
h) and/or cause the dog to be humanely euthanized by a licensed veterinarian.
i) Revocation of dog license
The board may also order the Dog Officer to issue additional citations based on the facts and findings of
the hearing, in accordance with MGL Chapter 140, Section 157.
The dog owner or keeper may appeal the orders of the Board of Selectmen to the District Court in
accordance with MGL Chapter 140, Section 157. An appeal will not stay the execution of an order to
restrain said dog during the time of the appeal proceedings, except in the case that said dog is ordered to
be euthanized.
9-2
The Board of Selectmen may enforce these bylaws by filing a criminal complaint in the District Court if a
dog owner fails to comply with a citation or with any orders issued pursuant to a hearing under this section,
and fails to appeal in accordance with Section 157. (amended May 9, 2011)
9-3
CHAPTER X
COUNCIL ON AGING
SECTION 1: The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating or
carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in co-operation with programs of the
Commission on Aging established under Ch. 6, S. 73 of the General Laws.
SECTION 2: The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Council on Aging consisting of eleven (11)
members. Upon acceptance of this by-law, the Board shall appoint four (4) members for three (3) years,
four (4) members for two (2) years and three (3) members for one (1) year term. Members can be
reappointed for concurrent terms. The members of the Council shall serve without pay.
SECTION 3: Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Council, by reason of death,
resignation, inability to act or for any other reason, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the
Selectmen for the remainder of the term.
SECTION 4: The Council on Aging at its first annual meeting and thereafter, annually in April of each year,
shall elect from its membership a President, 1st Vice President, 2nd Vice President, Secretary and
Treasurer. Each officer shall hold office until the next annual election. In the event a vacancy occurs in
any of the offices above, the Council shall hold a special meeting for the purpose of electing one of its
members to fill such vacancy.
SECTION 5: The Council shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities to the Town and shall
send a copy thereof to the Commission on Aging.
SECTION 6: The Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may require.
SECTION 7: The Board of Selectmen shall appoint three (3) associate members to the Council on Aging
each year when they make their annual appointments. The role of the associate members shall be to assist
the regular members of the Council in carrying out their responsibilities. (Added 4/14/97 STM)
10-1
CHAPTER XI
REGULATING THE USE OF THE SANITARY LANDFILL
RULES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1 - DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations:
a) "REFUSE" shall mean and include any solid waste product or those having the character of solids rather
than liquid in that it will not flow readily without additional liquid and which is composed wholly or partly of
such materials as rubbish, garbage, ashes, street cleanings, industrial or domestic solid wastes, but not
including body wastes.
b) "RUBBISH" shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, and consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste products. This includes paper, cardboard, packaging materials,
cans, glass, crockery, rags, boxes, wood, bedding metals, discarded home furnishings, yard clippings and
cleanings, solid industrial and domestic wastes, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, materials resulting
from demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures, tires and similar materials.
c) "GARBAGE" shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste products resulting from the handling,
storage, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods.
d) "CLEAN FILL" shall mean material free from refuse and consisting only of sand, gravel and other "clean
earth."
e) "REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA" shall mean any site, location, tract of land, area, building, structure, place
or premises used or intended to be used for refuse disposal.
f) "REFUSE DISPOSAL" shall mean bury, burn, destroy or otherwise dispose said refuse.
11-1
CHAPTER 2 - REFUSE DISPOSAL
a) No refuse disposal area shall be established or maintained on public or private premises within the limits
of the Town of Ludlow unless such premise has been approved and a permit issued by the Board of Public
Works and the Board of Health of the Town of Ludlow, MA. Said refuse disposal area shall be subject to
provisions of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow and of Ch. 111, S. 150A, Appendix B of the General
Laws of Massachusetts as amended by Ch. 310 of 1955.
b) The premises shall be provided with adequate and appropriate facilities for
extinguishing fires.
(c) No fires shall be allowed, except by permission of the Board of Health or its authorized representatives.
The Fire Chief or his authorized representatives shall supervise the burning operation.
d) The refuse disposal area shall be operated as a properly conducted sanitary landfill.
e) Clean fill shall be brought to the area as required by the Board of Health or its
authorized representative.
f) The disposal of garbage or other putrescible wastes shall not be permitted; except,
however, the Board of Health or its authorized representatives may, in an emergency situation, permit the
disposal but only in a manner prescribed by the Board of Health or its authorized representative.
g) Fences shall be erected, whenever deemed necessary, to prevent the blowing away
of certain refuse material.
h) The premises shall be maintained as free as possible of rodents and insects at all times with proper
control measures being instituted whenever requested by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
i) Scavenging or salvaging of rubbish or other refuse material shall not be allowed.
j) The disposal area shall be as free of standing water as is feasible and practicable.
k) There shall be a responsible person in charge at the refuse disposal area during the
periods of operation.
11-2
CHAPTER 3 -DISPOSAL PRIVILEGES
a) The refuse disposal area shall be open to Town of Ludlow businesses and
residents only, with the following exception. EXCEPTION: The Board of Selectmen may enter into a
contract with a public or private entity to bring in refuse from inside or outside the Town of Ludlow.
b) Refuse from outside the Town of Ludlow shall not be permitted in the refuse
disposal area, unless under the previous exemption stated in (a) above.
c) A special vehicle sticker permit shall be available at no charge to each household or
business in the Town of Ludlow for admission to the refuse disposal area.
d) Only TWO vehicle sticker permits shall be allowed for each household or business.
A fee of $1.00 will be charged if the permit is lost of destroyed.
e) The vehicle sticker permit shall have no expiration date.
f) The sticker permit for household users shall be affixed to the FRONT LEFT
BUMPER on the driver's side of the vehicle.
g) The sticker permits for business vehicles shall be kept on the front left bumper of
the vehicle.
h) IF A VEHICLE IS REPLACED, THEN IT WILL BE NECESSARY TO REMOVE THE
STICKER PERMIT AND RETURN IT TO THE SELECTMEN'S OFFICE SO THAT A NEW STICKER
PERMIT MAY BE ISSUED.
i) Vehicle(s) registration(s) must be submitted at time of application for sticker permit.
h) Business firms having one or more vehicles shall be issued only two sticker permits
after written application is made to the Board of Public Works and the registration number is given.
k) Sticker permits will be available upon request at the Board of Public Works Office,
Sportsmen's Road, Ludlow, MA.
11-3
l) A sticker permit shall not be transferable from one household to another or from
one business firm to another.
m) A ONE DAY PERMIT may be issued to a non-resident or out-of-town business who
is performing work in the Town of Ludlow, provided that the refuse to be disposed of is from Ludlow.
CHAPTER 4 - TIME PERIODS FOR USE OF REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA
a) The refuse disposal area shall be opened from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from May 1st
to October 31st, then from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from November 1st to April 30th. It will be opened on all
holidays except Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving Day, Washington's Birthday,
4th of July and Labor Day. It will remain closed on Sunday.
CHAPTER 5 - PENALTIES
a) Any person who shall violate any provisions of these regulations for which penalty is
not otherwise provided in any of the General Laws shall upon conviction be fined not more than twenty
dollars. Each and every violation of these regulations shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 6 - AMENDMENTS, ETC.
a) The Board of Public Works and/or Board of Health may from time to time prescribe
new rules and regulations or amendments relative to refuse disposal and areas.
CHAPTER 7 - UNCONSTITUTIONALITY CLAUSE
a) Should any chapter, paragraph, clause, or phrase of these regulations be declared
unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said regulation shall not be affected thereby.
These regulations shall become effective immediately after publication of said regulations in one or more
newspapers published in the County of Hampden for a period of not less than once a week for three
successive weeks. (Adopted 3/12/68 and effective 4/1/68. Amendments effective 8/1/70 and 2/7/78.)
11-4
CHAPTER 8 - MANDATORY RECYCLING BY-LAW
In order to implement a program of recycling in conjunction with ordinary waste disposal, residents of every
household shall separate waste material into the following categories before depositing same for disposal:
l. Glass and cans
2. Paper
3. Other waste
If no separation takes place, waste material shall not be accepted at the disposal location. Repeat offenders
shall suffer a fine of $50.00 per day. This Bylaw shall be implemented upon vote of a majority of the Board
of Public Works.
Upon placement of properly separated recyclable for collection by the Town or its designated agent at the
curbside or upon the tree belt, pursuant to this Bylaw, such materials shall become the property of the Town
of Ludlow. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person, other than authorized agents of the Town
acting in the course of their employment, to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
recyclable material so placed. Each and every such collection or pick up in violation hereof from one or
more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any violation of this paragraph or any part
thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars, and the violator shall make restitution to the
Town for the value of the recyclable illegally removed.
• See Article 11 STM 2/11/91 and Part 2 Ch. 1 S. 15.
11-5
CHAPTER XII
REGULATING MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION 1. Mobile Home Rent Control Board
The Mobile Home Rent Control Board shall consist of five members appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
The members in the first instance shall be appointed as follows: two (2) for a term of three (3) years; two
(2) for a term of two (2) years; one (1) for a term of one (1) year. After expiration of the aforesaid terms,
each subsequent appointment shall be for a period of three years. In the event of a vacancy in a seat, the
Board of Selectmen may fill said vacancy for the remainder of the term. There will be no monetary
compensation for Mobile Home Rent Control Board Members.
SECTION 2. Rules and Regulations
In accordance with the Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow, and Chapter 240 of the Acts of 1983, the Mobile
Home Rent Control Board, after hearing in accordance with General Laws Ch. 30A. S. 2, hereby adopts
the following rules and regulations for the purpose of regulating rents charged in mobile home parks within
its jurisdiction.
DEFINITIONS
1. "Fair Market Value" of property shall mean the current assessed valuation of the property or any other
valuation the Board feels more appropriate to the situation. This will be determined by the Board based on
the evidence presented to it.
2. "Fair Net Operating Incomes" shall be that income which will yield a return, after all reasonable operating
expenses, on the fair market value of the property, equal to the debt service rate for residential or
commercial property generally available from institutional first mortgage lenders. The Board, in any given
case may, on the basis of evidence presented to it, adopt a different rate of return if such a different rate of
return is deemed by the Board to be more appropriate to the circumstances of the case before it.
3. "Rent" shall mean the total consideration paid by a tenant to an owner for the use and occupation of
land in a mobile home park. This rent does exclude the tax collected by the owner and paid to the Town
under Massachusetts General Laws Ch. 140, S. 32G.
4. "Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure" or "Standard Rules" shall mean the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Administration and Finance pursuant to General Laws
Ch. 30A S. 11 and codified at 801 CMR Section 1.01 through 1.03 including any amendments which may
hereafter be adopted by the said Commissioner.
12-1
SECTION ONE - MAXIMUM RENT
The maximum rent for any mobile home park accommodation shall be the rent charged on January 2, 1985.
If the mobile home park was unoccupied at that time, the maximum rent shall be the rent charge for similar
accommodation on January 2, 1985. No rent adjustment of any mobile home park accommodation shall
be effective without prior approval of the Board after proceeding as set forth in Section two and three herein.
SECTION TWO - ADJUSTMENT OF MAXIMUM RENT
a) The Board may by order make such individual or general adjustments of the maximum rent
established by section one herein, either upward or downward, as may be necessary to remove hardships
or correct inequities for both the owner and the tenant and to yield to owners a fair net operating income
for mobile home park accommodations.
b) The Board may refuse to grant all or part of any upward adjustment of rent if the
Board determines that the affected mobile home park is not in compliance with the statutes, codes or
regulations of the Commonwealth or any agency or department thereof or any municipal rules, regulations,
codes, Bylaws or ordinances regulating the conditions of mobile home parks or, if the Board determines
that the owner has failed to provide normal and adequate repairs and maintenance.
The Board may refuse to make any downward adjustment of maximum rent if it determines that the tenant
is more than sixty (60) days in arrears in the payment of rent unless such arrearage is due to the withholding
or non-payment of rent pursuant to General Laws Ch. 239 S. 8A, or if the tenant is in substantial violation
of any enforceable rule of the mobile home park, or if the tenant is in violation of any laws or ordinances
which protect the health or safety of other mobile home park residents.
c) In addition to any other provisions of these regulations, a tenant of any mobile home
park accommodation may petition the Board for a downward adjustment in the tenant's individual rent and
the Board may make such a downward adjustment if the tenant establishes, by affidavit, that the owner of
said park has not rectified the said situation in a reasonable period of time, that the mobile home park
accommodations because of violations of state or municipal laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or Bylaws
are diminished in value to such a tenant. The Board based on this affidavit, may or may not dismiss the
petitions presented to it.
SECTION THREE - RENT ADJUSTMENT PROCEEDING
1. All proceedings to consider the upward or downward adjustment of rent shall be governed by the
standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice or Procedure - Formal Rules.
12-2
2. Any group of ten or more tenants, or any owner of any mobile home park may file with the Board a
Notice of Claim for an Adjudicatory Hearing requesting either an upward or downward adjustment of rent.
Said Notice of Claim shall simultaneously be served in hand, or by mail, postage prepaid and properly
addressed, upon the owner, tenant(s) or tenants' association as the case may be and upon any other
affected person, including any person affected by the proposed adjustment in rent.
All papers filed with the Board shall be accompanied by a statement signed under the pains and penalties
of perjury, that service of copies have been made, and specifying the mode of service, date of service, the
person(s) served and the address of the person(s). The Board may refuse to accept for filing any papers
not accompanied by such certificate of service.
3. A respondent opposing any Notice of Claim shall file an answer to it within twenty-one (21) days after
the filing of the Notice of Claim.
4. The Notice of Claim shall state clearly and concisely the facts which are the grounds for the proceeding,
the relief sought and shall include a statement of the present rent, and the proposed rent.
1. Any Notice of Claim for any upward adjustment of rent shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
(a) Financial statements for the three (3) years preceding the filing of the Notice of Claim;
such statements should clearly set forth income, sources of income, a detailed breakdown
of operating expenses, a complete and current balance sheet.
(b) An interim financial statement for the current year, if the period from the end of the last
financial statement required under part (a) to the date of filing the Notice of Claim is more
than three (3) months. The interim financial statement shall contain the same information
as required under part (a).
(c) A statement of the number of employees, job titles and descriptions, and salaries for
any employee whose employment relates in whole or in part to the affected mobile home
park.
(d) Current capital improvements and dates of completion.
(e) Proposed capital improvements and proposed dates of completion.
12-3
(f) Proposed budget for the year in which the increase is to be effective.
(g) A statement of the rate of return sought and the assessed valuation of the property or
appraised valuation of the property.
In any case where the owner seeking an upward adjustment in rent owns and operates more than one
mobile home park all financial documentation submitted shall pertain solely to the operation of the mobile
home park for which the upward adjustment is sought.
If any expenses are shared with other parks, the owner shall explain the rationale for his allocation.
Copies of all documents accompanying the Notice of Claim shall be served on the legal representative of
tenants affected by the proposed adjustment.
2. Any Notice of Claim for a downward adjustment in rent shall specify clearly and concisely the
grounds therefor. And, if based in whole or in part on the claimed violation of any law, regulation,
ordinance or by-law, shall so state with appropriate citation to the law, regulation, ordinance or bylaw.
3. The submission of any information or documents as set forth in this Section does not preclude
the Board from ordering any party to produce at the hearing or before the hearing any other
information or documentation relevant to the issues before the Board.
4. The Board shall make all reasonable efforts to conduct a hearing within sixty (60) days after the
date of filing of the Notice of Claim. If it appears that more time is necessary for the Board or parties
to prepare for the hearing, the Board or its Chairperson shall confer with the parties to establish in
writing a time schedule for the parties to complete any necessary pre-hearing preparation.
SECTION FOUR - LIMITATION OF PETITIONS
Notwithstanding any other provision of this regulation, the Board may, without holding a hearing, refuse to
adjust the maximum rent and may dismiss any petition or Notice of Claim for adjustment if a decision has
been made by the Board with regard to the maximum rent for a mobile home park or an individual mobile
home park accommodation within the twelve (12) months preceding unless the petition on the basis of new
evidence demonstrates a substantial change in circumstances warranting the proceeding. The Board may
also dismiss any petition or Notice of Claim if the Board finds that it was filed for purposes of harassment
or for purposes or relief beyond the jurisdiction of the Board.
12-4
SECTION FIVE - RULE MAKING
Any person whose rights, interest or property are, or may be affected, by rules and regulations of the Board
may file a petition for rule making or to have the Board consider the adoption and promulgation of any rule
or regulation consistent with St. 1981,Ch. 557. The Board on its own may conduct hearings for the purpose
of considering, adopting and promulgating any rule or regulation consistent with its jurisdiction and St. l98l,
Ch. 557.
All such proceedings shall be governed by General Laws Ch. 30A.
12-5
CHAPTER XIII
NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 1: A Violation of any Town Bylaw may be enforced by any means available in law or in equity.
When enforced on indictment or on complaint before a district court, any person violating any provision of
these by-laws shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars for each offense.
SECTION 2. Non-Criminal Disposition
(a) Scope and Authority
This Bylaw provides for a non-criminal disposition of a violation of any Town Bylaw, the violation of which
is subject to a specific penalty. This Bylaw is enacted in accordance with MGL c. 40, sec 21D and applies
to the following violations;
1. Any violation of an order of the Town’s Board of Health relating to public health which is authorized by
the General Laws, any special law applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Sanitary Code, or
other State regulation, or any Town bylaw, rule or regulation.
2. Any violation of an order of a Town Building Official relating to public safety which is authorized by the
General Laws, any special law applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Building Code, or other
State regulation, or any Town bylaw, rule or regulation.
3. Any violation of an order of a Town Fire Official relating to public safety which is authorized by the
General Laws, any special law applicable to the Town, the provisions of the State Fire Prevention Code or
other State regulation, or any Town bylaw, rule or regulation.
4. Any violation of any other Town bylaw, or any rule or regulation of any Town Officer, board or department.
(b) Enforcing Person
“Enforcing person,” as used in this Bylaw, shall mean any police officer of the Town of Ludlow, with respect
to any offense; the Fire Chief and his or her designees; the Building Inspector and his or her designees;
the Public Health Director and his or her designees; the Director of Operations, Department of Public Works
and his or her designees; the Sealer of Weights and Measures and his or her designees; the Dog Officer;
and such other officials as the Board of Selectmen or Bylaw may from time to time designate, each with
respect to violation of Bylaws within their respective jurisdictions. If more than one official has jurisdiction
in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
13-1
(c) Fines
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, when enforcement is pursuant to the non-criminal
disposition procedures of MGL c. 40, sec 21D, the following shall be the fines applicable to the listed
offenses, unless otherwise specifically provided by Bylaw:
First violation: Warning
Second violation: $100
Third violation: $200
Fourth and subsequent violations: $300 (deleted old added new)
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. (amended 5/10/2010)
13-2
CHAPTER XIV
REGULATION OF CLASS I, II AND III MOTOR VEHICLE
LICENSES
1. Regulation of Class I, II and III Motor Vehicle Licenses.
A. Any person filing an application for a license or amending an existing license shall file an
accurate plot plan of all the premises on which this license will be exercised. Such plan shall be
drawn to scale, shown the north arrow as well as the actual dimensions, radii, and all angles of all
the premises, showing the specific area to be used for the car lot, display areas, and all permanent
buildings. The plot plan shall also include buffer areas, signs, driveways, and all abutters to the
property; and such other information and plans as may be necessary to determine the merits of the
application. Such plans as may be necessary to determine the merits of the application. Such
plans must be approved by the Building Department and Engineering Department.
B. Every licensee shall provide a suitable place to conduct his business which shall include a plan
to provide services and storage for not less than one motor vehicle. A storage area shall be
exclusive of any office space. Each licensee shall be required to provide an area of display for
vehicles containing not less than 1,500 square feet.
C. The issuance of any license shall be allowed only for a minimum of five (5) cars and does not
allow auto repairs, or auto body repairs for the general public, but is restricted to repairs only on
cars offered for sale by the dealer. All major repairs must be done indoors.
D. After the license is issued under this section, the licensee must obtain dealer license plates
from the Registry of Motor Vehicles and shall not use repair plates for the vehicles held for sale.
The licensee must obtain the above plates within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the license
and retain these plates as a condition of holding this license. All license plate numbers must be
recorded in the office of the Town Clerk upon receipt from the Registry of Motor Vehicles.
E. No person shall be licensed to buy and sell second hand motor vehicles unless he has filed with
his application a statement certifying that such business will be the applicant's principal business
and to be conducted on the licensed premises.
14-1
F. No car for sale shall be parked within the buffer area which shall be a minimum of five feet from
a public way or sidewalk. Bumper guards shall be a minimum of five feet from a public way or
sidewalk. Bumper guards shall be placed along any street line used as a display area. The
licensing authority may require additional buffers that they deem necessary as it applies to safety
of each individual area.
G. No temporary office space will be allowed such as small buildings without proper sanitary
facilities, or trailers on wheels or blocks.
H. Failure of a licensee to conform with any of this section or zoning Bylaws, shall be deemed
cause to suspend, revoke, or not to reissue the license.
I. Effective upon the date of the adoption of this ordinance, all present licensees who remain in the
same location and under the same ownership shall be exempt from the provisions of subparagraphs
A, B, C and G of paragraph 1 of this chapter, provided, however, that all conditions in
effect upon the original issuance of any license shall remain as a condition for those license holders.
J. All signs shall conform with sign ordinance.
K. The hours of operation to be restricted between the hours of 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. No sales or
promotional activities on Sundays or holidays with the exception of Washington's Birthday.
L. Lighting shall be a condition of the license to be approved by the Building Inspector subject to
final inspection and approval by that officer.
M. Subject to any other safety precautions deemed necessary by the licensing authority.
N. The licensing authority may approve an application for a Class I and II dealers license with the
stipulation that all the above regulations must be met prior to the issuance of that license.
2. Revocation of license hearings. The licensing authority is empowered to suspend, revoke or take any
other action provided by this chapter or the General Laws of the Commonwealth against any license issued
hereunder, after hearing, if it finds that there has been a violation of law, ordinance, rules or regulation.
3. Penalties - If the licensing authority finds, after hearing, that there has been a violation of law, ordinance,
rule or regulation, it may revoke, suspend or fine any licensee. Fines shall be established as follows:
14-2
1. First offense for each day of violation, $50.00.
2. Second offense or subsequent offense for each day of violation, $100.00.
Nothing herein shall prevent the licensing authority from imposing any of the above penalties, in any
combination.
4. Limitation of licenses - The total number of Class II dealers licenses issued under General Laws, Ch.
140, S. 58 and 59 at any one time shall be no more than twenty (20).
5. Fees - The application fee for Class I and II licenses is $100.00. The annual fee of Class I and II licenses
is $100.
6. Enforcement, investigation - The investigation of violations under this chapter shall be delegated to the
Police Chief or his designees and the Building Inspector or his designees, who may enter licensed premises
at reasonable times to inspect and investigate the condition in order to ensure compliance with Sec. ll-l3.
7. Class III provisions - The provisions of paragraphs 2, 3, 5 and 6 inclusive shall apply to all Class III
licenses. The total number of Class III dealers licenses issued under General Laws Ch. 140, S. 58 and 59
at any one time shall be no more than ten (10).
a. Fees - The application fee for Class III license is $100.00. The annual fee of Class III licenses
if $100.00.
14-3
CHAPTER XV
CONSERVATION COMMISSION BYLAW
1. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaws is to assist the Conservation Commission in protecting the wetlands,
water resources, and adjoining land areas in the Town of Ludlow by controlling activities deemed by the
Conservation Commission likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon resource area values,
including but not limited to the following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion
and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water quality, water pollution control, fisheries,
wildlife habitat, rare species habitat including rare plan species, agriculture, aquaculture, and recreation
values, deemed important to the community.
2. Jurisdiction
No person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into, or
otherwise alter the following resource areas: any freshwater wetlands, marshes, wet meadows,
bogs, swamps, vernal pools, banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, rivers, streams, creeks,
beaches, lands under water bodies, lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or
surface water, and lands abutting any of the aforesaid resource areas (collectively the “resource
areas protected by this By-law”). Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not they border
surface waters. This jurisdiction shall extend to a buffer area of 100 feet away from any of the
above described resource areas, and is extended to a buffer area of 200 feet away from a river or
stream. Except where permitted by the Wetlands Protection Act, no person shall develop or disturb
an area within 25 feet of the above described resource areas, to be known as a minimum nondisturb
zone.
2. a, Exceptions:
In a case of Public Utilities, where no feasible alternatives exist, and no permanent damage will
occur to the wetland, the Conservation Commission may at its discretion grant a variance to the
“25 foot no disturb zone”.
In the case where no feasible alternatives exist but to encroach upon the Wetland in order to allow
the applicant access to his/her property, the Conservation Commission may at its discretion grant
a variance to the “25 Foot no disturb zone” provided no permanent damage will occur to the
Wetland and/or proposed replication is agreed upon by all parties.
(amended 5/14/2001)
15-1
2.b. Flood Control:
Any proposed work in the Floodplain of Isolated Areas or Bordering Land subject to Flooding may
not begin without first filing a Notice of Intent with the Conservation Commission and must be in
compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws, and 310 CMR 10.57,
and the Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to construction in the floodplains (currently
780CMR).(amended May 13, 2013)
The Floodplain District is delineated for the Town of Ludlow on the Hampden County Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated July 16, 2013, as Zones A and AE to indicate the 100-year
floodplain. The precise boundaries of the district are defined by the 100-year flood elevations
shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Flood Profiles contained in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report, dated July 16, 2013. Within Zone A, where the 100 year flood elevation is not
provided on the FIRM, the developer/applicant shall obtain any existing flood elevation data and it
shall be reviewed by the Department of Public Works. If the data is sufficiently detailed and
accurate it shall be relied upon to require compliance with this bylaw and the Massachusetts State
Building Code.(amended May 13, 2013)
3. Coordination with Other Boards
Any person filing a permit application or a Request for a Determination of applicability under the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act with the Commission, shall provide a copy thereof at the
same time, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to the conservation
Commission of the adjoining municipality, if the application or Request for a Determination of
applicability pertains to property within 300 feet of that municipality. An affidavit of the person
providing notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered shall be filed with the Commission.
In order to insure that the Conservation Commission is aware of any property being built upon or
development within its jurisdiction as defined above, the Conservation Commission shall be
provided by the applicant with a copy of any permit application submitted to other town Boards and
officials including but not limited to the Department of Inspectional Services (amended 5/9/2005) ,
Department of Public Works,
Planning Board and Board of Health. Notice of said requirement shall be posted in appropriate
Permitting places by the Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission shall provide
Public Hearing Notices to the above mentioned Boards. (Amended 5/8/00)
15-2
4. Performance Guarantees and Security
As part of a permit issued under this bylaw, except for permits issued for work being performed or
Contracted by any department or agency of the Town of Ludlow, and in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board or agency, the Commission may require that the
performance and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by
one or more of the methods described below:
(a) A financial guarantee, such as a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities
or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission.
Surety performance bonds, cash escrows, and standby letters of credit are the usual forms
of financial guarantees that will be accepted. Property escrows will not be accepted.
Permittee shall submit their estimates of what the required improvements will cost,
preferably with contractors bids to perform the work.
The term of any financial guarantees must be at least nine months longer than the time a
permittee has to complete a project. The Commission, at its discretion, may allow partial
or complete release of guaranteed funds as sections of a project are completed. The
Commission has the right not to release part of the guaranteed funds until after the project
is finished and a certificate of compliance is issued.
The Commission has the right to reject the terms of a proposed financial guarantee,
including the financial institution holding guaranteed funds if it is not a local bank, and to
determine the amount of funds that must be guaranteed. The commission’s only duty to
secure release of guaranteed funds is to certify that required improvements or conditions
have not been completed on time or to a satisfactory standard, as defined by the
Commission.
At the discretion of the Commission, a joint financial guarantee may be used to comply with
Commission requirements and that of other agencies, boards, and commissions in the
Town of Ludlow, provided however that all relevant parties agree on the terms and the
principal amount of the guarantee, and that the guarantee is structured so that all relevant
parties agree before any funds are released.
(b) A conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant enforceable in a court of law,
Shall be executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the
benefit of this municipality and observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by
mortgage deed.
15-3
5. Enforcement
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter resource areas
protected by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or
otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original conditions, or fail to comply with a permit or an
enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately
owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to be made
such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the commission deems necessary, subject to the constitutions
and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth
The commission shall have authority to enforce this bylaw, its regulations, and permits issued
thereunder by violation notices, administrative orders, and civil and criminal court actions. Any person who
violates provisions of this bylaw may be ordered to restore the property to its original condition and take
other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, or both.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and the town counsel shall take legal
action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the chief of police shall take legal
action for enforcement under criminal law.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers,
shall have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, or regulations, permits, or administrative
orders issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00. Each day or portion thereof
during which a violation continues, or unauthorized fill, or other alteration remains in place shall constitute
a separate offense, and each provision of the bylaw, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Commission may issue citations
under the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, S. 21D, which has been adopted
by the Town in Ch. 13, Sec. 1 of the General Bylaws. (Added 4/13/98 ATM)
6. Payment of Fees and Commission Expenses
At the time of a permit application (Notice of Intent or Request for Determination of Applicability) the
applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified in the Regulations of the Ludlow Conservation Commission.
This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Chapter 131, s 40) and
regulations (310 CMR 10.00). At any point in its deliberations prior to final decision, if, in the judgment of a
majority of the Commission, consulting services are necessary for the Commission to comprehend the
project impact completely, the applicant will reimburse the Town of Ludlow for consultant fees. The Town
is to be reimbursed in full prior to a decision on the request or application. Failure to reimburse the Town
for such necessary consultant fees will be sufficient grounds to deny the application or request; pass any
vote or take any action relative thereto. Submitted by the conservation Commission.
(added May 8, 2006)
15-4
CHAPTER XVI
COMMISSION ON DISABILITY
SECTION 1: Title and purpose:
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Commission on Disability to promote the inclusion and integration
of person’s with disabilities in the activities, services, and employment opportunities of the Town of Ludlow.
The Commission is established in accordance with MGL Chapter 40, Sections 8J and 22G, Section 504 of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
SECTION 2: Powers and Duties:
a) The Commission shall coordinate and/or carry out programs in cooperation with the Massachusetts
Office on Disability in order to bring about full and equal participation in all aspects of life in the Town of
Ludlow.
b) Research local problems of people with disabilities;
c) Review and make recommendations about policies, procedures, services and activities of
departments and agencies of the Town of Ludlow as they affect people with disabilities;
d) Advise and assist municipal officials in ensuring compliance with federal and state disability laws;
e) Initiate, monitor, and/or promote legislation at the town, state, and federal levels which advance the
equal status of people with disabilities and ensure that appropriate regulations are adopted and enforced
pursuant to such legislation;
f) Review plans for construction, additions or alterations of any new or existing public buildings as
they relate to accessibility issues;
g) Encourage public awareness of disability issues;
h) Provide information, referral, guidance and advice to individuals, businesses, organizations, and
public agencies in all matters pertaining to disability;
i) Receive gifts of property, both real and personal, in the name of the town, subject to the approval
of the Board of Selectmen; such gifts to be managed and controlled by the Commission:
j) Take such action as the Commission considers appropriate and to ensure the equal status of
persons with disabilities;
k) Prepare and submit an annual report of the Commission’s activities to be included in the Town’s
Annual Report.
16-1
SECTION 3: Membership:
a) The Board of Selectmen shall appoint no less than five and no more than nine town residents to
the Commission on Disability, the majority of whom must be persons with disabilities;
b) One member shall be a member of the family of a person with a disability, and one member must
be an elected or appointed municipal official;
c) The terms of the first members of said Commission shall be for one, two, or three years, and so
arranged that the term of one third of the members expires each year; with their subsequent appointments
being for three year terms;
d) Resignations of any members shall be made by notifying the Chairperson and the Board of
Selectmen in writing.
e) If any member is absent from three regularly scheduled meetings in one calendar year, a
recommendation shall be made to the Board of Selectmen that he/she be removed from the Commission,
unless any or all absences have been excused for good cause by the Chairperson.
f) Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Commission, by reason of death,
resignation, inability to act for any other reason, that vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Board of
Selectmen;
g) Members shall get the approval of the Commission prior to making statements or joining activities
on behalf of the Commission;
h) All members shall have full voting rights.
SECTION 4: Officers
a)The officers shall include a chairperson, vice chairperson, secretary, and treasurer;
b)Officers shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Commission;
c)One member may hold more than one office;
SECTION 5: Meetings
a) Regular meetings shall be held at least eight (8) times a year;
b) A quorum shall consist of a majority of current Commission membership;
SECTION 6: Amendments
These By-laws may be amended at any duly constituted meeting of the Commission by two-thirds vote of
those members present provided written notice of the proposed amendment is distributed to each member
a least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting. All amendments are subject to approval by the Town of
Ludlow.
(revised 5/20/2002) 16-2
CHAPTER XVII
PROHIBITING SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
A. Statement of Purpose:
Conclusive evidence exists that tobacco smoke poses a significant health risk to children, people with
asthma and other respiratory illnesses, and others; and for this reason, the Town enacts this By-Law:
B. Definitions:
Adequate Ventilation: a system that provides air exchange for an enclosed area that is separately ventilated
and is sufficient to prevent tobacco smoke from entering all non-smoking areas of a building.
Bar Area of a Restaurant: an area of a restaurant that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests or restaurant patrons on the premises and in which the serving of
food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
Bar: any establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests
or patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages. Revenue generated from the serving of alcoholic beverages must be equal to or greater than
eighty percent (80%) of the total combined revenue generated by the serving of such beverages and food,
per receipts as required to be filed with the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
Enclosed: a space bounded by walls continuous from the floor to the ceiling and enclosed by doors. The
construction of the walls, floor, ceiling, and doors shall be of such material that will prevent the permeating
of tobacco smoke pollutants. The doors must be self-closing.
Environmental tobacco Smoke (ETS): also known as second-hand smoke; both exhaled smoke and the
smoke given off by the burning end of a cigarette, pipe, cigar, or clove cigarette in any form.
Food Service Establishment: any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service;
this includes the site at which the individual portions are provided. The term includes such places
regardless of whether consumption of food is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food. The term includes, but is not limited to, any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, catering
operation, delicatessen, luncheonette, short-order café, pizza shop, donut shop, grille, tearoom, sandwich
stand, public and private school cafeteria, and work place cafeteria. “Bar Area of a Restaurant”, “Bar” and
“Designated Smoking Section of a Restaurant” are excluded from the above definition.
17-1
Indoor Sports Arena: any sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, martial arts school,
swimming pool, roller or ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sporting events.
Minor: a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
Municipal Building: any building owned or leased by a municipality. This includes, but is not limited to,
town offices, libraries, police and fire stations, and schools.
Open to the Public: designates times in which private clubs admit members of the general public to attend
receptions, parties, functions, meetings, events, etc., at their private club. This includes periods of time
when the private club is rented out to non-members of the club who hold receptions, parties, functions,
meetings, events, etc. This excludes periods of time when individual members of the club rent the club to
hold receptions, parties, functions, meetings, events, etc.
Person in Control: one or more persons who are responsible for the operation of a business or public place.
This person in control includes, but is not limited to, the owner of the establishment, proprietor, manager,
shift supervisor, designated person, or any combination thereof. A “person in control” is not an enforcement
agent of the Town pursuant to Section G of this by-law.
Private Club: any non-profit establishment which limits admission to members of such establishment (and
guest of such members) and which excludes admission to the general public, except for the designated
periods of time as referenced in the definition of “Open to the Public”.
Public Place: an enclosed, indoor area when open to and used by the general public, including but not
limited to the following; any and all food service establishments; retail stores; museums; libraries; public
schools-including any and all school property whether or not said property is enclosed; clinics; nursing
homes; auditoriums; indoor sports arenas; municipal buildings; inn, hotel, and motel conference/meeting
rooms and lobbies; public assembly rooms; all polling places; all buses, trains, taxis, and other means of
public mass transit while operating within the boundaries of the Town of Ludlow; retail tobacco stores and
malls; all businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public; public areas in attorneys, realtors, and
other offices; banks; Laundromats; haircutting establishments; movie theaters; bookstores; child care or
health care facilities; public restrooms; all lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in multiple-unit
residential and/or commercial facilities; stairwells, halls, entrances, and elevators accessible to the public;
and all other enclosed areas available to the general public.
Retail Store: any establishment whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for
resale, any goods, wares, merchandise, articles or other things, including supermarkets and grocery stores.
Smoking: lighting, inhaling, exhaling, or burning any cigarette, cigar, pipe or other tobacco product or clove
cigarette or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other tobacco product or clove cigarette in any
form.
17-2
C. Smoking Prohibited:
No person shall smoke nor shall any person be permitted by any “person in control” to smoke in any public
places within the Town of Ludlow.
D. Exceptions:
Deleted sections 1-2 (10/04/2004)
1. Non-enclosed outside patios or decks of restaurants.
2. (deleted)
3. Private Clubs except when open to the public.
4. Private or semi-private room of retirement or nursing homes and long-term care facilities occupied
by one (1) or more patients who have requested in writing on the facility admission form to be
placed in rooms where smoking is permitted.
5. All in-home offices approved by the Planning Board.
E. Posting notice of prohibition:
Every “person in control” of the premises upon which smoking is prohibited by and under the authority of
this by-law shall conspicuously display upon the premises “No Smoking” signs or the “No Smoking” symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of burning cigarette in a red circle with a red bar across it.)
F. Conflict with other laws or regulations:
Nothing in this by-law shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or other regulations so as
to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or other regulations.
G. Enforcement:
This by-law may be enforced by any Town of Ludlow police officer, Department of Inspectional
Services(amended 5/9/2005) official, Health Department official, or any other official appointed by the
Ludlow Board of Selectmen. Said official or officer will issue a citation to the person smoking and to the
“person in control” of the regulated public place and will report any violation to the designated secretary of
the Board of Selectmen who shall keep a record of offenses and report to the Board of Health, Building
Department and Police Department monthly on offenses reported to the Board of Selectmen for each
establishment in Town. Said record shall include the date of offense, whether the offense is the first,
second, third, etc., the issuing department and the name of the official/officer who issued the citation.
An officer/official who witnesses a violation of this by-law shall issue a citation to the person smoking and
the owner or manager of any public place covered by this by-law who is present at the time of the violation
at said public place. If the owner/manager is not present at the time of the violation the citation shall be
issued to the person in control of said establishment at the time of the violation. Violations shall be issued
according to the following schedule:
1. First & Second offense – written warning
2. Third offense within three years of the first offense – one hundred dollar ($100) fine
3. Fourth offense within three years of the first offense – two hundred dollar ($200) fine
4. Fifth and subsequent offenses within three years of the first offense – three hundred ($300)
fine
In the case of sixth offense, within three years of the first offense, in addition to a fine, the board, agency or
commission of the Town which has issued a license to or on behalf of the establishment, shall suspend
said Town issued license(s), to or on behalf of the establishment, for thirty (30) calendar days.
17-3
In the case of a seventh offense, within three years of the first offense, in addition to a fine, the board,
agency or commission of the Town which has issued a license to or on behalf of the establishment, for
ninety (90) calendar days.
In the case of an eighth offense, within three years of the first offense, the board, agency or commission of
the Town which has issued a license to or on behalf of the establishment, shall revoke said Town issued
license(s) to or on behalf of the establishment.
Individuals violating this by-law by smoking in any prohibited place shall be subject to a $50.00 fine.
Any provision of this by-law may be enforced by any officer or official referenced or designated in the first
paragraph of Section G of this by-law by a non-criminal disposition as provided by the Massachusetts
General laws Chapter 40, Section 21D.
The specific penalty for each violation to be enforced pursuant to this section shall be set forth below:
First and subsequent offenses for a person who is smoking in a regulated place – Fifty dollar
($50.00) fine.
Penalties for offenses for a “person in control” of public place.
Third offense – one hundred dollar ($100) fine.
Fourth offense – two hundred dollar ($200) fine.
Fifth and subsequent offenses – three hundred ($300) fine.
H. Due Process
Prior to the suspension or revocation of any Town issued license(s) pursuant to this by-law, the license
holder shall be given the full opportunity to appear before the board, agency, or commission considering
the suspension or revocation of said license(s). The license holder shall be allowed to present exhibits,
witnesses and make argument as to why said license should not be suspended or revoked. Said hearing
shall occur prior to the imposition of any suspension or revocation under this by-law.
I. Severability:
Should any section or portion of this by-law be held unlawful and unenforceable by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall only apply to the specific section or portion of the by-law directly
specified in the court’s decision.
J. Effective date:
This by-law shall be effective July 1, 2001, unless the Town has not received approval from the Attorney
General’s office by July 1, 2001. In that event, this by-law will become effective thirty (30) days after receipt
by the Ludlow Town Clerk of the approval from the Attorney General’s office. In the event that the by-law
is not in effect by July 1, 2001, the Board of Selectmen shall cause a notice of the effective date to be
served upon each license holder of the effective date of this by-law. Added(10/1/2000)FSTM
17-4
CHAPTER XVIII
POLICY ON THE REMOVAL OF NON-HAZARDOUS PUBLIC SHADE
TREES
BY INDIVIDUALS OR AGENCIES OTHER THAN THE
TOWN OF LUDLOW
I Trees are recognized as an asset to the community, providing a more healthful and beautiful
environment in which to live. Trees and other vegetation provide oxygen, shade, protection from wind,
glare and noise, view barriers, wildlife habitat aesthetics and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the
man-made urban setting. Landscaping is economically beneficial in attracting new residents, visitors and
industry. When grown on the right place and of proper varieties, 1 landscaping enhances the value and
marketability of property and promotes the stability of desirable neighborhoods and commercial areas.
II This policy is to be used for the removal of any non-hazardous public shade tree by any individual,
utility, organization, cooperation, or agency, other than the Town of Ludlow. Actual removals shall only be
performed by qualified tree removal contractors.
III This policy is to be followed for all public shade trees as defined by Massachusetts General law,
Chapter 87 (Tree growing within the right of way, at least 1.5 inches in diameter measured one foot above
ground), other than:
A. Trees that are determined by the Tree Warden to be dead, diseased, or dangerous. A
dangerous tree is one that is likely to fail, or significant portions are likely to fail, under mild
environmental or man made stress;
B. Trees that are less than 2 ½” in diameter that are, in the opinion of the Tree Warden, of no
significant value.
IV An applicant who wishes to remove a non-hazardous public shade tree is responsible for the
following expenses:
A. Legal advertising;
B. Cost of removal of tree and stump, including hauling away of all debris, and proper filling
of stump hole;
C. Planting of sufficient replacement trees as described elsewhere in this policy;
D. Cost of police traffic details, repair of street surface and road shoulder, and protection and
restoration of utility structures.
E. All other costs related to the removal and replanting.
V Public shade trees shall not be removed for a private purpose without suitable compensation to
the Town for replacements. The value of existing shade trees is to be calculated on an inch by inch
replacement basis. Replacements shall be at least two-inch diameter, nursery grown stock. The Tree
Warden may, at his option, require larger replacements. For example, if an 18” diameter tree, measured
four feet above grade is to be removed, the applicant must sufficiently reimburse the Town to provide for
the purchase and planting of nine, two-inch diameter replacements. Planting within the spring or fall
months following completion of construction. 18-1
VI At the discretion of the Tree Warden, the applicant shall either;
A. Arrange to plan suitable replacements using his own contractor, working to the Town’s
specifications, or
B. Make cash contribution to the Town to be used exclusively for the purchase and planting
of replacements, and related expenses.
VII If the applicant proposes to trim or prune a public shade tree, and if, in the opinion of the Tree
Warden the proposed work will drastically effect the health, beauty, structural stability, or safety of the tree,
the Tree Warden may consider the proposed work to have the same effect as the removal of the tree. In
these cases, the Tree Warden may either order the removal of the tree, or allow the tree to remain, providing
that it does not present an immediate hazard. In either case, appropriate replacement plantings must be
provided by the applicant, in accordance with Section V.
VIII The tree removal contractor, to be paid for by the applicant, must be approved by the Tree Warden
as to equipment, qualifications, and experience.
The tree removal contractor shall provide certificates of insurance in the following amounts and Town shall
be listed as additional insurer:
1. $ 250,000 workmen’s compensation;
2. $ 500,000 bodily injury;
3. $ 300,000 property damage;
4. $1,000,000 excess liability;
IX The applicant shall submit a bond in a form and amount approved by the Tree Warden, prior to the
commencement of work. The Bond will be released after the successful completion of all items of work.
Such surety may be held for one year from date of planting to ensure survival of the replacement trees.
X All tree work shall be performed in compliance with a.N.S.I.Z-133 and N.A.A. standards. Applicant
must guarantee the health of the replacements for two year from the time of planting.
XI Replacement trees shall be of such size and species as specified by the Tree Warden, and will be
planted on public property, along rights of way and on setback easements as allowed by M.G.L. Chapter
87, Section 7. Planting location will be determined by the Tree Warden.
18-2
XII Permit required.
A. All trees on any street or other publicly-owned property and any tree protected under the
terms of this section near any excavation or construction or repair of any building, structure,
or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fences, frame, or box not less than
four feet high and eight feet by eight feet, or at a distance in feet from the trunk equal to
the diameter of the trunk at DBH (Diameter Breast Height) in inches, whichever is greater.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, lay any drive, or place any
building material, excess dirt, or other debris, within the dripline of any public or protected
tree without first obtaining a permit from the tree warden.
C. No person shall place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any
stone, brick, sand, dirt, concrete or any other materials or chemicals which may impede
the passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein or any
Protected tree except by valid permit of the Tree Warden.
XIII Nothing contained in this policy shall prohibit the Tree Warden from refusing to permit the removal
of non-hazardous trees. The Tree Warden may refuse to grant the permit for the removal of non-hazardous
trees, if, in his or her opinion, the tree is of historic or scenic value, is of a size or species not commonly
found along the roadways of Ludlow, has significant wildlife value, or is an unusually healthy or significant
specimen.
XIV All decisions made by the Tree Warden are final (Added 5/8/00)
(but without reference to placement in a specific section of the Bylaws)(added 10/2/00)
18-3
CHAPTER XIX
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
SECTION 1. – Establishment
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee, consisting of at least five (5) and not
more than nine (9) voting members pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B. The
composition of the committee, the appointment authority and the term of office for the committee members
shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Commission for a term of three (3)
years.
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the Commission for an initial term of two (2)
years and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board for an initial term of one (1) year and
thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the Authority for a term of three (3) years.
One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the Commission for an initial term of two (2)
years and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
Up to four (4) members of the community to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, the first two with
initial terms of one (1) year and the remaining two with initial terms of two (2) years. All four would thereafter
be appointed for terms of three (3) years.
Unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term in a like manner as described above. Should
any of the Commissions, Boards, or Authorities who have appointment authority under this Section be no
longer in existence for any reason, the appointment authority for that Commission, Board, etc., shall
become the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen.
19-1
SECTION 2 – Duties
a.) The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of
the town regarding community preservation and planning. The committee shall consult with
existing municipal boards including the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission,
the Planning Board, the Recreation Commission, and the Housing Authority in conducting such
studies. As part of its study, the committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings
annually on community preservation possibilities, needs and resources, notice of which shall
be posted publicly and published for each of two consecutive weeks, the second of which must
be at least seven (7) days but not more than fourteen (14) days from the date of the public
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
b.) The Community Preservation Committee shall, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L.,
Chapter 44B, Sections 3 through 7, make recommendations to the Town Meeting for the
acquisition, creation and preservation of open space, for the acquisition and preservation of
historic resources, for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use,
for the creation, preservation and support of community housing (whenever possible must be
for reuse of existing buildings or new construction on previously developed sites), and for
rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic resources, land for recreational use
and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section.
c.) The Community Preservation Committee may include in its recommendation to the Town
Meeting a recommendation to set aside for later spending, funds for specific purposes that are
consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available
in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose, or to set aside for
later spending, funds for general purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
SECTION 3 – Quorum, Cost Estimates
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a
quorum. A majority of the members of the Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a
quorum. The Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by a vote of the majority of
the members in attendance. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include cost estimates and
be in accordance with M.G.L., Chapter 44B, Sections 3 through 7.
SECTION 4 – Amendments
This Chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the Town Meeting, provided that
the amendments would not cause a conflict with M.G.L., Chapter 44B.
19-2
SECTION 5 – Severability
In the event that any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
SECTION 6 – Effective Date
Following Town Meeting acceptance of the Community Preservation Act and subsequent referendum
acceptance, this Committee shall take effect immediately upon the completion of the requirements of
Chapter 40, Section 32. Each appointing authority shall have ten days after approval by the Attorney
General to make their initial appointments. Should any appointing authority fail to make their
appointment within that allotted time, the Board of Selectmen shall make the appointment.
Added(10/1/01)FSTM
19-3
PART 2
GENERAL LAWS
CHAPTER 170
ACTS OF 1891
An Act To Give Towns Jurisdiction Over Highways And County Bridges.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1: Any town which shall have accepted this act, as hereinafter provided, shall have and may
exercise original and concurrent jurisdiction with county commissioners of petitions for altering, widening,
locating anew and making specific repairs upon any highway or county bridge within such town; provided,
however, that such town shall not have the power to discontinue any highway or county bridge, but in
altering, widening or locating the same anew may discontinue such portions of the same as may become
unnecessary for the public use; and provided, also, that such discontinuance shall not diminish the former
width of such highway or bridge. The town shall have no right to assess any part of the expense upon the
county.
SECTION 2: The proceedings of the town and its officers in exercising the powers aforementioned, and
the remedies of parties whose rights are affected thereby, shall be the same as those provided by law in
the case of town ways.
SECTION 3: In any town which has accepted this act, and which has accepted the provisions of chapter
one hundred and sixty-nine of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and sixty-nine or of chapter three
hundred and eighty-two of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and seventy-one or of the first nine sections
of chapter fifty-one of the Public Statutes, the provisions of law above referred to shall apply to the action
of such town taken in pursuance of this act, in relation to any highway or county bridge therein.
SECTION 4: On appeals to the county commissioners from the action of the Selectmen or of the town the
county commissioners shall give not less than fourteen days notice to all parties interested, in the same
manner and to the same person as required in the laying out of town ways, and also by causing a copy of
such notice to be published in such newspaper as they shall order, not less than seven days before any
hearing. At such hearing the county commissioners may finally decide such appeal.
SECTION 5: Nothing in this act shall be construed as in any way affecting the provisions of sections one
hundred and seventeen to one hundred and thirty-eight inclusive of chapter one hundred and twelve of the
Public Statutes, or of chapter four hundred and twenty-eight of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and
ninety or any acts passed in amendment thereof.
A-1
SECTION 6: Within two weeks after any town has taken final action in pursuance of this act in relation to
any highway or county bridge therein, the Town Clerk of such town shall send to the county commissioners
a certified copy of the record of the town of such final action, and the county commissioners shall cause
said certified copy to be recorded in the same manner that the proceedings of the county commissioners
in relation to highways or county bridges are recorded by them.
SECTION 7: Within ten days after the acceptance of this act by any town, in the manner hereinafter
provided, the Town Clerk of such town shall send a certified copy of the vote accepting the same to the
county commissioners and also to the Secretary of the Commonwealth.
SECTION 8: This act shall take effect upon its passage so far as to allow any town to vote upon the
acceptance hereof; but shall take full effect in any such town only after it shall have been accepted by a
majority of the voters of such town present and voting thereon by ballot at a Town Meeting called for that
purpose. The ballots shall be furnished by the town and shall be in the following form: "Shall the act entitled
'an act to give towns jurisdiction over highways and county bridges' be accepted?
Yes or No". (Approved 4/6/1891).
CHAPTER 341
AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE TOWN OF LUDLOW TO
CONSTRUCT AND MAINTAIN A SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Special Acts of 1917
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1: The Town of Ludlow is hereby authorized to lay out, construct, maintain and operate a system
or systems of main drains and common sewers for a part or the whole of its territory, with such connections
and other works as may be required for a system of sewage disposal; and for the purpose of providing
better surface or other drainage guarding against pollution of the water, and otherwise protecting the public
health, may lay, make and maintain such main drains as it deems best. For the purposes aforesaid the
town may, within its limits, deepen, widen and clear of obstruction any brook, stream or water course, and
may straighten or alter the channel or divert the water thereof, and may make and maintain sub-drains, and
with the approval of the State Department of Health, discharge the water into any brook, stream or water
course within the town. The town may operate such a system jointly with any other adjacent municipality.
SECTION 2: The town shall elect by ballot at an Annual Town Meeting, or at a Special Town Meeting duly
called for the purpose, a board of three Sewer Commissioners who shall be citizens of the town, to hold
office, one until the expiration of one year, one until the expiration of two years, and one until the expiration
of three years from the next succeeding Annual Town Meeting, or until their successors are elected and
qualified, and thereafter at each Annual Town Meeting the town shall elect one member of the board to
serve for three years, or until his successor is elected and qualified. A Selectman or a member of the Board
of Health may be a member of the Board of Sewer Commissioners.
SECTION 3: The Board of Sewer Commissioners, acting on behalf of the town, shall have power to take,
or acquire by purchase or otherwise, any lands, water rights of way or easements in said town, public or
private, necessary for accomplishing any purpose mentioned in this act, and may construct within the town
main drains and sewers under or over any water course, bridge, railroad, railway, highway, boulevard, or
other way or within the location of any railroad, and may enter upon and dig up any private land, street or
way or railroad location, for the purpose of laying such drains and sewers and of maintaining and repairing
same, and may perform any other act necessary or proper for the purposes of this act; provided, however,
that the said board shall not take in fee any land of a railroad corporation, and that they shall not enter upon
or construct any drain or sewer within the location of any railroad corporation except at such time and in
such manner as they may agree upon with the corporation, or, in case of failure to agree, as may be
approved by the public service commission.
A-2
SECTION 4: Said board, in order to take in fee any land, water rights, rights or way of easements, shall
cause to be recorded in the registry of deeds for the County of Hampden, a statement signed by a majority
of the board containing a description thereof sufficiently specific for identification, and declaring that the
same are taken under authority of this act; and upon such recording, the Title to the lands, water rights,
rights of way or easements described in the statement shall vest in the Town of Ludlow, which shall pay all
damages therefore and all other damages sustained by any person or corporation through any action of
said board under this act, but no registered land, or interest therein, shall be deemed to have
been taken until the provisions of chapter one hundred and twenty-eight of the revised laws has been
complied with. Said board at the time of such taking shall notify the owners thereof in writing, and may
agree with any person or corporation upon the damages sustained by such person or corporation; otherwise
the damages shall be assessed by a jury in the Superior Court for said County upon petition of either party,
in the manner provided by law for determining damages for land taken for highways; but in case of a taking,
no suit or petition shall be brought after the expiration of two years from the date of recording of the taking
as herein provided; and in all other cases no suits or petition shall be brought after the expiration of two
years from the time when the cause of action accrues.
SECTION 5: In every case of a petition for the assessment of damages or for a jury said town may, at any
time, file in the Office of the Clerk of the Court an offer to pay the petitioner a sum specific therein as
damages; and if the petitioner does not accept the same within thirty days after notice of such offer, and
does not finally recover a sum greater than that offered, not including interest from the date of the offer on
the sum so recovered, the town shall recover costs from the date of said notice; and the petitioner shall be
entitled to costs only to said date.
SECTION 6: The town shall by vote determine what proportion of the cost of said system or systems of
sewerage and sewage disposal the town shall pay; provided, that it shall pay not less than one quarter nor
more than two thirds of the whole cost. In providing for the payment of the remaining portion of the cost of
said system or systems the town may avail itself of any or all of the methods permitted by general laws,
and at the same meeting at which it determines the proportion of the cost which is to be borne by the town,
it may by vote determine by which of such methods the remaining portion of said cost shall be provided for.
In case it determines that such remaining portion shall be provided for wholly or in part by assessments
upon the owners of estates situated within the territory embraced by said system or systems and benefited
thereby, the owners shall be assessed by the Board of Sewer Commissioners, their proportional parts,
respectively, or such portion of said cost as the town shall have determined is to be provided for by
assessment, but no estate shall be deemed to be benefited until a sewer is constructed into which it can
be drained. For the purpose of fixing the amounts of such assessments, the board shall determine the
value of the special benefit to each of said estates from the said system or systems of sewers, taking into
account all the circumstances of the case; and the proportionate part to be paid by the owners of said
estates, respectively, shall be based upon the amount of the special benefit to each estate, determined as
aforesaid, and in no case shall exceed such special benefit, and every such owner shall, within three months
after written notice of such assessment served on his or on the occupant of his estate, or sent by mail to
the last address of the owner known to the Board of Sewer Commissioners, pay the sum so assessed by
the Collector of Taxes of said town;
Provided, that said board shall, on the written request of any such owner made within the said three months,
apportion his assessment into two equal parts of assessments; and the board shall certify such
apportionment to the Assessors of the town, and one of said parts or installments, together with the interest
at six percent per annum on all unpaid apportionment’s, shall be added by the Assessors to the annual tax
on such estate for each year next ensuing, until all the said parts have been added, unless sooner paid as
hereinafter provided; and provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
payment at any time in one payment, notwithstanding its prior apportionment, of any balance due, but
interest on such balance at the rate of six percent per annum shall be paid to the date of such payment,
and thereupon the Collector of Taxes shall receive the same and certify the payment or payments to the
Assessors, who shall preserve a record thereof. In case of corner lots abutting on more than one sewered
street, the same area shall not be assessed more than once.
SECTION 7: The town, for the purpose of paying the necessary expenses and liabilities incurred under
this act, may incur indebtedness in accordance with the provisions of chapter seven hundred and nineteen
of the acts of the year nineteen hundred and thirteen and all acts in amendment thereof and in addition
thereto.
SECTION 8: The town shall at the time of authorizing any loan under the provisions of section seven
provide for the payment thereof in such annual payments as will extinguish the same in accordance with
the provisions of said section; and when a vote to that effect has been passed, the amount required thereby,
less the amount that may be appropriated therefore as provided in the following section, shall annually
thereafter without further vote be assessed by the Assessors of the town in the same manner as other
taxes, until the debt incurred by said loan is extinguished.
SECTION 9: The receipts from sewer assessments and from payments made in lieu thereof shall be
applied to the payment of charges and expenses incident to the maintenance and operation of said system
of sewerage or to the extension thereof, except that any part of such receipts may be applied to the payment
of interest upon notes or bonds issued hereunder, and not otherwise provided for, or to the payment or
redemption of such bonds or notes as the town shall by vote determine, and the said receipts shall be used
for no other purpose. If the said receipts shall not in any year be sufficient for the purposes aforesaid, the
town shall raise forthwith by taxation, in the same manner in which money is raised for other town purposes,
the balance required therefore.
SECTION 10: Any assessment levied under the provisions of section six and any charge made as aforesaid
shall constitute a lien upon the estate which shall continue for two years after certificate thereof is filed, and
after the demand aforesaid is made or, in case of apportionment, until the expiration of two years from the
time when last installment is committed to the Collector. Said assessment, together with interest at the rate
of six percent per annum, with incidental costs and expenses, may be satisfied by sale of the estate or so
much thereof as will be sufficient to discharge the assessment and interest and intervening charges, if the
assessment is not paid within three months after the services of said notice or, if it has been apportioned,
within three months after any portion has become due. Such sale and all proceedings connected therewith
shall be conducted in the same manner as sales for the non-payment of taxes, and real estate sold may be
redeemed in the same manner as if sold for the non-payment of taxes. Such assessments or parts thereof
may be collected also by an action of contract in the name of the Town of Ludlow against the owner of the
estate, brought at any time within two years after the same become due.
SECTION 11: Any person aggrieved by any such assessment may, at any time within three months after
the service of the demand mentioned in section six of this act, apply to the Superior Court for said county
for a jury to revise the same, but before making such application he shall give to the said commissioners
fourteen days notice in writing, and shall therein specify particularly his objection to the assessment, to
which specification he shall be confined in his hearing before a jury.
SECTION 12: The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall annually appoint a clerk, and may appoint a
superintendent of sewers, who shall not be a member of the board, and may remove the clerk or
superintendent at its pleasure, and may fix the pay of the clerk and superintendent and define their duties.
The commissioners may in their discretion prescribe such annual rentals or charges for the use of said
sewer system, based on the benefits derived therefrom, as they shall deem proper. The compensation of
the commissioners shall be fixed by the town.
SECTION 13: All contracts made by the Board of Sewer Commissioners shall be made in the name of the
town and shall be signed by the Board but no contract shall be made or obligation incurred by the
Commissioners for any purpose in excess of the amount of money appropriated by the town therefor.
SECTION 14: Said Commissioners may from time to time prescribe rules and regulations for the
connection of estates and building with main drains and sewers, and for the inspection of the materials, the
construction, alteration, and use of all connections and drains entering such main drains or sewers, and
may prescribe penalties not exceeding twenty dollars for each violation of any such rule or regulation. Such
rules and regulations shall be published not less than once a week for three successive weeks in some
newspaper published in the County of Hampden, and shall not take effect until such publication has been
made.
SECTION 15: No act shall be done under authority of the preceding sections, except in the making of
surveys and other preliminary investigations, until the plans for the said system of sewerage have been
approved by the State Department of Health. Upon application to said department for such approval the
department shall give a hearing, after due notice to the public. At such hearing plans showing in detail all
the work to be done in constructing said system of sewerage shall be submitted for the approval of the
State Department of Health.
SECTION 16: Until the Board of Sewer Commissioners shall have been elected as provided in this act,
the town may carry on the construction of the system of sewerage by a fully authorized committee of the
town, but not longer than until the annual meeting next but one after the commencement of said work of
construction. The committee shall serve without pay and shall have all the powers and authority given to
the Board of Sewer Commissioners in this act or by the General Laws relating to Boards of Sewer
Commissioners.
SECTION 17: This act shall take effect upon its passage, but no expenditure shall be made and no liability
incurred hereunder until it has been accepted by vote of a majority of the voters of the town voting thereon
at a legal meeting called for the purpose. Approved 5/22/1917.
CHAPTER 336
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR PRECINCT VOTING
REPRESENTATIVE TOWN MEETINGS, TOWN MEETING
MEMBERS, A REFERENDUM AND AN ANNUAL MODERATOR
IN THE TOWN OF LUDLOW
Special Acts of 1929
The Act as printed herein contains the amendments as made by the following acts:
Chapter 167, Special Acts of 1941
Chapter 349, Special Acts of 1956
Chapter 98, Special Acts of 1958
Chapter 459, Special Acts of 1959
Chapter 62, Special Acts of 1960
Chapter 754, Special Acts of 1977
Chapter 59, Special Acts of 1988
Chapter 124, Special Acts of 2001Apvd(11/1/01)*
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1: Upon the acceptance of this act by the Town of Ludlow, as hereinafter provided, the
Selectmen shall forthwith divide the territory thereof into three voting precincts, each of which shall be
plainly designated and shall contain not less than five hundred inhabitants. All precincts shall contain
approximately an equal number of inhabitants. The precincts shall be so established as to consist of
compact and contiguous territory, to be bounded as far as possible by the center line of known streets and
ways or by other well defined limits. The boundaries of such precincts shall be reviewed and, if need be,
such precincts shall be wholly or partly revised by the selectmen in December, once in 5 years, or in
December of any year when so directed by a vote of a representative town meeting no later than November
30 of that year. In the course of any such revision the number of such precincts may be changed.
Selectmen shall, within twenty days after any establishment or revision of the precincts, but not later than
January twentieth of the succeeding year, file a report of their doings with the Town Clerk, the Registrars
of Voters and the Assessors of taxes with a map or maps or description of the precincts and the names and
residences of the inhabitants therein. The Selectmen shall also cause to be posted in the Town Office a
map or maps or description of the precincts as established or revised from time to time, with the names and
residences of the inhabitants therein; and it shall also cause to be posted in at least one public place in
A-3
each precinct a map or description of that precinct with the names and residences of the inhabitants therein.
The division of the town into voting precincts and any revision of such precincts shall take effect upon the
date of the filing of the report thereof by the Selectmen with the Town Clerk. Whenever the precincts are
established or revised, the Town Clerk shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the State Secretary,
stating the number and designation of the precincts. Meetings of the registered voters of the several
precincts for elections, for primaries, and for voting upon any question to be submitted to all the voters of
the town, shall be held on the same day and at the same hour and at such place or places within the town
as the Selectmen shall in the warrant for such meeting direct. The provisions of the General Laws relating
to precinct voting at elections, so far as the same are not inconsistent with this act, shall apply to all elections
and primaries in the town upon the establishment of voting precincts as hereinbefore provided.
SECTION 2: Other than the officers designated in section three as Town Meeting Members At Large, the
Representative Town Meeting membership shall in each precinct consist of the largest number divisible by
three which will admit of a representation of all precincts by an equal number of members and which will
not cause the total elected town meeting membership to exceed ninety. The registered voters in every
precinct shall, at a special election called for that purpose, to be held not sooner than thirty days after the
establishment of precincts under this act or at the first annual town election held after the establishment
thereof, and at the first annual town election following any precinct revision where the number of precincts
is changed, conformably to the laws relative to elections not inconsistent with this act, elect by ballot the
number of registered voters in the precinct, other than the officers designated in section three as town
meeting members at large, provided for in the first sentence of this section, to be town meeting members
of the town. The first third in order of votes received of members so elected shall serve three years; the
second third in such order shall serve two years; and the remaining third in such order shall serve one year
from the day of the annual town meeting, or, in the case such election is at a special meeting, from the day
of the next annual town meeting, in case of a tie vote affecting the division into thirds, as aforesaid, the
members elected from the precinct shall by ballot determine the same, and thereafter, except as is
otherwise provided herein, at each annual town election the registered voters of each precinct shall, in like
manner, elect one third of the number of town meeting members to which that precinct is entitled for the
term of three years, and shall at such election fill for the unexpired term or terms any vacancy or vacancies
then existing in the number of elected town meeting members in their respective precincts. Upon every
revision of the precincts where the number of precincts is changed the term of office of all elected town
meeting members from every such precinct shall cease upon the election of their successors. The Town
Clerk shall, after every election of town meeting members, forthwith, notify each elected town meeting
member by mail of his election.
SECTION 3: Any Representative Town Meeting held under this act, except as otherwise provided herein,
shall be limited to the voters elected under section two, together with the following designated as town
meeting members at large; namely, the Selectmen, the Moderator, the Town Clerk, the Town Treasurer,
the Town Collector, the Town Counsel if he is a resident of the town, the Chairman of the School Committee,
the Chairman of the Library Trustees, the Chairman of the Board of Health, the Chairman of the Park
Commission, Tree Warden, the Chairman of the Assessors of Taxes, the Chairman of the Sewer
Commission, the Chairman of the Forestry Commission, the Chairman of the Cemetery Committee, the
Chairman of the Finance Committee, the Highway Surveyor, the Chairman of the Board of Registrars of
Voters, and the Chairman of any other board or commission established in the town by authority of the
General Court. The Town Clerk shall notify the town meeting members the time and place at which
Representative Town Meetings are to be held, the notices to be sent by mail at least seven days before the
meeting. The town meeting members, as aforesaid, shall be the judges of the election and qualification of
their members. A majority of town meeting members shall be a quorum for doing business, but a less
number may organize temporarily and may adjourn from time to time. Notice of every adjourned
representative town meeting shall be posted by the Town Clerk in at least one public place in each precinct,
and he shall notify the town meeting members by mail of the adjournment at least twenty-four hours before
the time of the adjourned representative town meeting. The notices shall state briefly the business to be
acted upon at any meeting and shall include notice of any proposed reconsideration. All town meetings
shall be public. The town meeting members as such shall receive no compensation. Subject to such
conditions as may be determined from time to time by the representative town meeting, any voter of the
town who is not a town meeting member may speak at any Representative Town Meeting, but shall not
vote. Any elected town meeting member may resign by filing a written resignation with the Town Clerk, and
such resignation shall take effect upon the date of such filing. No elected town meeting member whose
official position entitles him to be a town meeting member at large shall act as a town meeting member at
large during such time as he remains an elected town meeting member. A town meeting member who
moves from the town shall cease to be a town meeting member and an elected town meeting member who
moves from one precinct to another or is so removed by a revision of precincts shall not retain membership
after the next annual election.
SECTION 4: Nomination of candidates for town meeting members to be elected under this act shall be
made by nomination papers, which shall bear no political designations, and shall be signed by at least ten
inhabitants of the precinct in which the candidate resides, and filed with the Town Clerk on or before the
last date for filing nomination papers for other town offices; provided that any incumbent town meeting
member may become a candidate for re-election by giving written notice thereof to the Town Clerk not later
than twenty-one days prior to the last day and hour for filing nomination papers. No nomination papers
shall be valid in respect to any candidate whose written acceptance is not thereon or attached thereto when
filed.
SECTION 5: The articles in the warrant for every town meeting, so far as they relate to the election of the
Moderator, Town Officers, Town Meeting Members and, as provided in this act, to referenda and all matters
to be acted upon and determined by ballot of the town, shall be acted upon and determined by the voters
in their respective meetings by precincts. All other articles in the warrant for any town meeting, beginning
with the town meeting at which said town meeting members are first elected, shall be acted upon and
determined exclusively by town meeting members at a meeting to be held at such time and place as shall
be set forth by the Selectmen in the warrant for the meeting, subject to the referendum provided for by
section eight.
SECTION 6: A Moderator shall be elected by ballot at an annual town meeting for a term of three years
and shall serve as Moderator of all town meetings except as otherwise provided by law, until a successor
is elected and qualified. Nominations for and election of a Moderator shall be as in the case of other elective
town officers and any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the town meeting members at a meeting held
for that purpose. If a Moderator is absent, a Moderator pro tempore shall be elected by the town meeting
members.
SECTION 7: Any vacancy in the full number of elected town meeting members from any precinct shall be
filled until the next annual election by the remaining elected town meeting members of the precinct from
among the registered voters thereof. Notice of any vacancy shall be given promptly by the Town Clerk to
the remaining members from the precinct in which the vacancy or vacancies exist and he shall call a special
meeting of such members for the purpose of filling the vacancy. He shall cause to be mailed to every
member, not less than seven days before the time set for the meeting, a notice specifying the object, time
and place of the meeting. At said meeting a majority of the elected town meeting members from such
precinct shall constitute a quorum, and they shall elect from their own number a chairman and clerk. The
choice to fill any vacancy shall be by ballot and a majority of the votes cast shall be required for a choice.
The chairman and the clerk shall count the ballots and shall make certificate of the choice and forthwith file
the same with the Town Clerk, together with a written acceptance by the member or members so chosen
who shall thereupon be deemed elected and qualified as town meeting member or members, subject to the
right of all town meeting members to judge of the election and qualifications of the town meeting members
as set forth in section three.
SECTION 8: A vote passed at any representative town meeting authorizing the expenditure of twenty
thousand dollars or more as a special appropriation, or establishing a new board or office or abolishing an
old board or office or merging two or more boards or offices, or fixing the term of office of town officers,
where such term is optional, or increasing or reducing the number of members of a board, or adopting a
new by-law, or amending an existing by-law, shall not be operative until after the expiration of five days,
exclusive of Sundays and Holidays, from the dissolution of the meeting. If, within said five days, a petition,
signed by not less than three percent of the registered voters of the town, containing their names and
addresses as they appear on the list of registered voters, is filed with the Selectmen asking that the question
or questions involved in such a vote be submitted to the registered voters of the town at large, then the
Selectmen, after the expiration of five days, shall forthwith call a special meeting for the sole purpose of
presenting to the registered voters at large the question or questions so involved.
The polls shall be opened at ten o'clock in the forenoon and shall be closed not earlier than eight o'clock in
the evening, and all votes upon any questions so submitted shall be taken by ballot, and the check list shall
be used in the several precinct meetings in the same manner as in the election of town officers. The
questions so submitted shall be determined by a majority vote of the registered voters of the town voting
thereon but no action of the Representative Town Meeting shall be reversed unless at least twenty percent
of the registered voters shall so vote. Each question so submitted shall be in the form of the following
questions, which shall be placed upon the official ballot: "Shall the town vote to approve the action of the
Representative Town Meeting whereby it was voted (brief description of the substance of the vote)?" If
such petition is not filed within said period of five days, the vote of Representative Town Meeting shall
become operative and effective upon the expiration of the said period.
SECTION 9: The Town of Ludlow, after the acceptance of this act and the first election of the town meeting
members there under, shall have the capacity to act through and be bound by its said town meeting
members who shall, when convened from time to time as herein provided, constitute Representative Town
Meetings, and the Representative Town Meeting shall exercise exclusively, so far as will conform to the
provisions of this act, all powers vested in the municipal corporation. Action in conformity with all provisions
of law now or hereafter applicable to the transaction of town affairs in town meetings shall, when taken by
any Representative Town Meeting in accordance with the provisions of this act, have the same force and
effect as if such action had been taken in a town meeting open to all voters of the town as heretofore
organized and conducted.
SECTION 10: This act shall not abridge the right of the inhabitants of the Town of Ludlow to hold general
meetings, as that right is secured to them by the Constitution of this Commonwealth, nor shall this act confer
upon any Representative Town Meeting in said town the power finally to commit the town to any measure
affecting its municipal existence or changing its government, without action thereon by the voters of the
town at large, using the ballot and check list therefor.
SECTION 11: The question of the acceptance of this act shall be submitted to the registered voters of the
Town of Ludlow at the annual town meeting in the year nineteen hundred and thirty. The vote shall be
taken by ballot in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws, so far as the same shall be
applicable, in answer to the question, which shall be placed upon the official ballot to be used for the election
of town officers; "Shall an act passed by the General Court in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-nine
entitled 'An Act providing for precinct voting, Representative Town Meetings, town meeting members, a
referendum and an annual Moderator in the Town of Ludlow' be accepted by this town?"
SECTION 12: So much of this act as authorizes its submission for acceptance to the registered voters of
the Town of Ludlow shall take effect upon its passage, and the remainder shall take effect upon its
acceptance by a majority of the voters voting thereon. (Approved 5/22/1929 Originally)
CHAPTER 600
AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
COMMISSION IN THE TOWN OF LUDLOW
Special Acts of 1974
Amended 6/14/84
Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the
authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1: The Town of Ludlow is hereby authorized to operate and maintain a municipal golf course on
property now or formerly known as Westover Air Force Base, including any recreation and picnic areas
adjoining said golf course.
SECTION 2: There is hereby established in the Town of Ludlow a Municipal Golf Course Commission,
hereinafter called the commission, for the maintenance, promotion, development and administration of a
municipal golf course including any recreation and picnic areas adjoining said golf course. The commission
shall consist of seven members, of whom three shall be the Park Commissioners of said town and four
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of said town. When the commission is first established, the
terms of the four appointed commissioners shall be for one, two, three and four years respectively, and
thereafter when the term of a member expires, his successor shall be appointed for a term of four years.
Any appointed member of the commission who has served a term of four years may not be reappointed to
the commission until the expiration of one year after the completion of his term. Any appointed member of
the commission may, after a public hearing if requested, be removed for cause by the appointing authority.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment. The chairman of the Park Commissioners shall act as temporary
chairman at the first meeting of the commission, at which time a permanent chairman shall be elected by
majority vote of the commission. Thereafter, at the first meeting in February of each year, a chairman shall
be elected by majority vote of the commission. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the
Town of Ludlow. Each member shall continue in office after expiration of his term until his successor is
duly elected or appointed and qualified. Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and
an affirmative vote of four members shall be necessary for any action taken by the commission. No vacancy
in the membership of the commission shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform
all duties of the commission. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall
be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The commission shall
be subject to all laws governing the conduct of municipal officials, committees and departments and shall
file an annual report of its activities for each calendar year with the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 3: The commission is hereby authorized and empowered:
A-4
(a) to adopt Bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business;
(b) to ensure, maintain, repair and improve such golf course and recreation and picnic
areas and operate the same for use by the public;
(3) to provide, through its employees or by the grant of one or more concessions, or in
part through its employees and in part by the grant of one or more concessions, for
the furnishing of services and things for the accommodation of persons admitted to
or using the golf course and adjoining facilities, which concessions may be allowed
to serve alcoholic beverages in compliance with Chapter one hundred and thirty-eight of
the General Laws;
(d) to establish rules and regulations, and fix policies for the use of such golf course
and adjoining facilities;
(e) to fix from time to time and charge and collect fees for admission to or the use of
the golf course or any part thereof, and for the grant of concessions therein and for
things furnished, or services rendered by the commission. The commission may fix
such fees as in its judgment are best adapted to ensure sufficient income to meet
expenses of operating and maintaining the golf course and adjoining facilities; such
fees shall be subject to the provisions of section fifty-three of Chapter forty-four of
the General Laws;
(f) to make all contracts and agreements for a term of not more than three years
necessary or incidental to the performance of its duties and the execution of its
powers under this act, to employ such agents and employees as may be necessary
in its judgment, and to fix their compensation, and to do all acts and things
necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly granted in this act;
provided, that the provisions of Chapter thirty-one of the General Laws shall not
apply to any such employees.
SECTION 4: This act shall take effect upon its acceptance by the Town of Ludlow. (Accepted 8/12/1974)
CHAPTER 672
AN ACT CREATING THE WESTOVER METROPOLITAN
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Whereas the deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purposes, which is to aid private
enterprise in the speedy and orderly conversion and redevelopment of lands formerly used for certain
activities at Westover Air Force Base in order to prevent blight, economic dislocation and unemployment,
and to aid private enterprise fully to utilize certain opportunities to alleviate unemployment, therefore it is
hereby declared to be an emergency law necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
convenience.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1: Findings and purpose.
It is hereby found that there exists within the Commonwealth substantial unemployment which is detrimental
to the welfare of the people of the Commonwealth, that the termination by the United States of certain
activities at the Westover Air Force Base will, in the absence of a speedy and orderly conversion and
redevelopment of lands formerly used for such activities to nonmilitary uses, result in blight, economic
dislocation, and additional unemployment, all to the further detriment of the welfare of the people of the
Commonwealth, and that private, semipublic enterprise, unaided by the Commonwealth, is unable to
accomplish such a speedy and orderly conversion and redevelopment so as to prevent such further
detriment. It is further found that there are opportunities presented by such termination to private,
semipublic or public enterprise to alleviate such unemployment and that private, semipublic or public
enterprise, unaided by the Commonwealth, is unable fully to utilize such opportunities.
Therefore it is the purpose of the Westover Metropolitan Development Corporation created by this act to
aid private, semipublic or public enterprise in the speedy and orderly conversion and redevelopment of
lands formerly used for certain activities at said base to nonmilitary uses, including, but not limited to,
industrial, commercial or manufacturing uses, in order to prevent blight, economic dislocation, and
additional unemployment and to aid private, semipublic or public enterprise fully to utilize opportunities to
alleviate unemployment.
SECTION 2: In this act the following words and phrases shall, unless the context requires otherwise, have
the following meanings:
"Corporation", the Westover Metropolitan Development Corporation.
A-5
"Cost of a project", all costs, whether incurred prior to or after the issue of bonds or notes hereunder, of
acquisition, site development, construction, improvement, enlargement, reconstruction, alteration,
machinery, equipment, furnishings, demolition, or removal of existing buildings or structures, including the
cost of acquiring any lands to which such buildings or structures may be moved, financing charges, interest
prior to and during the carrying out of any project, interest for up to two years after completion or estimated
completion date of any project, planning, engineering and legal service, administrative expense, the funding
of notes issued for capital purposes, such reserve for debt service or other capital or current expenses as
may be required by a trust agreement or resolution securing notes or bonds, and all other expenses
incidental to the determination of the feasibility of any project or to carrying out the project or to placing the
project in operation.
"Economic development area", any part of the area formerly used by the United States for the Westover
Air Force Base.
"Economic development plan", a detailed plan, as it may be approved from time to time by the municipality
as herein provided for one or more economic development projects within an economic development area,
which plan shall be consistent with local objectives respecting appropriate land uses, and shall be
sufficiently complete to indicate the boundaries of the area, such land acquisition, such demolition, removal
and rehabilitation of structures, and such development, redevelopment and general public improvements
as may be proposed to be carried out within such area, zoning and planning changes, if any, and proposed
land uses, maximum densities and building requirements; provided, however, that no economic
development plan shall propose zoning changes, to or from business or residential uses, or provide for any
office building other than one wholly incidental to a manufacturing, commercial or industrial use within the
area without the specific approval of the city or town within which the project lies.
"Economic development project", a project to be undertaken in accordance with an economic development
plan for acquisition by the corporation of land and the improvements thereon, if any, within an economic
development area and for clearance, if necessary, rehabilitation, improvement, and redevelopment for
industrial, manufacturing, or commercial uses. An economic development project may include
improvements necessary for carrying out the objectives of the economic development project, together with
such site improvements as are necessary for the preparation of any site for uses in accordance with the
economic development plan, and making any land or improvements acquired in the area of the project
available for redevelopment or rehabilitation by private, semipublic or public enterprise, including sale, initial
leasing or retention by the corporation for industrial, manufacturing, or commercial uses in accordance with
the economic development plan. An economic development project may also include the construction by
the corporation of any of the buildings, structures or other facilities for industrial, manufacturing, or
commercial uses contemplated by the economic development plan and the repair, removal or rehabilitation
by the corporation of any of the buildings, structures or other facilities located in the area covered by the
economic development plan which, under such plan, are to be repaired, removed or rehabilitated.
"Lands", any real property, improvements thereon, and related personal property.
"Municipality", the Town of Ludlow, with respect to any parcel of land lying wholly therein, the City of
Chicopee, with respect to any parcel of land lying wholly therein, or the Town of Ludlow and the City of
Chicopee acting jointly, with respect to any parcel of land lying partly within said town and partly within said
City.
"Pollution control facilities", facilities for the prevention, avoidance, reduction, control, abatement or
elimination of pollution of air or waters by industrial, manufacturing, or commercial establishments by any
means.
SECTION 3: There is hereby created a body politic and corporate to be known as the Westover
Metropolitan Development Corporation, which shall be governed by a board of nine directors, all residents
of the Springfield-Chicopee-Holyoke standard metropolitan statistical area, one of whom shall be appointed
chairman by a majority vote of the other directors, three of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
City of Chicopee, with the approval of the Board of Aldermen of the City of Chicopee, two of whom shall be
appointed by the First Selectman of the Town of Ludlow, and three of whom shall be experienced in
industry, manufacturing, or commerce, shall not be residents of the City of Chicopee or the Town of Ludlow,
and shall be appointed by a majority vote of the other directors; provided, however, that the initially
appointed chairman shall be one of the three nominees of the Westover Task Force created
by the joint commission on federal base conversion and those three members initially appointed on the
basis of experience and nonresidency shall be appointed by the chairman, each from among three
nominees of said Task Force. The chairman and other directors shall serve for terms of three years;
provided, however, that of those initially appointed by the Mayor of the City of Chicopee, two shall be for
terms of two years of those initially appointed by the First Selectman of the Town of Ludlow, one shall be
for a term of two years, and of those initially appointed by the chairman of the board of directors, two shall
be for terms of two years. Vacancies arising other than from the expiration of a term shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as regularly provided for such appointments. Directors
shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties hereunder, but each director may be
reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the performance of his duties.
A majority of the nine directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but the action
of a majority of the entire board shall be required for any transaction. For the purposes of section eleven
A of Chapter thirty A of the General Laws, the corporation shall be deemed to be an authority established
by the General Court to serve a public purpose in the Commonwealth.
SECTION 4: The directors of the corporation shall adopt a corporate seal for the corporation, and designate
the custodian thereof, may from time to time appoint and at pleasure remove a clerk, a treasurer or such
other officers of the corporation as they may deem necessary, and may determine their duties and their
compensation, which shall be paid by the corporation, shall cause at all times accurate accounts to be kept
of all receipts and expenditures of the funds of the corporation, and shall make a report annually in
December to the City of Chicopee and the Town of Ludlow and to the General Court containing an abstract
of such accounts and detailed information of all receipts and expenditures, including prices paid for land
purchased or taken and any buildings constructed thereon, contracts for construction of facilities and for
the leasing thereof, and such other detailed information as may be deemed helpful. The offices of Treasurer
and Clerk may be held by the same person. The corporation shall cause an audit of its books and accounts
to be made at least once in each fiscal year by certified public accountants and the cost thereof shall be
treated as an item of current expense.
Except as otherwise provided in this act, the corporation shall have full power to exercise care of its property
and the management of its business and affairs, and to sell and convey any real property not needed for
its business or affairs, by deed or other instrument sealed with the corporate seal, signed and acknowledged
by a majority of the board of directors or in like manner to authorize such sale and conveyance by any of
its officers or agents. The Treasurer shall give bond for the faithful performance of his duties, with a surety
company authorized to do business in this Commonwealth as surety, in such sum as the said board may
determine, the premium therefor to be paid by the corporation. The provisions of Chapter thirty-one of the
General Laws or any rule made thereunder shall not apply to any person employed or engaged by the
corporation under this act.
SECTION 5: The corporation is hereby authorized:
(a) To sue and be sued in its own name, and plead and be impleaded.
(b) To adopt Bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business, and to alter the same
at its pleasure.
(c) To make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or incidental to the performance of its
duties and the execution of its powers under this act, and to employ consulting engineers,
superintendents, managers, and such other engineers, construction and accounting experts and
attorneys and such other employees, agents and consultants as may be necessary in its judgment,
and to fix their compensation.
(d) To receive and accept from any federal agency, the Commonwealth or any municipality grants, loans
or advances for or in aid of an economic development project or projects and to receive and accept
contributions from any source of either money, property, labor or other things of value, to be held, used
and applied for the purposes for which such grants, loans, advances and contributions may be made.
Any municipality may borrow outside its debt limits to obtain money for a loan to the corporation, with
the approval of the Secretary of Communities and Development.
(e) To borrow money and, from time to time, to make, accept, endorse, execute and issue bonds,
debentures, promissory notes, bills of exchange, and other obligations of the corporation, for moneys
borrowed or in payment for property acquired or for any of the other purposes of the corporation, and
to secure the payment of such obligations by mortgage, pledge, deed, indenture, agreement, or other
instrument of trust, or by other lien upon, assignment of, or agreement in regard to all or any part of the
property, rights, or privileges of the corporation.
(f) To issue revenue bonds of the corporation, payable solely from revenues, for the purpose of paying all
or any part of the cost of a project or projects, except that any municipality may, upon request by the
corporation, pledge its full faith and credit to the solvency of the corporation.
(g) To invest any funds not required for immediate use or disbursement in certificates of deposit or in
obligations of the government of the United States or in obligations the payment of the principal of, and
interest on, which is guaranteed by the Government of the United States.
(h) To provide such advisory services and technical assistance as may be necessary or desirable to carry
out the purposes of this act.
(i) To prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs, drawings, specifications and estimates of cost or
the construction, reconstruction, development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, remodeling, alteration or
repair of economic development projects and from time to time modify such plans, designs, drawings,
specifications and estimates.
(j) To finance pollution control facilities in the same manner provided by this act for economic development
projects, in which event all provisions of this act which are applicable to economic development projects
apply to the pollution control facilities, insofar as such provisions are apt, except as otherwise provided.
(k) To designate, subject to the approval of the municipality, areas formerly used for the Westover Air
Force Base as economic development areas.
(l) Whenever the United States shall give notice that any lands, or any interest therein, formerly used
for the Westover Air Force Base are available for disposal or make advertisement for bids with respect
to such lands, or such interest, the corporation may take whatever steps are required by federal law to
acquire such lands, or such interest.
(m) To acquire and hold any lands, or any interest therein, formerly used for the Westover Air Force Base.
(n) To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its property and other assets and
operations in such amounts and from such insurers as it deems desirable.
(o) To clear and improve property acquired by it, and to engage in or contract for the construction,
reconstruction, development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, remodeling, alteration or repair thereof.
(p) To arrange or contract with the municipality for the planning, replanning, opening, grading or closing of
streets, roads, alleys or other places or for the furnishing of facilities or for the acquisition by the
municipality of property or property rights or for the furnishing of property of services in connection with
a project or projects.
(q) To sell, convey, mortgage, lease, transfer option, exchange or otherwise dispose of any lands, or any
interest therein, as the objects and purposes of the corporation may require, subject to such limitations
as may be prescribed by law.
(r) To loan on mortgages, including purchase money mortgages, on real estate and personal property
within economic development areas, to foreclose the same when in default, and to bid for the purchase
property at any foreclosure or other sale; and in such event, to deal with such property in such manner
as may be necessary or desirable to protect the interests of the corporation therein.
(s) To manage any project whether owned or leased by the corporation and to enter into agreements
with the Commonwealth or the municipality or any agency or instrumentality thereof or with any person,
firm, partnership or corporation either public or private for the purpose of causing any project to be
managed.
(t) To act with respect to one or more projects as a corporation organized under Ch. 121A S.3 or S. 18B
of the General Laws, provided that the accounts for each project shall be kept separately, and the
income of one project shall not be expended upon or for the benefit of another project.
(u) To borrow money for the purpose of aiding in the construction of equipment required by the
Commonwealth or United States to abate air or water pollution.
(v) To do all acts and things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly granted in this
act.
SECTION 5a: The corporation may exercise any of its powers for the purpose of making lands formerly
used for Westover Air Force Base available for development of facilities for the generation, transmission or
transformation of electric power and energy by or for the electric utilities primarily consisting of one or more
political subdivisions of the Commonwealth. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the corporation
may borrow money to acquire such lands, or any interest therein, and lease, sell, or otherwise transfer the
same for consideration to Massachusetts Municipal Wholesale Electric Company, Massachusetts Municipal
Power Development Corporation or to electric utilities primarily consisting of one or more political
subdivisions of the Commonwealth or to another entity or entities for the purposes of this section. The uses
of lands under this section may include, as an incident to the generation, transmission or transformation of
electric power and energy, headquarters or other office space for the corporate entity owning or operating
the facilities referred to in this section. Lands subject to this section shall not constitute or be designated
as "economic development areas", and the terms "economic development plan" and "economic
development project" as used in this act shall not be deemed to include activities of the corporation under
this section, nor shall such activities be subject to sections sixty-one and sixty-two of chapter thirty of the
General Laws, but the foregoing shall not be deemed to exempt from any applicable environmental laws
the construction or operation of facilities referred to in this section.
SECTION 6: No economic development project shall be undertaken until a public hearing relating to the
economic development plan covering such project has been held by the corporation after due notice, and
the economic development plan has been approved, in the case of the Town of Ludlow, by an affirmative
two-thirds vote of an Annual Town Meeting or a Special Town Meeting called for the purpose and, in the
case of the City of Chicopee, by a two-thirds vote of the Board of Aldermen with the approval of the Mayor.
If no economic development project covered by an economic development plan is commenced within seven
years after the approval of such plan, the approval of such plan shall lapse. Every economic
development plan submitted to the municipality for approval under this act (i) shall require that every person
occupying the whole or any part of the economic development area covered by such plan during the period
of forty years after the approval of such plan shall make every reasonable effort, in employing persons in
his business, to give to the fullest practicable extent preference to residents of the municipality and (ii) shall
be accompanied by a report on such plan by the planning agency of the municipality to whom such plan
shall have been submitted before its submission to the municipality by a statement of the proposed method
for financing each project covered by such plan and by such other information as the corporation deem
advisable.
Notice of the public hearing required by the first paragraph of this section shall be given by the corporation
to (l) such persons, groups and organizations as have requested in writing that such notice be given them,
(2) the department and secretary and agency, whether of the city or of the Commonwealth, likely in the
judgment of the corporation to have an actual or potential interest in the economic development plan,(3)
the Senator for every senatorial district of the Commonwealth, and the Representative for every
representative district thereof, within which the economic development area or any part thereof lies. In the
course of preparing an economic development plan, the corporation shall consult with each of the aforesaid
so far as in the judgment of the corporation it is practicable. If an economic development plan is so
approved by the municipality, the corporation shall have the powers and duties imposed by this act to
undertake and carry out the economic development projects covered by such plan. The corporation shall
not be required to submit an economic development plan so approved to the Department of Community
Affairs of the Commonwealth for further approval.
SECTION 7: Except as provided herein rents and charges for services or facilities furnished or supplied
by the corporations shall not be subject to supervision or regulation by an department, division, commission,
board, bureau or agency of the Commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof, and, if derived from a
project in connection with which revenue bonds have been issued, shall, with all other revenues derived
from the project, except such part thereof as may be necessary to pay such cost of maintenance, repair
and operation and to provide such reserves thereof as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the
issuance of the bonds or in the trust agreement, but including such part thereof as may be necessary to
provide such reserves for the payment of the principal of and the interest on said revenue bonds as may
be provided for in such resolution or trust agreement, and including also the proceeds of any and all sales
by the corporation of property within the project area, be set aside at such regular intervals as may be
provided for in such resolution or trust agreement, in a sinking fund which is hereby pledged to and charged
with the payment of (l) the interest upon such bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the
bonds as the same shall fail due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and
interest, and (4) the redemption price or the purchase price of bonds retired by call or purchase as therein
provided.
SECTION 8: The corporation shall be liable in contract or in tort in the same manner as a private
corporation. The directors, employees, officers and agents of the corporation shall not be liable as such on
its contracts or for torts not committed or directly authorized by them. The property or funds of the
corporation shall not be subject to attachment or to levy and sales on execution, but if the corporation
refuses to pay a judgment entered against it in any court of competent jurisdiction, the Superior Court,
sitting within and for the county in which the corporation is situated, may, by writ of mandamus, direct the
Treasurer of such agency to pay such judgment.
SECTION 9: The real estate and tangible personal property of the corporation shall be deemed to be public
property used for essential public and governmental purposes and shall be exempt from taxation and from
betterments and special assessment; provided, that in lieu of such taxes, betterments and special
assessments, the municipality may determine a sum to be paid to it annually in any year or period of years,
such sum to be in any year not in excess of the amount that would be levied at the then current tax rate
upon the average of the assessed value of such real estate, including buildings and other structures, for
the three years preceding the year of acquisition thereof, the valuation for each year being reduced by all
abatements thereon.
The municipality may, however, agree with the corporation upon the payments to be made, or the
corporation may make and the municipality may accept such payments, the amount of which shall not in
either case be subject to the foregoing limitation. The last paragraph of S. 6 and all of S. 7 of Ch. 59 of the
General Laws shall, so far as apt, be applicable to payments under this section.
Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent the taxation to the same extent and in the same manner
as other real estate is taxed, of real estate acquired by the corporation for an economic development project
and sold by it, or the taxation to the same extent and in the same manner as real estate of the
Commonwealth is taxed, of real estate so acquired by the corporation and leased by it; provided, however,
that real estate so acquired by the corporation and sold or leased to an urban redevelopment corporation
or other entity operating under Ch. 121A A of the General Laws or to an insurance company or savings
bank or group of savings banks operating under said chapter, shall be taxed as provided in said chapter
and not otherwise. The corporation and the debentures, revenue bonds and revenue refunding bonds
issued under the provisions of this act, their transfer and the income therefrom including any profit made
on the sale thereof, shall at all times be free from taxation by the Commonwealth or any subdivision thereof.
SECTION l0: To provide funds for the general purposes of the corporation, including working capital, the
corporation may from time to time issue debentures; provided, however, that such debentures outstanding
at any one time shall not exceed five million dollars unless specifically approved by the Secretary of
Communities and Development. Such debentures unless otherwise authorized by law shall not be deemed
to constitute a debt of the Commonwealth or of the municipality or a pledge of the faith and credit of the
Commonwealth or of the municipality and shall be subordinated to all other obligations of the corporation
and shall be payable at such time or times and in such installments, if any, as the corporation shall
determine, but solely out of the net assets of the corporation; and the holders thereof shall be entitled to
interest thereon but only out of the net earnings of the corporation, and in no event at a rate higher than the
rate specified therein. Such debentures may be secured by a trust agreement by and between the
corporation and a corporate trustee, which shall be located within the Commonwealth and shall be a trust
company or bank having the powers of a trust company. Such trust agreement shall contain such provisions
for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the debenture holders as may be reasonable and
proper and not in violation of law. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the
laws of the Commonwealth which may act as depository under such trust agreement to furnish such
indemnifying bonds or to pledge such securities as may be required by the corporation. Such trust
agreement shall set forth the rights and remedies of the debenture holders and of the trustee, and may
restrict the individual right of action by debenture holders. In addition to the foregoing, such trust agreement
may contain such other provisions as the corporation may deem reasonable and proper for the security of
the debenture holders. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such trust agreement may
be treated as an item of current expense.
SECTION 11: The municipality may raise and appropriate or may borrow, or may agree with the corporation
or with the Federal Government or the Commonwealth to raise and appropriate or to borrow, in aid of the
corporation, such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and powers of the corporation
including defraying part of the development, acquisition and operating costs of any project. Indebtedness
of the municipality authorized under this section shall be outside the limit of indebtedness prescribed in S.
10 of C. 44 and shall be payable within twenty years and otherwise subject to S. 16 to 27 inclusive, of said
C. 44; provided, however, that the total amount of indebtedness of the municipality, outstanding at any one
time under this section and Ch. 1, 2 and 5 of S. 20 of Ch. 121B shall not exceed five per cent of the
municipality equalized valuation as defined in S. 1 of said Ch. 44. Indebtedness incurred under this act
shall also be subject to approval under S. 22 of said Ch. 121B in like manner as indebtedness incurred
under said S. 20.
SECTION 12: The corporation is hereby authorized to provide by resolution, at one time or from time to
time, for the issuance of revenue bonds of the corporation for the purposes of paying all or any part of the
cost of a project or projects. The principal of and interest on such bonds shall be payable solely from the
funds herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such
rates, and shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty years from their date or dates, as may be
determined by the corporation, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the
corporation, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the corporation
prior to the issuance of the bonds. The corporation shall determine the form of the bonds, including any
interest coupons to be attached thereto, and the manner of execution of the bonds, and shall fix the
denomination or denominations of the bonds, and the place or places of payment of principal and interest,
which may be at any bank or trust company within the Commonwealth. In case any officer whose signature
or a facsimile of whose signature shall appear on any bonds or coupons shall cease to be such officer
before the delivery of such bonds, such signature or such facsimile shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient
for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. The bonds may be issued in
coupon or registered form or both, as the corporation may determine and provision may be made for the
registration of any coupon bonds as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. The
corporation may sell such bonds in such manner, either at public or at private sale, and for such price, as
it may determine to be for the best interests of the corporation.
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and
shall be disbursed in such manner and under such restrictions, if any, as the corporation may provide. Prior
to the preparation of definitive bonds, the corporation may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts or
temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds when such bonds have been
executed and are available for delivery. The corporation may also provide for the replacement of any bonds
which shall be come mutilated or shall be destroyed or lost. Revenue bonds may be issued under the
provisions of this act subject only to those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required
by this act.
The corporation is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for issuance of revenue refunding bonds of
the corporation for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds then outstanding and issued under the
provisions of this act, including the payment of any redemption premium thereon and any interest accrued
or to accrue to the date of redemption of such bonds, and, if deemed advisable by the corporation, for the
additional purpose of constructing or reconstructing any extensions or improvements of the project. The
issue of such bonds, the maturates and other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties
of the corporation in respect of the same shall be governed by the provisions of this act insofar as the same
may be applicable. While any bonds issued by the corporation remain outstanding the powers, duties or
existence of the corporation shall not be diminished or impaired in any way that will affect adversely the
interest and rights of holders of such bonds.
Revenue and revenue refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this section, unless otherwise
authorized by law, shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the Commonwealth or of the city, or a pledge
of the faith and credit of the Commonwealth or of the city, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the
funds herein provided therefor from revenues. In the event that the corporation, or municipality or
Commonwealth is not obliged to pay said revenue and revenue refunding bonds, then, and in that event,
all such revenue and revenue refunding bonds shall contain on the fact thereof a statement to the effect
that neither the corporation nor the Commonwealth nor the municipality shall be obliged to pay the same
or the interest thereon except from revenues and that neither the faith and credit nor taxing power of the
Commonwealth or of the municipality is pledged to the payment of or the interest on such bonds.
All revenue and revenue refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have and are
hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments.
SECTION 13: In the discretion of the corporation, such revenue bonds or revenue refunding bonds may
be secured by a trust agreement by and between the corporation and a corporate trustee, which may be
any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within the Commonwealth. Such trust
agreement may pledge or assign the revenues to be received, but shall not convey or mortgage any project
or part thereof.
Either the resolution providing for the issuance of bonds or such trust agreement may contain such
provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable
and proper and not in violation of law, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, provisions
defining defaults and providing for remedies in the event thereof, which may include the acceleration of
maturities, and covenants setting forth the duties of, and limitations on, the corporation in relation to the
acquisition, construction, improvement, enlargement, alteration, equipping, furnishing, maintenance,
operation, repair, insurance and disposition of property, the custody, safeguarding, investment, and
application of moneys, the use of any surplus bond or note proceeds and the establishment of reserves.
Such resolution or trust agreement may also contain covenants by the corporation in relation to, among
other things.
(a) The establishment, revision and collection of such rents and charges for services of facilities
furnished or supplied by the corporation as shall provide revenues sufficient with other revenues of the
project, if any, to pay (i) the cost of maintaining, repairing and operating the project and of making renewals
and replacements in connection therewith, (ii) the principal of and the interest on said revenue bonds, as
the same shall become due and payable, (iii) payments in lieu of taxes, betterment and special assessment,
and (iv) reserves for all such purposes, (b) the purpose or purposes for which the proceeds of the sale of
the bonds will be applied and the use and disposition thereof, (c) the use and disposition of the gross
revenues of the corporation from the project, and additions thereto and extensions and improvements
thereof, including the creation and maintenance of funds for working capital and for renewals and
replacements to the project, (d) the amount, if any, of additional revenue bonds payable from the revenues
of the project and the limitations, terms and conditions on which such additional revenue bonds may be
issued, and (e) the operation, maintenance, management, accounting and auditing of the project and of the
income and revenues of the corporation. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under
the laws of the Commonwealth to act as depository of the proceeds of bonds or of revenues and to furnish
such indemnifying bonds or to pledge such securities as may be required by the corporation. Such trust
agreement may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict
the individual right of action by bondholders as is customary in trust agreements or trust indentures securing
bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust agreement may contain such
other provisions as the corporation may deem reasonable and proper for the
security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such trust agreement
may be treated as a part of the cost of the operation of the project. The pledge by any such trust agreement
or resolution shall be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made, the revenues or other
moneys so pledged and then held or thereafter received by the corporation shall immediately be subject to
the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act; and the lien of any such pledge
shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise
against the corporation, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof.
SECTION 14: Revenue bonds and revenue refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this act are
hereby made securities in which all public officers and public bodies of the Commonwealth and its political
subdivisions, all insurance companies, trust companies in their commercial departments and within the
limits set by section fifty-four of chapter one hundred and seventy-two of the General Laws, banking
associations, investment companies, executors, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other
persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of
a similar nature may properly and legally invest funds, including capital in their control or belonging to them;
and such bonds are hereby made obligations which may properly and legally be made eligible for the
investment of savings deposits and the income thereof in the manner provided by section fifty or chapter
one hundred and sixty-eight of the General Laws. Such bonds are hereby made securities which may
properly and legally be deposited with and received by any state or municipal officer or any agency or
political subdivision of the Commonwealth for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other
obligations of the Commonwealth is now or may hereafter be authorized by law.
SECTION 15: Any holder of bonds or debentures issued under the provisions of this chapter or of any
coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted
by the trust agreement, may, by commencing a civil action, protect and enforce any and all rights under the
laws of the Commonwealth or granted hereunder or under the trust agreement, and may enforce and
compel the performance of all duties required by this act or by the trust agreement, to be performed by the
corporation or by any officer thereof.
SECTION 16: Insofar as the provisions of this act are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law,
general or special, excluding any state or the municipal building code and the municipal zoning Bylaws, the
provisions of this act shall be controlling.
SECTION 17: The provisions of this act are severable; and if any of its provisions shall be held
unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions.
SECTION 18: This act, being necessary for the welfare of the Commonwealth and its inhabitants, shall be
liberally construed to effect the purpose thereof. Approved August 1, 1974; Amended November 17,
1975.
APPROVED AUGUST 1, 1974
AMENDED NOVEMBER 17, 1975
CHAPTER 473
AN ACT FURTHER REGULATING THE COMPENSATION OF
TOWN CLERKS WHO SERVE AS REGISTRARS OF VOTERS.
SPECIAL ACT OF 1990
Section 1: Chapter 41 of the General Laws is hereby amended by inserting after section 191 the
following section:-
MA St 41 Sec 19J
Section 19J. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections nineteen G and nineteen H, a city or town
which accepts this section may compensate a clerk of a city or town who also serves as a member
of its board of registrars of voters, in addition to any compensation to which such clerk is entitled
as city or town clerk, a sum not less than fifty dollars but not to exceed one hundred dollars, and,
if the number of registered voters exceeds one thousand, an additional sum not less than fifty
dollars but not to exceed one hundred dollars for each additional thousand of registered voters or
major fraction thereof; provided, however, that the total payment for such service as a member
of said board shall not exceed four thousand dollars in any year.
MA St 41 Sec 19J note
Section 2. For the purposes of implementing section one during fiscal year nineteen hundred and
ninety-one, a town may accept the provisions of this act and set such compensation for a town
clerk at a special town meeting and provide that payment of such additional compensation may
be made from available funds and the amounts of such payment shall be reported by the town
accountant or by the town treasurer if there is no town accountant, to the assessors who shall
include the amounts so reported in the aggregate appropriation assessed in the determination of
the next subsequent annual tax rate.
Approved December 29, 1990
A-6
CHAPTER 39
AN ACT PROHIBITING THE DISCLOSURE OF THE NAMES
AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS OF CERTAIN LAW
ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL AND OTHERS
SPECIAL ACTS OF 1996
(which amends mass general laws chpt 66, sec 10)
SECTION 1: Section 10 of chapter 66 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 1994 Official Edition, is
hereby amended by adding the following paragraph:-
The home address and home address and home telephone number of law enforcement, judicial,
prosecutorial, department of youth services, correctional and any other public safety and criminal justice
system personnel shall not be public records in the custody of the employers of such personnel and shall
not be disclosed; provided, however, that such information may be disclosed to an employee organization
under chapter one hundred and fifty E or to a criminal justice agency as defined in section one hundred
and sixty-seven of chapter six. The name and home address and telephone number of a family member
of any such personnel shall not be public records in the custody of the employers of the foregoing persons
and shall not be disclosed. The home address and telephone number, or place of employment or education
of victims of adjudicated crimes and of persons providing or training in family planning services and the
name and home address and telephone number, or place of employment or education of a family member
of any of the foregoing shall not be disclosed.
SECTION 2: Section 3 of chapter 268B of the General Laws, as so appearing, is hereby amended by
inserting after the word “reports:”, in line 18, the following words:-provided, however, that the commission
shall be authorized, in its discretion, to exempt from public disclosure those portions of a statement of
financial interest filed pursuant to section five which contain the home address of the filer; and provided,
further, that.
Approved March 14, 1996.
A-7
CHAPTER 127
The Acts of 1999
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A PROGRAM TO ALLOW PERSONS
OVER THE AGE OF SIXTY (60) TO VOLUNTEER TO PROVIDE
SERVICES TO THE TOWN OF LUDLOW IN EXCHANGE FOR
A REDUCTION ON THE INDIVIDUAL” REAL PROPERTY TAX
BILL OF NO MORE THAN $500.00 IN A GIVEN TAX YEAR.
SECTION 59. Chapter 59 of the General Laws is hereby amended by inserting after section 5J the following
section:-
SECTION 5k. In any city or town which accepts the provisions of this section, the board of selectmen of a
town or in a municipality having a town council form of government, the town council or the mayor with the
approval of the city council in a city may establish a program to allow persons over the age of 60 to volunteer
to provide services to such city or town. In exchange for such volunteer services, the city or town shall
reduce the real property tax obligations of such person over the age of 60 on his tax bills and any reduction
so provided shall be in addition to any exemption or abatement to which any such person is otherwise
entitled and no such person shall receive a rate of, or be credited with, more than the current minimum
wage of the commonwealth per hour for services provided pursuant to such reduction nor shall the reduction
of the real property tax bill exceed $500 in a given tax year. It shall be the responsibility of the city or town
to maintain a record for each taxpayer including, but not limited to the number of hours of service and the
total amount by which the real property tax has been reduced and to provide a copy of such record to the
assessor in order that the actual tax bill reflect the reduced rate. A copy of such record shall also be
provided to the taxpayer prior to the issuance of the actual tax bill. Such cities and towns shall have the
power to create local rules and procedures for implementing this section in any way consistent with the
intent of this section.
In no instance shall the amount by which a person’s property tax liability is reduced in exchange for the
provision of services be considered income, wages or employment for the purposes of taxation as provided
in chapter 62, for the purposes of withholding taxes as provided in chapter 62B, for the purposes of
unemployment insurance as provided in chapter 151, for the purposes of workers’ compensation as
provided in chapter 152 or any other applicable provisions of the General Laws but such person while
providing such services shall be considered a public employee for the purposes of chapter 258. (Apvd Oct
2, 2000);
(as amended Oct 2, 2000)
SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY ABATEMENT PROGRAM
(deleted old A.B. and C 10/01/2012 and replaced on (10/1/2012)
A-8
A. Eligibility of volunteers: apart from the requirements of the General Laws of the Commonwealth, the
following will also apply:
1. Volunteers must be sixty-two (62) years or older, as certified by a copy of a birth certificate at the time
of participation.
2. Volunteers must be an owner/occupant of a legal domicile in the town of Ludlow for a minimum of ten
(10) consecutive years prior to participating in the program.
3. In accordance with Massachusetts Law, the annual tax obligation will not be reduced below ten percent
(10%) of the annual tax.
B. Scope of Program
The Town will set up to no more than (75) slots as volunteer services in various Town Departments for this
program. The program will have a Board of Advisors composed of five (5) Town Department Managers
and/or designees and the Town Administrator as an ex-officio member to assist in the counsel and advice
to the Board of Selectmen for definition of the program, monitoring of its effectiveness and selection
process. The Advisors will consist of the following: School Business Manager, Council on Aging Director,
Town Collector, Assistant Assessor and Librarian. The Advisory Board shall meet annually to re-determine
the allocation of seventy-five slots
1. Applications will be accepted from November 1st through December 31st of each year for the
following fiscal year selection. The attached application must be utilized for all prospective
volunteers.
2. Volunteers may begin the work on February 1st or later which ever is more convenient for the
assigned department and all work must be completed no later than November 30th.
3. Volunteers must complete the number of hours equivalent to $500.00 divided by the Federal
Minimum wage. To qualify for the abatement, individuals must complete the assigned number of
hours (no partial abatements will be recognized)
4. Only one abatement per household (volunteer hours must be completed by one individual not
shared)
5. The abatement will be applied to the domicile address at the time of the hours worked.
6. If the number of applicants exceeds the number of slots, selection of perspective volunteers will be
made on a lottery basis. Each applicant not selected will be assigned a number. In the event that
an applicant cannot fulfill the requirements, then the slot will be filled by the next numerical
applicant. If that applicant refuses then the next numerical applicant available will be chosen.
7. The allocation of slots will be assigned to the departments where volunteers will be most valuable.
8. Department heads must certify participation of the volunteer program by completing the bottom
portion of the original application.
9. In lieu of wages received, volunteers will receive from the Board of Assessors Office, a certificate
prior to the issuance of the actual real estate tax bill for the current fiscal year.
(added Oct 1, 2012)
CHAPTER 137
AN ACT RELATIVE TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES SERVING IN
THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES.
ACTS OF 2003
Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which is to protect forthwith
the salaries of certain public employees who served or are serving in the armed forces, therefore it is hereby
declared to be an emergency law, necessary for the immediate preservation of the public convenience.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the
authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, an employee in the service of the
commonwealth or a county, city or town that accepts this section as provided in this section, including an
employee of a school district, who has been granted a military leave of absence because the employee is
a member of the army national guard, the air national guard or a reserve component of the armed forces
of the United States called to active service in the armed forces of the United States after September 11,
2001, shall be entitled to receive pay at his regular base salary as such a public employee, and shall not
lose any seniority or any accrued vacation leave, sick leave, personal leave, compensation time or earned
overtime. An employee eligible under this section shall be paid his regular base salary as such a public
employee for each pay period of such military leave or absence after September 11, 2001, reduced by any
amount received from the United States as pay or allowance for military service performed during the same
pay period, excluding overtime pay, shift differential pay, hazardous duty pay or any other additional
compensation. For the purposes of this section, the words “active service” shall not include active duty for
training in the army national guard or air national guard or as a reservist in the armed forces of the United
States. This section shall take effect in a county, city or town upon its acceptance in a county, by vote of
the county commissioners; in a city or town, as provided in section 4 of chapter 4 of the General Laws; and
in a regional school district, by vote of the school committee. Nothing in this section shall limit or reduce a
person’s entitlement to benefits under section 59 of chapter 33 of the General Laws, and nothing in this
section shall entitle a person to benefits in excess of the maximum benefit provided under said section 59
of said chapter 33 for any period during which that person is receiving benefits under this section.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, state agencies and municipal
governments may expend in the current fiscal year associated costs incurred in prior fiscal years pursuant
to this act.
A-9
SECTION 3. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, any employee eligible for
retirement under section 616 of chapter 26 of the acts of 2003 who was stationed outside of the
commonwealth on active military duty during the period from July 15, 2003 through September 1, 2003,
inclusive, shall file his application for retirement with the state board of retirement within 30 days of
discharge from active military duty outside the commonwealth or within 30 days of the effective date of this
act. The retirement date requested shall be no more than 60 days and no less than 30 days from the date
said application is filed with the state board of retirement.
SECTION 4. Section 40 N of chapter 7 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 2002 Official Edition, is
hereby amended by inserting after the definition “Minority business” the following definition:-“Veteranowned
business”, a contracting or subcontracting business which is beneficially owned by 1 or more
veterans as defined in clause Forty-third of section 7 of chapter 4, meeting the requirements set forth in
clauses (1) to *4), inclusive, of the definition of minority business, except that the terms “veteran”, “veteran
owners”, and “veteran-owned business”, shall be substituted for the terms “minority” and “minority persons”,
“minority owners”, and “minority business” as appearing in that definition.
SECTION 5. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
in line 47 after the word “businesses”, in lines 47 and 57, each time it appears, the following words:-, and
veteran-owned businesses.
SECTION 6. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
in line 62 after the word “businesses”, in line 62, the following words:- and 3 per cent for veteran-owned
businesses,.
SECTION 7. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “women-owned”, in lines 66, 100 and 106, each time it appears, the following words:- and
veteran-owned.
SECTION 8. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
in line 68 after the word “women-owned”, in lines 68, 72 and 103, each time it appears, the following words:-
or veteran-owned.
SECTION 9. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “business”, in line 71, the following words:- or 3 per cent for a veteran-owned business,.
SECTION 10. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “per cent”, in line 77, the following words:- or veteran-owned business set-aside below 3 per
cent.
SECTION 11. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “section”, in line 85, the following words:-; nor shall any portion of contracting and
subcontracting work reserved for minority-owned businesses under this section be awarded to any veteranowned
business not meeting the requirements of a minority-owned business under this section; nor shall
any portion of contracting and subcontracting work reserved for women-owned businesses under this
section be awarded to any veteran-owned business not meeting the requirements of a women-owned
business under this section; nor shall any portion of contracting and subcontracting work reserved for
veteran-owned businesses under this section be awarded to any minority-owned business not meeting the
requirements of a veteran-owned business under this section; nor shall any portion of contracting and
subcontracting work reserved for veteran-owned businesses be awarded to any women-owned business
not meeting the requirements of a veteran-owned business under this section.
SECTION 12. Said section 40N of chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting after
the word “court”, in line 98, the following words:- and, in the case of veteran-owned businesses, to the
department of veterans’ services.
SECTION 13. Said section 40N of said chapter 7, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by adding
the following paragraph:-
SOMBA shall work in collaboration with the Massachusetts Small Business Development Center Network
and The National Veterans Business Development Corporation to establish and update, by periodic
additions and deletions, a list of veteran-owned business under this section and shall cause the list to be
published in the central register established in section 20 of chapter 9, and filed with the joint committee on
state administration and in such other publications as the commissioner shall designate.
SECTION 14. Section 39 of chapter 23A of the General Laws, as so appearing, is hereby amended by
inserting after the word “Minority”, in line 5, the following words:-, women and veterans.
SECTION 15. Said section 39 of said chapter 23A, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “minority”, in line 7, the following words:-, women and veterans.
SECTION 16. Section 40 of said chapter 23A, as so appearing, is hereby amended by inserting after the
definition of ‘OMWBDE” the following definition:-
“Veteran business enterprise”, for the purpose or receipt of services from SOMWBA, a business enterprise
that is both owned and controlled by 1 or more veterans, as defined in section 7 of chapter 4, who have
invested in an ongoing business free of conversion rights.
SECTION 17. Section 44 of said chapter 23A, as so appearing, is hereby amended by inserting after the
word “women”, in line 2, and in line 16, the second time it appears, and in lines 23, 51 and 57, in each
instance, the following words:- and veteran.
SECTION 18. Said section 44 of said chapter 23A, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by inserting
after the word “women”, in line 16, the first time it appears, the following words:-or veteran.
SECTION 19. Said section 44 of said chapter 23A, as so appearing, is hereby further amended by striking
out, in line 76, the words “or women-owned” and inserting in place thereof the following words:-or womenor
veteran-owned.
SECTION 20. Section 18 of chapter 30B of the General Laws, as so appearing, is hereby amended by
striking out, in line 8, the word “forty N” and inserting in place thereof the following words:-40N and any
business beneficially owned by 1 or more veterans as provided in the definition of “veteran-owned business”
as set forth in section 40N.
SECTION 21. Sections 1, 2 and 3 shall expire on September 11, 2005.
Approved November 26, 2003
(added May 8, 2006)
CHAPTER 394
AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE TAXATION OF FOREST, FARM,
AND RECREATION LAND
ACTS OF 2006
Section 1: The definition of “class two, open-space” of subsection (b) of section 2A of Chapter 59 of the
General Laws, as appearing in the 2004 Official Edition, is hereby amended by adding the following
sentence: In a City or Town that has elected to adopt section 2A of Chapter 61, section 4A of Chapter 61A
or section 2A of Chapter 61B, class two, open-space shall include land taxable under Chapter 61, 61A or
61B.
(May 10, 2010)
A-10

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 1-1
SECTION II: ZONING DISTRICTS 2-1
SECTION III: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
General Regulations 3-1
Fences 3-1
Private Swimming Pools 3-2
Mobile Homes 3-2
Driveway Entry Permits 3-3
Table of Principal Uses 3-3
Prohibited Uses 3-4
Accessory Use Regulations 3-6
Non-conforming Use Regulations 3-9
Sidewalks and Curbings 3-10
SECTION IV: DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
General Dimensional Regulations 4-1
Specific District Dimensional Requirements 4-2
Planned Business Development 4-3
Mill Redevelopment District (MRD) Bylaw 4-7
SECTION V: OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Floodplain District Bylaw 5-1
Business in the Agriculture Moderate Density Overlay District 5-4
Aircraft Flight Regulations 5-6
Water Supply Protection District 5-6
East Street Revitalization Overlay District 5-11
Smart Growth Overlay District 5-13
SECTION VI: SPECIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
Horses and/or Ponies 6-1
Earth Removal 6-1
Home Occupations 6-3
Home Professional Offices 6-5
Parking Requirements 6-5
Sign Regulations 6-9
Accessory Apartment Bylaw 6-14
Wireless Communications Facilities 6-17
Commercial Kennels 6-19
Small Wind Energy Systems Bylaw 6-20
Large-Scale, Ground-Mounted, Photovoltaic Systems 6-27
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Dispensary 6-33
Single Family Dwellings on Estate Lots 6-33
SECTION VII: LAND USE REVIEW METHODS
Special Permits 7-1
Site Plan Approval 7-4
Stormwater Management 7-11
SECTION VIII: ADMINISTRATION
Board of Appeals 8-1
Enforcement 8-1
Conditions of Construction 8-3
SECTION IX: REPEAL, VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE 9-1
SECTION X: DEFINITIONS 10-1
BACK OF BOOK: DIAGRAMS
TABLE 1 – TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES
TABLE 2 – TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
TABLE 3 – REQUIRED LANDSCAPING
TABLE 4 – SIGNS
1-1
SECTION I: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
1.0 AUTHORITY
The Town of Ludlow Zoning Bylaw is adopted under Chapter 40A of the General Laws
(The Zoning Act) as amended.
1.1 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Bylaw are to promote the general welfare of the Town of Ludlow, to
protect the health of its inhabitants, to encourage the most appropriate use of land within
the Town, to increase the amenities of the Town, and to provide an adequate supply of
light and air and reduce the hazard from fire by regulating the location, use, and height of
buildings and the area of open spaces about them.
END OF SECTION 1
2-1
SECTION II: ZONING DISTRICTS
2.0 CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
The Town of Ludlow is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Type Full Name Short Name
Residential Dist: Residential A-1 RA-1
Residential A RA
Residential B RB
Business Dist: Business A
Light Commercial Use BA
Business B
Heavy Commercial Use BB
Agricultural Dist: Agricultural A
Industrial Dist: Industrial A IA
Industrial B IB
Industrial C IC
Overlay Dist: Agriculture:
Moderate Density AMD
Aircraft Flight AF
Water Supply Protection WSP
Mill Redevelopment Dist: Mill Redevelopment District MRD
2.1 ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of zoning districts are hereby established as shown, defined
and bounded on an eight-page zoning map originally prepared for the Town of Ludlow
by Durkee-White-Towne & Chapdelaine, Civil Engineers and Land Surveyors, dated
August, 1960 as amended. Said Zoning Map and amendments thereto as duly adopted
shall be considered an integral part of this bylaw. (Amended 10/2/06)
2.2 ZONING MAP INTERPRETATION
For purposes of interpretation of the Zoning Map, the location of the boundary lines of
the districts shown upon the Building Zone Map shall be determined as follows:
2.2.1 Zoning district boundaries which follow streets, railroads, or water courses shall
be deemed to coincide with the mean center line thereof.
2-2
2.2.2 Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of property or
lot lines, and the exact location of the property, lot, or boundary lines is not
indicated by means of figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary
lines.
2.2.3 Boundary lines located outside of street lines and shown approximately parallel
thereto shall be parallel to such street lines. Dimensions between the zoning
district boundary lines and streets shall be measured perpendicular to the sideline
of such street.
2.2.4 Where a zoning district boundary, other than an overlay district boundary, divides
a lot which was in single ownership on February 17, 1955, or upon the effective
date of any amendment changing the boundaries of one of the zoning districts in
which the lot or a portion of the lot lies, the regulations applicable to either zoning
district may be extended to as much of the lot as lies within 30 feet of the adjacent
zoning district boundary.
2.2.5 In all cases which are not covered by the other provisions of this Section, the
location of boundary lines shall be determined by the distances in feet, if given,
from other lines upon said map, by the use of identifications as shown on the map,
or if none are given, then by the scale of said map.
END OF SECTION 2
3-1
SECTION III: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
3.0 GENERAL REGULATIONS
3.0.1 Use of Buildings, Structures, and Land
For the purposes of this bylaw, any lawful building or structure or use of a
building, structure, or land or part thereof, may be constructed, altered, enlarged,
and used for any purpose which is not injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental
to a neighborhood and does not violate any section of this bylaw or any of the
provisions of the Town of Ludlow in regard to health and safety to its inhabitants.
3.0.1.1 No foundation, building, or structure shall be erected or substantially
altered without a building permit issued by the Building Inspector. A record of
such applications, the survey and plans herein referred to, and action taken
thereon, shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector. (Added
4/10/95)
3.0.2 Existing Uses Not Affected
This bylaw shall not apply to existing buildings or structures, nor to the existence of any
building or structure or of land to the extent of that use at the time of the adoption of this
bylaw.
3.0.3 Obstruction at Street Intersections
Within that portion of any lot at a street intersection which lies between the street line
joining parts on each street line, 25 feet from the intersection of such street lines, no
fence, wall, temporary sign, hedge, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision in excess of
three (3) feet in height above the adjacent level shall be permitted.
3.0.4 Fences
Fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height across the front yard setback portion of any
lot perimeter; shall comply with the provisions of Section 3.0.3 of the Zoning Bylaws;
and shall not exceed six and one-half (6 ½) feet in height on the remainder of the lot
perimeter. No fence more than one-quarter solid shall be erected across the front line,
and closer to the street than the setback requirements of the primary building. All fences
must be at least six (6) inches from any lot line and must be erected so that the less
appealing or post side shall face inward, and chain link or cyclone fences shall have the
barbs face down. A fence height greater than six and one-half (6 ½) feet may be
permitted if authorized by the Board of Appeals after a Public Hearing. Shrubs and/or
shrubbery shall not constitute the meaning of a fence for the purpose of this provision.
All fences four (4) feet and higher require a building permit.
3-2
Fences located on land zoned Industrial A, B, and C shall not exceed 6½ feet in height
across the front yard setback portion of the lot; and no fence more than one-quarter solid
shall be erected across the front line and closer to the street than the setback requirements
of the primary building. Shall comply with the provisions of Section 3.0.3 of the Zoning
Bylaw. (Added 10/3/11)
a. Shrubs Used for Screening/Fencing (added 10/6/03)
Shrubs used for screening/fencing shall not exceed three (3’) feet in height
across the front yard setback portion of any lot. No restriction on height
on the remainder of the lot perimeter. Shrubs do not require a building
permit.
All fences and shrubbery must comply with Section 3.0.3 Obstruction at
Street Intersections, and Section 4.0.8 Corner Lots.
b. Jersey Barriers are prohibited from being used as fences to divide property
lines in all zoning districts. (Added 5/9/11)
3.0.5 Private Swimming Pools
As defined herein, private SWIMMING POOLS shall be permitted as accessory
uses to residential dwellings provided they conform to the following standards:
a. The location of a pool and its appurtenant structures on a lot shall conform
to the minimum front, sides, and rear yard requirements of the respective zoning
district, but in no case shall the pool be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any
side or rear lot line. A pool must be located at least ten (10’) from any and all
structures. Exception: Pool Decks. (amended 10/6/03)
b. All in-ground pools shall be enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet high
and of a type not readily climbed by children. Above-ground pools shall have a
ladder that must comply with the Massachusetts building code. (Amended 5/9/11
& 5/14/12)
c. The operation and maintenance of all pools shall comply with the Rules
and Regulations of the Board of Health and the State Building Code.
3.0.6 Mobile Homes
Temporary mobile homes to be placed on the site of a residence which has been destroyed by
fire or other natural holocaust for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months while the residence
is being rebuilt. Any such mobile home shall be subject to the
3-3
provisions of the State Sanitary code.
3.0.7 Dish Antennae on Residential Structures
DELETED 10/6/03
3.0.8 Off-Street Parking
The parking spaces required and used in calculating the number of required parking
spaces may not be located in the front yard requirements.
3.0.9 Driveway Entry Permits
Curb cuts/driveway entry permits shall be issued by the Department of Public Works
(DPW) in accordance with the Department of Public Works (DPW) regulations.
(amended 10/01/01)
3.0.10 Dumpsters
Storage of dumpsters on residential property for periods longer than 14 days is prohibited
without a permit from the Board of Health.
3.1 TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES
No land, structure, or building shall be used except for the purposes permitted in the
district as set forth in this section unless otherwise permitted in this section. The
restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth in
Section 3.2.2, Table 1, Ludlow Table of Principal Uses:
Y Yes – Use permitted by right
N No – Use prohibited
SPPB Use allowed by special permit from the Planning Board
PBS Use allowed by permit from the Board of Selectmen
PBH Use allowed by permit from the Board of Health
SPA Use allowed by site plan approval given by the Planning
Board
3.1.1 If any activity might be classified under more than one of the principal use
definitions, the more specific definition shall determine whether the use is permitted. If
the activity might be classified under equally specific definitions, it shall not be permitted
unless both principal uses are permitted in the district.
3.1.2 Deleted 10/7/02.
3.1.3 Aircraft Flight Overlay District. To determine which uses are prohibited in the
Aircraft Flight Overlay District, see Section 3.2.7.
3-4
3.1.4 To determine which uses are permitted in the Water Supply Protection District see
Section 5.3 for a complete explanation.
3.2 PROHIBITED USES
3.2.1 Any use not specifically or generically listed herein or otherwise permitted in a
district shall be deemed as prohibited. Any legal use of land or building is permitted in
accordance with the requirements of this bylaw except those uses which are dangerous or
detrimental to a neighborhood because of fire hazard, offensive noise, smoke, vibration,
harmful radioactivity, electrical interference, dust, odor, fumes heat, glare, unsightliness,
or other objectionable characteristics.
District-Specific Prohibited Uses
3.2.2 Table of Principal Uses – See Table 1
3.2.3 Deleted 10/3/05
3.2.3 Prohibition on Marijuana Establishments (Added 11/6/17)
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 3(a)(2), all
types of marijuana establishments, as defined in Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 94G, Section 1 and as may otherwise be defined by Massachusetts law or
regulation, to include, without limitation, all marijuana cultivators, marijuana
business location, any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, and
the conducting of any such activity for commercial purposes by whichever name
used, shall be prohibited within the Town of Ludlow. This prohibition shall not
be construed to affect the medical use of marijuana as expressly authorized by the
provisions of Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and 105 CMR 725.000 (as the same
may be amended from time to time); pass any vote or take any action relative
thereto.
3.2.4 Agricultural District
a. Dwellings of two or more units are prohibited, unless it is an Adult Care
Facility. (Amended 10/3/11)
1. Adult Care Facilities are allowed to be constructed in the Agricultural
District provided that such a facility can connect to town sewer, town
water, and gas services. Waivers of this requirement will only be
considered, by the Planning Board, after appropriate departments
including, but not limited to the DPW, Fire Department, Building
Commissioner, and the Board of Health have been given a minimum of
14 days to review and comment on the waiver request.(Added 10/3/11)
3-5
b. Business uses other than those related to AGRICULTURE, HOME
OCCUPATIONS (Section 6.2), PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICE (Section 6.3),
or uses allowed by right as described in the Table of Principal Uses, Section 3.2.2,
Page 11, are prohibited.
3.2.5 Business A Districts
a. No building, structure, or land shall be used in whole or in part for
fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering, finishing, or assembling except
as may be reasonably necessary in the uses to which such buildings, structures, or
land are permitted as in the Table of Principal Uses, Section 3.2.2, Page 11.
b. PARKING GARAGES and AUTO REPAIR GARAGES which park,
store, and/or repair more than fifteen (15) motor vehicles are prohibited. All
storage and/or repair of motor vehicles, bodies and parts out of doors is prohibited
except in emergencies.
c. AUTO SALES LOTS are prohibited in Business A and Business B
districts. (Amended 5/14/01; 10/3/05)
3.2.6 Industrial A , Industrial C, and Mill Redevelopment Districts (Amended
5/9/11
The manufacture and production of the following industrial uses are prohibited in
Industrial A, Industrial C, and the Mill Redevelopment Districts:
- Acetylene gas, cyanide compound or oxygen manufacture
- Asphalt manufacture or refining
- Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture
- Creosote manufacture
- Distillation of coal or wood
- Drop forge shop
- Explosives, fireworks or ammunition manufacture
- Fertilizer manufacture
- Fumigation plants
- Glue or size manufacture from fish or animal offal
- Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture
- Incineration or reduction of or dumping of offal, garbage, or refuse on a commercial basis
(except where operated by the Town)
- Junk yard, junk storage, scrapping of autos and parts and the salvage thereof
- Linoleum manufacture
- Paint and lacquer manufacture
- Petroleum refining and the bulk storage of petroleum products
- Sewage disposal plant (except where controlled by the Town)
- Soap, tallow, grease or lard manufacture
3-6
- Slaughterhouse
- Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture
- Tannery
- Tar or asphalt roofing manufacture
- Tar products manufacture
- All other enterprises or uses regarded as hazardous or offensive
3.2.7 Aircraft Flight Overlay District (Rev. 4/11/94)
The following uses are prohibited in the Aircraft Flight Overlay District:
-Adult Care Facilities (Amended 10/3/11) *Schools
-Hospitals *Day Care Centers
-Auditoriums *Houses of Worship
-Concert Halls *(Added 4/11/94 – See House Bill #4755))
3.3 ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
3.3.1 General Accessory Regulations
The following regulations shall apply to all districts:
a. Research Facilities
A special permit is required for uses accessory to activities permitted as a matter
of right which are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific
development or related production. Such accessory uses do not have to be located
on the same parcel as the principal use.
b. Accessory Buildings
(1) An accessory building attached to its principal building shall be
considered an integral part of the principal building and as such shall be
subject to the open space requirements applicable to the principal building.
(2) An unattached one-story building shall be placed no nearer than
five (5) feet to a side lot line and five (5) feet to a rear lot line and a twostory
unattached accessory building shall be placed no nearer than ten (10)
feet to a side lot line and ten (10) feet to a rear lot line. (Revised 10/7/02
& 10/7/13)
(3) To promote health and safety, no garage buildings may be used as
a permanent dwelling. (Amended 1/25/99 STM)
3-7
(4.) The total area for all unattached accessory structures in all
residential (RA-1, RA, RB) and agricultural (A, AMD) districts is limited
in size not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the square footage for the
principal structure. Square footage calculations for principal and accessory
structures will include all levels, excluding basements. Accessory
structures used for active farming are exempt. (Amended 10/3/11)
c. Accessory Livestock Agriculture
On land used for agriculture and livestock agriculture with five (5) or less acres,
and with the approval of the Board of Health, the following uses are allowed and
may be considered as accessory uses if the use is for the occupants only: the
keeping of a small flock of poultry of not more than 25 birds, the keeping of
saddle or riding horses (as outlined in Section X, Definitions), and other farm
animals, excluding pigs.
d. Smokehouses
On land used other than for farms, the use of a SMOKEHOUSE may be
permitted with the approval of the Board of Health and the Building Inspector,
and as such may be considered as an accessory use, located seventy-five (75) or
more feet from any street line and one hundred (100) or more feet from any
dwelling. Such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted for gain.
e. Deleted 10/3/05
f. Storage Trailers, Storage Boxes (with attached or unattached wheels),
and all other Temporary Storage Accessory Structures including Office
Trailers. (Added 10/05/09)
Storage Trailers, Storage Boxes, or Portable Storage Containers and all other
temporary storage accessory structures (“Temporary Storage facilities”) are only
to be used as a temporary or emergency solution for short term usage during
construction, reconstruction, or relocation of storage buildings, homes, and
commercial buildings and on the conditions described in subparagraphs (1)
through (5) below. The use is terminated upon final inspection of the building
and a Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
3-8
Temporary Storage facilities are only permitted under the following conditions.
1. The Building Commissioner may authorize the temporary use of a Temporary
Storage facility for storage following a fire or other calamity or during
construction or major renovation of a structure or principal use by building
permit. In no event shall the temporary use exceed twelve (12) consecutive
months after the issuance of the permit, unless construction, reconstruction or
renovation is delayed by seasonal or other considerations. In such instances, the
Building Commissioner may authorize an extension of the temporary use or until
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, at which time the Temporary Storage
facility shall be removed from the address or property.
2. A Temporary Storage facility, when being used following a fire or other
calamity or during construction or major renovation of a structure or principal
use, shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. No
Temporary Storage facility shall be permitted to be placed in any portion of a
front yard of a residential/commercial property other than a driveway/parking lot
or area agreed upon prior to the issuance of a building permit.
3. A Storage facility used for agricultural, educational, non-profit or religious
purposes is subject to reasonable regulations of the Planning Board, in accordance
with General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3. Industrial and municipal uses are
subject to site plan approval.
4. Portable Storage Containers are allowed for storage/moving purposes for 90
consecutive days. No permit required, and must be removed after occupancy is
complete.
5. Office trailers and combination office/Temporary Storage facility are subject to
site plan approval from the Planning Board and will need a building permit,
electrical permit, a plumbing permit, and a permit from the Board of Health.
g. Clothing Donation Receptacles (Added 10/1/12)
Clothing donation receptacles that benefit a non-profit organization are only
allowed in business and industrial districts, on non-vacant land. Such receptacles
shall not be located in the setbacks specified for the district in which they are
located. The receptacle must not provide a visual distraction or safety hazard.
There is a limit of two such receptacles per parcel. They can be no larger than
three cubic yards and no greater than six feet in height. They must be metal,
neutral in color, and cannot be of reflective or fluorescent colors. They must only
accept articles of clothing and have clearly visible language discouraging illegal
dumping. Contact information must be permanently affixed to the receptacle and
must use at least two-inch block letters. The receptacle must be properly
maintained, with no visible damage, rust, holes, or graffiti.
3-9
All clothing donation receptacles require a permit. Applications will be accepted
and reviewed by the Department of Inspectional Services and subject to an
appropriate fee set by that office. Permits must be renewed yearly and are valid
from July 1st through June 30th of the following year. At the time of application,
the following must be provided: a description of the receptacle, a graphic
depiction of where the receptacle will be located, a schedule for emptying it, and
written permission from the property owner.
3.3.2 DISTRICT SPECIFIC ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS FOR ALL
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any use permitted herein shall be allowed,
provided that such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted for gain, except
for charitable purpose. A private garage for three automobiles shall be considered as an
accessory use, and if attached, may be located only in the side or rear yard and must
comply with setback requirements. Only one such vehicle may be a commercial vehicle,
and of not more that 10,000 pounds registered G.V.W. One recreational vehicle may be
parked on a lot if not used or occupied for a dwelling or sleeping purposes, per setback
requirements for accessory buildings, said recreational vehicle shall be stored in the side
or rear yard. (Revised 10/06/08)
3.4 NON-CONFORMING USE AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
3.4.1 A NON-CONFORMING USE is the use of any building or land lawfully
occupied at the time of the adoption of this bylaw which does not conform to the
requirements of the district in which it is located.
3.4.2 Any building, part of a building, or land which at the time of the adoption of this
bylaw is being put to a NON-CONFORMING USE may be:
a. Continued in that use or a similar use provided such use has not been
voluntarily discontinued for a period of two years. If a non-conforming use has
not been used for a period of two years or more, it shall not be re-established and
any future use shall be in conformity with this bylaw.
b. Enlarged in that use to twenty-five percent (25%) greater in volume or
area than that which existed at that time of adoption of this bylaw, and to a greater
extent when approved by the Board of Appeals, provided that such enlargement is
not substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conforming use to the
neighborhood. Limited to one (1) 25% increase. (Rev. 10/3/94)
c. Changes to a more restricted use, provided that when changed it shall not
be returned to a less restricted use.
3-10
d. Rebuilt or restored at the same location and again used as previously, in
the case of a building destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion or other
catastrophe, provided that such rebuilding or restoring shall be commenced within
twelve (12) months after such catastrophe; and further provided that the building
as restored shall not exceed in volume or area the original non-conforming
structure, by more than twenty-five percent (25%), unless approved by the Board
of Appeals.
3.5 SIDEWALKS AND CURBING
The Planning Board may require sidewalks and curbing of materials determined by the
Planning Board in those circumstances where site plan approval is otherwise required.
END OF SECTION 3
4-1
SECTION IV: DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS
4.0 GENERAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
4.0.1 No building or structure in any district shall be located, constructed, changed,
enlarged, or permitted, and no use of premises or land in any district shall be permitted
which does not conform to the density and dimensional regulations as set forth herein.
4.0.2 Reduction of Open Space: No LOT on which is located any building used for
residence purpose in any district shall be changed or reduced in area or shape so that it
does not conform to the provisions of this bylaw. This does not apply in the case of a
LOT, a portion of which is take for public use.
4.0.3 Lots on Narrow Streets: In case of LOTS fronting on a street less than 50 feet in
width, the required FRONT YARD shall be increased by one-half the difference between
fifty (50) feet and the actual width of the street.
4.0.4 Lots of Less than the Required Width or Area: On LOTS of less than the
required width or area for the district in which they are located and which have been duly
recorded by plan or deed, or assessed as separate parcels before the date of adoption of
this bylaw, the LOT area and width requirements need not apply. Any LOT on which
more than one house existed at the time, may be divided and sold to separate owners.
See also M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 6. (Rev. 10/3/94)
4.0.5 Only one residence building may be erected hereafter on any one LOT, except as
allowed in the Residence B and Agriculture: Moderate Density Districts.
4.0.6 Any new building LOT which has an on-site potable water supply and an on-site
sewerage disposal system, shall have a minimum of one (1) acre in order to comply with
Title V.(Amended 10/7/02)
4.0.7 Front Yards: With the exception of subdivisions, buildings or structures need to
be located only as far back from the street as the average of the FRONT YARD depths of
the buildings or structures nearest on either side and within the same block and district, or
within five hundred (500) feet, whichever is the lesser distance.
4.0.8 Corner Lots: In any Residence District, Agriculture, or Agriculture Moderate
Density District, the buildings or structures on LOTS having FRONTAGE on two streets
may only be located as near to the street lines as the minimum FRONT YARD depths
required on each street, except that the buildable width of such lot need not be reduced to
less than twenty-six (26) feet. No accessory building on a corner LOT need be placed
further from the street line than the FRONT YARD depth provisions for the district.
4.0.9 Projections: Nothing in this bylaw shall prevent the projection of steps, eaves,
cornices, window sills, or belt courses into any required yard.
4-2
4.0.10 Reduction of Required Open Space: No yard, lot area, or other open space
required for a building by this bylaw shall, during the existence of such building, be
occupied by or counted as open space for another building. No lot or area shall be so
reduced or diminished that the yards or other open space shall be smaller than prescribed
by this bylaw.
4.0.11 Height Provisions
a. All building heights must comply with the State Building Code.
(Amended 10/2/06)
b. A building in the Industrial C District shall not exceed the height standards
of the Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
c. Exceptions: The height provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to such
structures as belfries, chimneys, flags, television or radio poles, windmills, silos,
barns, elevator enclosures, water tanks, scenery lofts, bulkheads, and similar
structures not used for residence purposes.
d. Accessory buildings or structures, including private garages, shall not
exceed seventeen (17) feet in height, for a one-story building. A two-story
accessory building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. (Amended
10/3/05)
4.0.12 Buffer Strips
Buffer strips are required for any parcel in a Business (BA, BB) or Industrial districts. See
Table 3 for buffer strip standards.
a. The Planning Board may require a buffer area in any Business District,
Agriculture Moderate Density Overlay District, or Industrial District which abuts
a residential lot. Said buffer area may not exceed twenty-five (25) feet or onethird
(1/3) of the lot dimension abutting the residential area, whichever is
smaller.(Added 10/97)
4.1 SPECIFIC DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
The following information relates to specific requirements which are not conveyed through the
Table of Dimensional Regulations.
4.1.1 Residence B District Requirements
a. Only 10 units per acre may be constructed and a multiple DWELLING
shall contain no more than 20 units. The balance of the LOT not used for
DWELLING or parking shall be suitably planned, landscaped (see Table 3) and
maintained.
4-3
b. DELETED 5/8/06
c. A paved off-street parking space must be provided. The balance of the lot
not used for buildings, driveways, recreation facilities, or parking space shall be
suitably landscaped and maintained (see Table 3).
d. Garage space may be provided for the use of the occupants of the project
for the storage of passenger vehicles only, either within the principal buildings or
in accessory garage buildings.
e. The laying out and construction of access ways shall comply with the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations in effect at the time.
4.1.2 Business A and Business B District Dimension Requirements for Pre-Existing
Non-Conforming Uses
Side Yard: Ten (10) feet or within fifteen (15) feet of another building unless a party or
fire wall is provided. (Revised 10/06/08)
4.1.3 Industrial B Districts
All buildings used in any part for residence purposes in Industrial B Districts shall
conform to the minimum lot size and open space requirements for dwellings in Residence
B District.
4.1.4 Industrial C Districts
Site plan showing on-site parking arrangements and driveway entrances must be
approved by the Planning Board before a building permit can be issued.
4.2 Defeated at Town Meeting 10/3/94.(Creative Development & Common Drive)
4.3 PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT (Section added 10/3/94)
Planned Business Developments shall be permitted in the Business A & Business B Districts
only upon issuance of a special permit with site plan review from the special permit granting
authority.
4.3.1 General Description
A Planned Business Development shall mean a development constructed on a lot or lots
under single or consolidated ownership at the time of application, planned, developed,
operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to
4-4
accommodate retail or service uses. Planned Business Developments are permitted a
reduction in the parking requirements contained in Section 6.4.2 of off-street parking
regulations provided that the special permit and site plan review requirements of this
bylaw are met as well as additional requirements herein specified.
4.3.2 Uses Allowed by Special Permit
Uses permitted by special permit with site plan review in a Planned Business
Development shall be limited to the following:
a. Retail establishments selling principally convenience goods including but
not limited to food, drugs, and proprietary goods;
b. Retail establishments selling general merchandise, including but not
limited to dry goods, apparel, and accessories, furniture and home equipment,
small wares and hardware, and including discount and limited price variety stores;
c. Eating and drinking places not including drive-in establishments;
d. Drive-in eating establishments;
e. Sales by vending machines as a principal use;
f. Establishments selling new and/or used automobiles and trucks, new
automobile tires and other accessories, aircraft, boats, motorcycles, and household
trailers;
g. Motel;
h. Personal and consumer service establishment;
i. Membership club;
j. Professional and business offices and services;
k. Automotive repair, automobile service station or garage (not including a
junkyard or open storage of abandoned automobiles or other vehicles);
l. Miscellaneous business repair services;
m. Amusement and recreation service, outdoor;
n. Amusement and recreation service, indoor.
4-5
4.3.3 Dimensional
a. All uses in a Planned Business Development shall be in conformity with
the dimensional and density regulations set forth in the Planned Business
Development Table of Dimensional Regulations:
PLANNED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District General Business Industrial
Minimum Lot Area Per
Planned Business
Development: 5 Acres 5 Acres
Minimum Lot Width: 120 Feet 140 Feet
Minimum Frontage: 120 Feet 140 Feet
Minimum Front Yard: 30 Feet 50 Feet
Minimum Side Yard: 25 Feet 25 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard: 30 Feet 30 Feet
Maximum Permitted Height: 30 Feet 30 Feet
Maximum Permitted Stories: 2 Stories 2 Stories
Maximum Building Coverage
of Lot Based on Gross Floor
Area: 50% 50%
b. Uses shall be contained in one continuous building except that groupings
of buildings may be allowed by special permit of the board where such groupings
are consistent with the safety of the users of the development and are further
consistent with the overall intent of this section; the development shall be served
by one common parking area, exit, and entrance.
c. High-volume traffic generating uses, (uses that have a trip generation rate
of 700 vehicles per day or more,) are restricted to a total of only twenty (20%)
percent of the gross floor area of a building. These uses include, but are not
limited to, fast-food restaurants, service stations, convenience markets, and
automatic teller bank machines. Unless the applicant provides data from existing
uses, the institute for Transportation Engineers' publication, Trip Generation shall
be used to calculate the number of vehicle trips per day for proposed uses.
Building permits for additional high-volume traffic generators will not be issued
once the twenty (20%) percent threshold has been reached.
d. The screening and buffer requirements for industrial or business districts
apply to Planned Business Developments.
4-6
4.3.4 Additional Planned Business Development Requirements
In addition to the special permit and site plan review requirements of this bylaw,
the development must conform to the following:
a. The development shall be served by a public water and sewer system.
b. The development shall be served by one common parking area and by
common exit and entrance areas.
c. A reduction in parking space requirements is permitted for a Planned
Business Development.
Reduction in parking space requirements shall not exceed more than ten (10%)
percent of those required under normal application of requirements for the
particular uses proposed.
d. Except for the permitted parking space reduction, the Planned Business
Development shall comply with the off-street parking and loading regulations
contained in Section 6.4.2 of this bylaw. In addition, the development must
comply with the following:
1. Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the structure.
No parking shall be permitted within the required front yard of a structure.
2. Notwithstanding other screening and landscape requirements set
forth elsewhere in the bylaw, all front and side yards shall be landscaped.
Such landscaping shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
planting of grass, ground cover, flower beds, shrubs, hedge, or trees. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and
orderly in appearance, and free of refuse and debris. All plantings shall be
arranged and maintained so as not to obscure the vision of traffic.
3. Street frontages shall include shade trees and there shall be trees
planted for every 30 feet of street frontage, using trees no less than 2.5
inch caliper at the time of installation. In the case of an uncleared site,
existing vegetation can be preserved to achieve said objective.
4. When a parking lot is located adjacent to a public right-of-way, at
least a 10-foot wide landscaped area between the right-of-way and the
parking lot shall be provided. This area shall be landscaped with one
shade or ornamental tree planted every forty (40) feet along the right-ofway.
4-7
5. For interior parking lot areas at least two (2%) of the gross area of
the vehicular use area shall be landscaped. Developed areas shall be a
minimum of nine (9) feet in width. One shade tree for every fifteen (15)
parking spaces is required in parking lots of over 20 parking spaces.
6. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be grounds to revoke parking
lot approval and the approval for the principal use which the parking lot
serves.
7. Loading and unloading facilities shall be located in a manner so as
not to be visible from the street frontage. In addition, such facilities shall
be screened from public view from any side streets abutting the lot on
which the building is located.
e. A traffic impact statement is required for all Planned Business
Development.
4.3.5 Application for a Planned Business Development
a. The applicant must comply with the application requirements of M.G.L.
Chapter 40A, Section 9. Where the site plan constitutes a subdivision, the
development shall be subject to Planning Board approval under the subdivision
control law.
b. The applicant shall provide the Town with a performance guarantee if the
development requires subdivision. The performance guarantee is subject to
approval from the Planning Board and shall be in the form of (a) a Covenant
covenanting that before any lot is built upon or conveyed, all roads and utilities
shall be built and approved by the Planning Board, or (b) performance bond or
surety. In the case of (b), the applicant shall complete all the required
improvements at least nine (9) months prior to the expiration date of the financial
performance guarantee so that the Town will have time to draw upon said funds
and complete the unfinished work.
4.4 MILL REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (MRD) Bylaw. (Added 5/9/11)
Mill Redevelopment District. Development contained on a single parcel or adjoining parcels
that includes different and complimentary uses (both residential and non-residential) and which
provide for a variety of residential and business activities throughout the day.
4.4.1 General Provisions
a. The purpose of the Mill Redevelopment District ("MRD") is to provide for largescale
developments of at least 50 acres gross which are master-planned with
flexibility within the bounds of a district and which require a minimum of three
4-8
separate permitted land uses situated in locations favorable to the accommodation
of such developments. The district, while originally owned by one entity, may
during development phases be subdivided into smaller lots for specific uses
allowed within the district or for conveyance purposes. Consistent with this
purpose, uses in a Mill Redevelopment District shall be subject to the following
provisions, in addition to those contained elsewhere in this chapter.
b. Development shall be guided by an approved District Comprehensive Plan and
through the use of a streamlined site plan review process.
c. By the use of the public review and planning powers, the provisions of this
section are also intended to do the following:
1. Help create major mixed-use areas in planned locations at appropriate
densities, heights and mixtures of uses.
2. Encourage the preservation and rehabilitation of structures of historic
merit in the district.
3. Encourage areas devoted primarily to pedestrians by separating pedestrian
and vehicular circulation patterns and by requiring off-street parking
spaces in accordance with this objective.
4. Encourage flexibility in architectural design and building bulk, provided
that the designs and building bulk shall be compatible and harmonious
with adjoining development over the district as a whole.
5. Make recreation areas more accessible to the district's residents and
visitors.
6. In a variety of ways, create environments conducive to a higher quality of
life and environment for residents, businesses, employees and institutions
in the Town of Ludlow, thereby promoting and protecting the public
health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the
community both within and outside of the Mill Redevelopment District.
d. All development activity within the MRD shall be subject to and conform with
the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Control Law in effect in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Mass. G.L. Chapter 41 Sections 81(k) to
81(gg), inclusive, and the Ludlow Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
4.4.2 Authority
The Planning Board shall act as the MRD Comprehensive Plan-Special Permit Granting
Authority for any development proposal requiring a Special Permit subject to Section
7.0.2.
4.4.3 Allowable Uses
The only uses allowed in the Mill Redevelopment District shall be those uses listed in the
Table of Principal Uses Sections 3.2.2 and the following uses, which shall also be
4-9
allowed as a matter of right in the MRD, subject to the provisions of this Section 4.4
relating to Mill Redevelopment Districts and all other applicable provisions of the Zoning
By-Law:
a. Dwellings or multiple dwellings including multi-family. The number of dwelling
units approved under the Comprehensive Plan shall be limited to 250 units, except
that the Planning Board, in its discretion, may approve additional units provided
that the Planning Board determines that to do so will not have an adverse impact,
economic or otherwise, upon the neighborhood or upon the town.
b. Community centers that may serve the social, religious, and recreational needs of
residents and employees of the MRD and neighboring areas.
c. Private trades, businesses, professional or technical schools or colleges or other
educational institutions or uses.
d. Artist's studio.
e. Private or public theaters.
f. Recreational buildings, fitness centers, indoor or outdoor athletic fields, or multipurpose
recreational uses.
g. Parks or open spaces.
h. Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses
i. Outpatient or inpatient hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, surgical centers or
medical facilities.
j. Nursing homes or congregate-care or life-care facilities.
k. Medical office buildings, clinics or testing laboratories.
l. Business, commercial or office buildings with or without dwellings above the first
floor.
m. Call centers, data centers, or uses dedicated to housing computers, computer
servers, or telecommunications equipment including cellular telephone antennas.
n. Research Facilities in the MRD District shall be exempt from the requirements of
Section 3.3.1 (a).
o. Ground mounted and rooftop mounted solar panel installations.
4.4.4 Multiple Uses in the Same Structure
Within the MRD District there shall be no restriction on combining different categories
of use within the same building other than those imposed by the State Building Code or
other federal, state or local regulations other than the Zoning By-Law.
4.4.5 Open Space Requirements
a. Definition of Open Space.
For purposes of this Section 4.4, open space shall mean a portion of a lot or other area of
land associated with or adjacent to a building or group of buildings in relation to which it
serves to provide light and air, or scenic, recreational or similar purposes. Such space
shall, in general, be available for entry and use by the occupants of the building(s) with
which it is associated, and at times to the general public, but may include a limited
4-10
proportion of space so located and treated as to enhance the amenity of development by
providing landscaping features, screening or buffering for the occupants or neighbors or a
general appearance of openness. Open space shall include parks, plazas, lawns,
landscaped areas, decorative plantings, pedestrian ways, active and passive recreational
areas, including playgrounds, swimming pools, and undisturbed woodlands. Streets,
parking lots, driveways, service roads, loading areas, and areas normally inaccessible to
pedestrian circulation beneath pedestrian bridges, decks or shopping bridges shall not be
counted in determining required open space.
b. Mill Redevelopment District Public Open Space Requirement.
A minimum of 5% of the land area in an approved MRD Comprehensive Plan shall be
reserved or designated as open space. No development shall be allowed which would
reduce open space in an approved MRD Comprehensive Plan below 5% of the total land
area.
4.4.6 Comprehensive Plan Required
Each Comprehensive Plan for an MRD shall be approved pursuant to a Special Permit issued
by the Planning Board as provided in Section 4.4.7 below. Any proposal for development or
redevelopment of property under this Section shall require the submittal of an application for
a Special Permit that constitutes approval of an MRD Comprehensive Plan. The application
for approval of a Comprehensive Plan shall include the following elements:
a. A narrative and graphic description of existing conditions including, at a
minimum:
1. Existing buildings and their uses.
2. Natural and man-made site features.
3. Utilities.
4. Traffic and circulation patterns.
5. Underground features such as tanks and soil conditions.
b. A narrative and graphic description of the proposed development that meets the
requirements set forth in this bylaw including the following:
1. Buildings to be restored, rehabilitated, or constructed.
2. Buildings to be removed.
3. Proposed uses including the density or intensity of each proposed use.
4. Proposed internal and external traffic and circulation patterns.
5. Proposed parking needs, including provisions for shared parking between
uses, if applicable.
6. Proposed utilities including water, sewer, electrical and communications
service, storm water, and solid waste containment and disposal.
7. Proposed landscaping and signage features.
8. Proposed open space.
c. An analysis of impacts associated with the proposed development, including, at a
4-11
minimum:
1. A traffic study showing the impact of the proposed development on the
surrounding area. The traffic study shall include existing and
expected volumes at build-out, the expected directional distribution of
vehicles to and from the site, and existing and expected levels of service at
major intersections determined by the Planning Board to be impacted by the
project. The traffic study counts and the mitigation measures required as part
of an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) under the MEPA process associated
with the proposed development will be deemed sufficient and acceptable for
purposes of this impact analysis.
2. A wetlands and flood analysis showing the disposition of on-site storm water
and its impacts on properties located downstream of the site. If a study was
prepared as part of an EIR under the MEPA process, then the criteria under
this section taken into combined account with the mitigation measures
required under MEPA will be satisfied.
3. Impacts upon the delivery of public services, including schools, public safety,
municipal utilities.
4. Impacts upon historic properties or districts, if any. If such a study was
prepared as part of an Environmental Impact Report under the MEPA process,
it shall be deemed as sufficient to satisfy this requirement.
5. Potential property taxes and other revenues that may be generated by the
project.
4.4.7 Application Process and Requirements
(1) A Comprehensive Plan for a Mill Redevelopment District (MRD) shall be approved
through the submission of an application for the issuance of a Special Permit by the Planning
Board. The issuance of the Special Permit shall constitute the approval of the
Comprehensive Plan for the MRD that is the subject of the application for a Special Permit.
(2) For the purpose of streamlining the permitting process, the Planning Board shall follow
the provisions of MGL C. 43D if applicable.
(3) Prior to submittal of a formal application and to minimize expense and delay for the
applicant, the Planning Board shall request the presentation of informal drawings of the
Comprehensive Plan for the MRD at a regular meeting of the Board. The Board and the
applicant may review such informal drawings, without prejudice, to identify potential areas
of concern and agreement. This meeting shall not be advertised as a formal public hearing
and no vote of Planning Board shall take place.
4.4.8 Review Criteria
The Planning Board shall review and act upon an application for a Special Permit
approving a Comprehensive Plan in accordance with Section 7.0.4 (Special Permit) of
this Bylaw
4-12
4.4.9 Procedural Steps
The Planning Board, in its discretion, may require that the applicant engage the services
of consultants or professional engineers to review and provide opinions as to the
adequacy of proposed infrastructure, systems, and mitigation measures presented by the
applicant. The Planning Board shall maintain a list of qualified consultants or
professional engineers whose work is acceptable and the actual consultant or professional
engineer shall be selected from this list by the applicant. The consultant or professional
engineer shall be provided with a detailed scope of services for the review by the
Planning Board and shall submit a fixed fee for the services for approval by the Planning
Board and the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for the payment of the agreed
upon fee at the time of delivery of the consultant’s report. The Planning Board may
accept or reject the opinion and advice of the consultant or professional engineer if it
concludes that to do so is in the best interest of the town.
4.4.10 Site Plan Approval Process
a. Following the issuance of a Special Permit for a MRD Comprehensive Plan but prior to
issuance of a building permit for each particular project in the Mill Redevelopment
District that consists of the construction of a new structure, the project proponent shall
receive site plan approval/disapproval from the Administrative Review Committee. The
Administrative Review Committee shall have as its voting members the following:
1. The Director of Public Works, and one member or designee of the Board of
Public Works
2. Building Commissioner, or designee
3. Town Planner, or designee
4. Two members or designees of the Planning Board
5. Fire Chief, or designee
6. Police Chief or designee
7. One member or designee of the Conservation Commission
8. One member or designee of the Historical Commission. (Added 10/5/15)
Designated members need not be standing members and may be designated based upon
availability or specific expertise required for site plan review.
b. A quorum for a meeting of the Administrative Review Committee shall be five members
and approval of a site plan shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of those
present.
c. A site plan submitted for review shall conform substantially to the MRD Comprehensive
Plan approved by the Planning Board and shall only include Minor Variations as
described in Section 4.4.14 below. Approval by the Administrative Review Committee is
the only requirement for the site plan review. No public comment process is required
when the site plan conforms substantially to the Comprehensive Plan. If the
4-13
Administrative Review Committee determines that a Major Change has occurred in the
Comprehensive Plan, as described in Section 4.4.14 below, the provisions of Section
4.4.14 shall be applicable.
4.4.11 Required Site Plan Contents
a. Copies of a site plan, in hard copy or electronic format, shall be submitted to the
Administrative Review Committee at the office of the Town Planner, in numbers
determined by the Committee. Within 15 calendar days of the submittal date the
Committee shall review the plan. Within 21 days following the submittal of the plan the
Committee shall meet to discuss the plan. Within 30 days of submittal of the plan the
Committee shall render a decision on the site plan, in accordance with Section 4.4.13,
unless the Committee and the applicant agree to extend the date of decision.
b. All plans submitted for site plan review under this section shall be prepared by
qualified professionals, including a registered engineer, registered architect and/or
registered landscape architect, and shall include the items and information required
pursuant to Section 7.1.5. Instead of a registered land surveyor seal, a locus plan will
need to be provided for each new site within the total site area.
4.4.12 Modifications to the Site Plan
As part of its review process, the Administrative Review Committee may request that the
applicant make changes to the proposed site plan to bring it into substantial conformance
with the Master Plan, with only Minor Variations from the Comprehensive Plan as
provided in Section 4.4.14 below.
4.4.13 Final Action
The Administrative Review Committee’s final action, in writing, shall consist of the
following:
(a) Approval of a site plan based upon a determination that the proposed project
conforms substantially with the Comprehensive Plan, with only Minor Variations;
(b) Approval of the site plan subject to any conditions imposed by the Administrative
Review Committee. Any such conditions shall be limited to changes necessary to
achieve substantial conformance with the Comprehensive Plan with only Minor
Variations; or
(c) Disapproval of the site plan based on a determination that the proposed project
does not conform substantially with the Comprehensive Plan with only Minor Variations
but instead either does not conform with the Comprehensive Plan or includes Major
Changes.
The applicant shall be entitled to appeal the final action taken by the Administrative Review
Committee on the proposed site plan to the Planning Board by filing notice of appeal with the
Planning Board within ten (10) days following the issuance of the Administrative Review
Committee's final written action with respect to the proposed site plan. The Planning Board shall
4-14
review and consider the proposed site plan and take final action on the appeal within thirty (30)
days following any such appeal. Any action by the Planning Board shall be subject to further
appeal to Hampden County Superior Court, provided that notice of appeal is filed with the Town
Clerk within ten (10) days following the decision of the Planning Board that is being appealed
from and an action is commenced in Hampden County Superior Court within twenty (20) days
from the date of the decision of the Planning Board that is being appealed from.
4.4.14 Changes to the Comprehensive Plan
a. It is anticipated that during the course of the development of an MRD District pursuant to
a Comprehensive Plan approved through the issuance of a Special Permit there will be
changes to the Comprehensive Plan. Changes to an approved Master Plan shall be
categorized as either Minor Variations or Major Changes.
b. Minor Variations shall consist of the following:
(a) an increase of less than twenty (20%) percent in the total improved square footage in
the Mill Redevelopment District;
(b) changes in particular uses in particular locations, provided that there is no overall
change in the proposed use categories that are included in the MRD Comprehensive
Plan; and
(c) a change in the size or location of any proposed use, roadway or driveway which, in
the opinion of the Administrative Review Committee, does not have a significant
impact on the project and will not require mitigation by the applicant.
No Planning Board action shall be required with respect to a Minor Variation identified by the
Administrative Review Committee.
c. Major Changes shall consist of the following:
(a) an increase of more than twenty (20%) percent in the total improved square footage in
the Mill Redevelopment District;
(b) changes in proposed use categories or types that result in one or more uses not
included as part of the existing Comprehensive Plan proposed for the MRD; or
(c) a change in the size or location of any proposed use, roadway or driveway which, in
the opinion of the Administrative Review Committee, has a significant impact on the
project and will require mitigation by the applicant.
Major Changes shall require the approval of the Planning Board pursuant to an amendment to the
Special Permit issued by the Planning Board that constitutes approval of the Comprehensive
Plan. Amendments to the Special Permit shall require a public hearing and shall be subject to all
of the requirements for the issuance of a Special Permit that are set forth in this Bylaw.
4-15
4.4.15 Subdivision of Property
Where there are established pre-existing buildings, as of the date of the approved Comprehensive
Plan on the Mill Redevelopment property, the land on which they are located may be subdivided,
allowing the pre-existing buildings to be placed on their own individual parcel. The newly
created parcel is exempt from Table 2 Table of Dimensional Regulations, specifically the Mill
Redevelopment District Dimensional Regulations. The only prerequisite would be to meet a 5
foot setback from newly established property lines. The 5 foot setback may be waived by the
Planning Board with recommendation from the Building Commissioner. If a new building is to
be constructed on a parcel with a pre-existing building the new building will need to meet the
setbacks for the Mill Redevelopment District, unless waived by the Planning Board, on
recommendation from the Building Commissioner. New parcels that have no pre-existing
buildings will need to meet the Mill Redevelopment District Dimensional Regulations as set out
in Table 2.
END OF SECTION 4
5-1
SECTION V: OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Article #2: To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Ludlow by
adding the Floodplain District Bylaw to Section 5.0, as follows:
SECTION V: OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
5.0 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BYLAW (Amended 5/13/13)
5.0.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Floodplain District is to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare, to protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic flooding, to
preserve the natural flood control characteristics, and the flood storage capacity of the
floodplain and to preserve and maintain the groundwater table and water recharge areas
within the floodplain.
5.0.2 District Delineation: The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay
district. The District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Ludlow
designated as Zone A and AE on the Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the
Hampden County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Ludlow are panel
numbers 25013C0207E, 25013C0209E, 25013C0217E, 25013C0226E, 25013C0227E,
25013C0228E, 25013C0229E, 25013C0231E, 25013C0232E, 25013C0233E,
25013C0234E, 25013C0236E, 25013C0237E, 25013C0240E, 25013C0241E,
25013C0242E, and 25013C0245E dated July 16, 2013. The exact boundaries of the
District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and
further defined by the Hampden County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July
16, 2013. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file
with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Commissioner, Conservation
Commission and the Department of Public Works. (Amended 5/13/13)
5.0.3 Use Regulations:
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted as a
right or by special permit, must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the
Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:
- Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which
address floodplain and coastal high hazard areas;
- Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);
5-2
- Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
- Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage,
DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5);
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state
regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of
these state regulations. (Amended 5/13/13)
5.0.4 Permitted Uses
The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood
flows shall be permitted provided they do not require structures, fill or storage of
materials or equipment:
a. Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc.
b. Forestry and nursery uses.
c. Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.
d. Conservation of water, plants, wildlife.
e. Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths.
f. Temporary non-residential structures used in connection with fishing,
growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises.
g. Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
5.0.5 Special Permits in Floodplain District (Amended 5/13/13)
No structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved,
reconstructed (except as provided in Section 5.0.3 above), or otherwise created or moved;
no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated, or transferred, unless a Special
Permit is granted by the Planning Board. Said Board may issue a Special Permit
hereunder (subject to other provisions of the bylaw – See Section 7.0) if the application is
compliant with the following provisions:
a. The proposed use shall comply in all respects to the provisions of the
underlying District in which the land is located.
b. In accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9, Special Permits may
only be issued following a public hearing which must be held within 65 days after
a Special Permit application is filed with the Special Permit Granting Authority.
5-3
The applicant shall also file a copy of the Special Permit application forthwith
with the Town Clerk. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall take final
action on an application for Special Permit within 90 days following the public
hearing. Failure to do so shall constitute approval. A unanimous vote of a threemember
board and a vote of at least 4 members of a five-member board is
required.
c. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures and other development are prohibited in the
floodway unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by
the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100 year flood.
d. The Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions as it
finds necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the
occupants of the proposed use.
e. In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway
data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in
any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
f. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other
developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A zones.
g. All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
i) such proposals minimize flood damage;
ii) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
iii) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
h. In a riverine situation, the Conservation Commission shall notify the following
of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
 Adjacent Communities
 NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
 NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
5-4
5.1 BUSINESS IN THE AGRICULTURE: MODERATE DENSITY OVERLAY
DISTRICT
Special Permits for business uses in the AGRICULTURE: MODERATE DENSITY OVERLAY
DISTRICT, if consistent with this bylaw in all other respects, shall be granted only if the
Planning Board determines that the proposal's benefits to the Town or vicinity will outweigh any
adverse effects, after consideration of the following:
5.1.1 Location
a. The proposal will be located near uses which are similar to the proposed
use or, if not, the nearby uses will be ones likely to benefit from rather than be
damaged by having the proposed activity nearby.
b. Public water supply will be available or will be made available without
increased cost to the Town and serving this use at this location will pose no
problems which are unusual.
c. If the proposed project will employ more than 10 full-time people, then
public sewer will be available or will be made available without increased cost to
the Town and serving this use will pose no problems to the Town which are
unusual.
d. The proposal will not cause environmental stress from erosion, siltation,
ground water or surface water contamination, or habitat disturbance on the site.
5.1.2 Activity Type and Mix
a. The proposed activity will contribute to the diversity of services available
to the Town.
b. Any retail services will be designed to serve the Town's population rather
than a larger region.
c. The proposal will add little to traffic congestion, considering the location,
the number of trips likely to be attracted, and any special access provisions
committed (e.g. bike storage facilities, employee ridesharing) and uses with an
average number of 100 trips generated per day per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
d. The proposal will pose no environmental hazard because of use or storage
of explosive, flammable, toxic, or radioactive materials.
e. The proposal will not result in air pollution or excessive noise.
5-5
5.1.3 Site Design
a. Scenic views from public ways and other developed properties will be
considerately treated in the design of the site.
b. Topographic change will be in keeping with the surrounding topography.
c. Removal of existing trees or other important natural features will be
avoided.
d. Pedestrian movements within the site and to other places will be well
provided for.
e. Vehicular movement within the site will be safe and convenient, and
arranged so as to not disturb abutting properties.
f. Visibility of parking and service areas from public streets will be
minimized through facility location and the use of topography and vegetation.
(Amended 10/2/06)
g. Potential disturbances such as noise, glare, and odors will be effectively
confined to the premises through buffering or other means.
h. Water quality will be protected through appropriate location and design of
disposal facilities in relation to water bodies and site geology.
i. One driveway per business shall be permitted as a matter of right. Curb
cuts shall be limited to the minimum width for safe entering and exiting, and shall
in no case exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width.
j. The Planning Board may waive up to 25% of the required parking spaces
under Section 6.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS in the Agriculture Moderate
Density District. (Added 10/1/18)
5.1.4 Facility Design
a. Scenic views from public ways and other developed properties will be
considerately treated in the design of the building(s).
b. Primary exterior materials will match the appearance of materials
commonly found on existing buildings within the Town.
c. Domestic scale will be maintained in the building(s)' design through
massing devices such as breaks in walls and root planes and through the design of
architectural features.
5-6
5.2 AIRCRAFT FLIGHT REGULATIONS
5.2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Aircraft Flight Overlay District is to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to protect human life and property from hazards of aircraft noise
and accident potential created by the town's proximity to Westover Air Force Base.
5.2.2 District Delineation
The Aircraft Flight District is delineated on the Aircraft Flight Overlay District Map
dated January 15, 1992.
5.2.3 Use Regulations
The Aircraft Flight Overlay District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts. See Section 3.2.7 for prohibited uses.
LUDLOW WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICT
5.3 WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICT
5.3.1 Purpose of District
To promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community by protecting and
preserving the surface and groundwater resources of the Town and the region from any
use of land or buildings which may reduce the quality of its water resources. All
activities must comply with 310 CMR 22.00 Drinking Water Regulations, and MGL
Chapter 21G Water Management Act. (Amended 10/7/02)
5.3.2 Definitions
a. Groundwater: All water found beneath the surface of the ground.
b. Watershed: Lands lying adjacent to water courses and surface water
bodies which create the catchment or drainage areas of such water courses and
bodies.
c. Leachable Wastes: Waste materials including solid wastes, sludge and
pesticide and fertilizer wastes capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to
the environment.
d. Impervious Surfaces: Materials or structures on or above the ground that
do not allow precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
5-7
e. Trucking Terminal: Business which services or repairs commercial
trucks which are not owned by the business.
f. Hazardous Waste: A waste which is hazardous to human health or the
environment. Hazardous wastes have been designated by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency under 40 CFR 250 and the Regulations of the Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Management Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 21C.
5.3.3 District Delineation
a. The Water Supply Protection District is herein established to include all
lands within the Town of Ludlow lying within the watershed areas of the
Springfield Reservoir and the Nash Hill Reservoir which now or may in the future
provide public water supply. The map entitled "Ludlow Water Supply Protection
District", Town of Ludlow, on file with the Town Clerk, delineates the boundaries
of the district.
b. Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of
proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where they
should properly be located.
5.3.4 Prohibited Uses
a. Business and industrial uses, not agricultural, which manufacture, use,
process, store, or dispose of hazardous materials or wastes as a principal activity,
including but not limited to metal plating, chemical manufacturing, wood
preserving, furniture stripping, dry cleaning, and auto body repair, or which
involve on-site disposal of process waste waters.
b. Trucking terminals, bus terminals, car washes, motor vehicle gasoline
sales, automotive service and repair shops.
c. Solid waste landfills, dumps, auto recycling, junk and salvage yards, with
the exception of the disposal of brush or stumps.
d. Underground storage and/or transmission of petroleum products excluding
liquefied petroleum gas.
e. Outdoor storage of salt, de-icing materials, pesticides or herbicides.
5-8
f. Dumping or disposal on the ground, in water bodies, or in residential
septic systems of any toxic chemical, including but not limited to septic system
cleaners which contain toxic chemicals such as methylene chloride and 1-1-1
trichloroethane, or other household hazardous wastes. (See list of prohibited
chemicals at Board of Health or Town Clerk's Office).
g. New uncontained storage of manure, fertilizer, road de-icing, and sanding
materials;
h. New facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste;
i. New solid waste combustion or handling facilities;
j. New sand and gravel excavation operations;
k. New disposal of snow from outside Zone A that contains de-icing
materials;
l. New junk, salvage, or motor vehicle repair operations;
m. New activities with greater than 15% impervious surface, 20% with
artificial recharge or 2500 S.F.; and
n. New commercial outdoor washing of vehicles, new commercial car
washes.
5.3.5 Restricted Uses
a. Excavation for removal of earth, sand, gravel, and other soils shall not
extend closer than five (5) feet above the annual high groundwater table. A
monitoring well shall be installed by the property owner to verify groundwater
elevations. This section shall not apply to excavations incidental to permitted
uses, including but not limited to providing for the installation or maintenance of
structural foundations, freshwater ponds, utility conduits or on-site sewage
disposal.
(1) Access road(s) to extractive operation sites shall include a gate or
other secure mechanism to restrict public access to the site.
(2) Upon completion of earth removal operations, all altered areas
shall be restored with topsoil and vegetative plantings. All fine materials,
such as clays and silts, removed as part of the earth removal operation and
leftover as by-products, shall be disposed of off-site to prevent damage to
aquifer recharge characteristics.
5-9
b. Sodium chloride for ice control shall be used at the minimum salt to sand
ratio which is consistent with the public highway safety requirements, and its use
shall be eliminated on roads which may be closed to the public in winter.
c. Salt storage areas shall be covered and be located on a paved surface, with
berms to prevent run-off from leaving the site.
d. Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, lawn care chemicals, or other leachable
materials shall be used with manufacturer's label instructions and all other
necessary precautions to minimize adverse impacts on surface and groundwater.
e. Above-ground storage tanks for oil, gasoline, or other petroleum products
shall be placed in a building, either in a concrete basement, or other indoor
location on a diked, impermeable surface sufficient to contain the volume of the
tank plus 10% to prevent spills or leaks from reaching groundwater.
f. Installation of on-site sewage disposal systems shall not be installed in
areas where soil percolation rates are faster than two minutes per inch without
additional measures imposed by the Board of Health. (See Board of Health
Regulations)
5.3.6 Drainage
For commercial and industrial uses, to the extent feasible, run-off from impervious
surfaces shall be recharged on the site by being diverted toward areas covered with
vegetation for surface infiltration. Such run-off shall not be discharged directly to rivers,
streams, or other surface water bodies. Dry wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and
sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination. All recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner(s).
5.3.7 Special Permit Uses
a. Uses Allowed by Special Permit
The following uses may be allowed by Special Permit obtained from the Planning
Board:
(1) Commercial and industrial uses which are allowed in the Table of
Uses;
(2) Any enlargement, intensification, or alteration of an existing
commercial or industrial use;
(3) The rendering impervious of more than 20% of any single
residential lot.
5-10
5.3.8 Requirements for special permit in the Water Supply Protection District
The applicant shall file six (6) copies of a site plan prepared by a qualified professional
with the Planning Board. The site plan shall at a minimum include the following
information where pertinent.
a. A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and other potentially
hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than
those associated with normal household use.
b. Those businesses using or storing such hazardous materials shall file a
hazardous materials management plan with the Planning Board, Hazardous
Materials Coordinator, Fire Chief, and Board of Health which shall include:
(1) Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials
or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage,
corrosion, leakage or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up
procedures.
(2) Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and
wastes with impervious floor surfaces.
(3) Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30, including obtaining an
EPA identification number from the Mass Department of Environmental
Protection.
c. Drainage recharge features and provisions to prevent loss of recharge.
d. Provisions to control soil erosion and sedimentation, soil compaction, and
to prevent seepage from sewer pipes.
5.3.9 Additional procedures for Special Permit in the Water Supply Protection
District
a. The Planning Board shall follow all special permit procedures contained in
Section 5.1
b. The Planning Board may grant the required special permit only upon
finding that the proposed use meets the following standards and those specified in
Section 5.1 of this bylaw. The proposed use must:
(1) in no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect the
existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is available in the
Water Supply Protection District, and;
5-11
(2) be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils,
topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural
characteristics of the site to be developed.
c. The Planning Board shall not grant a special permit under this section
unless the petitioner's application materials include, in the Board's opinion,
sufficiently detailed, definite and credible information to support positive findings
in relation to the standards given in this section.
5.3.10 Requires Buffer strip Along River and Stream Banks
The following requirements shall apply to all uses allowed by right or by Special Permit:
a. A buffer strip extending one hundred (100) feet in width landward from
the bank of all rivers and streams shall be required for all land within the Water
Supply Protection District. If any lot existing at the time of adoption of this
bylaw does not contain sufficient depth measured landward from the riverbank to
provide a one hundred foot buffer strip, the buffer strip may be reduced to 50% of
the available lot depth, measured landward from the river or stream bank.
b. The buffer strip shall include trees and shall be kept in a natural condition.
c. No buildings nor structures shall be erected, enlarged, altered or moved
from within the buffer strip.
d. On-site waste water disposal systems shall be located no less than 150 feet
from the normal high water mark of a river or stream.
5.3.11 Non-conforming Use
Non-conforming uses which were lawfully existing, begun, or in receipt of a building or
special permit prior to the first publication of notice of public hearing for this bylaw may
be continued. Such non-conforming uses may be extended or altered, as specified in
M.G.L. Ch. 40A, Section 6, provided that there is a finding by the Planning Board that
such change does not increase the danger of surface or groundwater pollution from such
use.
5.4 EAST STREET REVITALIZATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (Title amended
10/3/05)
5.4.1 Purpose:
To encourage the preservation and revitalization of the East Street Corridor.
5-12
5.4.2 Definition of Area:
The East Street Revitalization Zone is that portion of East Street running from its
intersection with State Street to its intersection with King Street on its northerly side and
Stevens Street on its southerly side. This district would include non-industrial parcels
that abut East Street and lie partly or completely within 200 feet of East Street.
5.4.3 Deleted 10/3/05
5.4.4 Allowed Uses:
a. Residential:
(1) Single or multi-family dwellings and accessory buildings as
permitted in Residence B zones (including Home Occupations and
Accessory Apartments with Special Permit Approval.) (Amended 10/3/05)
(2) Combined business/residential structures incorporating only
allowed commercial uses.
b. Commercial:
(1) Commercial enterprises as permitted in Business A zones, subject
to Site Plan Approval.
(2) Certain other commercial enterprises as described in the following
list of Permitted Uses, subject to Site Plan Approval.
(3) Other commercial enterprises as listed: (Amended 10/3/05)
Apartments
Arcades/Billiard Halls
Athletic Clubs
Barber/Hair Styling/Personal Care Shops
Children’s Care Facilities
Driving Schools
Food Preparation
Funeral Homes
Libraries/Museums
Offices
Open-Air Parking Facilities
Restaurants/Lounges/Cafés/Bars
Retail Shops
Services
Theaters
5-13
c. Other
(1) Government Offices
(2) Business or Civic Organizations
(3) Schools, Churches, and other not for profit public facilities
5.4.5 Prohibited Uses:
a. Hotels, Motels, Lodging
b. Auto repair, auto sales, auto bodies, auto service stations.
c. Transportation centers
d. Veterinary/Pet Care Facilities
SMART GROWTH OVERLAY DISTRICT BYLAW (Added 10/7/13)
SECTION 5.5 SMART GROWTH OVERLAY DISTRICT (SGOD)
5.5.1 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Section 5.5 are:
1. To establish a Smart Growth Overlay District and encourage smart growth in accordance
with the purposes of M.G. L. Chapter 40R;
2. To encourage new development close to existing infrastructure and services in order to
protect open space and farmland in the outer reaches of the town;
3. To support private developers in their efforts to provide a range of safe, quality housing
options for individuals and families of all ages and incomes;
4. To develop new homes which are consistent with the character of Ludlow’s existing
neighborhoods
5. To encourage development types as delineated in the 2011 Master Plan
5.5.2 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Section 5.5, the following definitions shall apply. All capitalized terms shall
be defined in accordance with the definitions established under the Enabling Laws or Section
5.5.2, or as set forth in the Plan Approval Authority Regulations. To the extent that there is any
conflict between the definitions set forth in Section 5.5.2 or the PAA Regulations and the
Enabling Laws, the terms of the Enabling Laws shall govern.
Affordable Homeownership Unit - an Affordable Housing unit required to be sold to an Eligible
Household.
Affordable Housing - housing that is affordable to and occupied by Eligible Households.
5-14
Affordable Housing Restriction - a deed restriction of Affordable Housing meeting statutory
requirements in M.G.L. Chapter 184, Section 31 and the requirements of Section 5.5.6.5 of this
Bylaw.
Affordable Rental Unit - an Affordable Housing unit required to be rented to an Eligible
Household.
Applicant – the individual or entity that submits a Project for Plan Approval.
As-of-right - a use allowed under Section 5.5.5 without recourse to a special permit, variance,
zoning amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A Project that requires Plan Approval by the
PAA pursuant to Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13 shall be considered an as-of-right Project.
Bicycle Parking Facilities - Bicycle racks or other provision for indoor or outdoor storage of
bicycles. Storage must allow for the locking of bicycles to racks or inside storage containers.
Department or DHCD - the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development, or any successor agency.
Design Standards – means provisions of Section 5.5.13 made applicable to Projects within the
SGOD that are subject to the Plan Approval process.
Eligible Household - an individual or household whose annual income is less than 80 percent of
the area-wide median income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's
rules for attribution of income to assets.
Enabling Laws - G.L. Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00.
Mixed-Use Development Project – a Project containing a mix of residential uses and nonresidential
uses, as allowed in Table 1, and subject to all applicable provisions of this Section
5.5.
Monitoring Agent – the local housing authority or other qualified housing entity designated by
the PAA pursuant to Section 5.5.6.2, to review and implement the Affordability requirements
affecting Projects under Section 5.5.6.0.
PAA Regulations – the rules and regulations of the PAA adopted pursuant to Section 5.5.9.3.
Plan Approval - standards and procedures which all Plan Approval Projects in the SGOD must
meet pursuant to Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13 and the Enabling Laws.
Plan Approval Authority (PAA) - The local approval authority authorized under Section 5.5.9.2
to conduct the Plan Approval process for purposes of reviewing Project applications and issuing
Plan Approval decisions within the SGOD.
5-15
Project - a Residential Project or Mixed-use Development Project undertaken within the SGOD
in accordance with the requirements of this Section 5.5.
Residential Project - a Project that consists solely of residential, parking, and accessory uses, as
further defined in Section 5.5.5.
SGOD – the Smart Growth Overlay District established in accordance with this Section 5.5.
Zoning Bylaw - the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Ludlow.
5.5.3 OVERLAY DISTRICT
5.5.3.1 Establishment. The Ludlow Smart Growth Overlay District, hereinafter referred
to as the “SGOD,” is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 226
acres in size that is superimposed over the underlying zoning district(s) and is
shown on the Zoning Map as set forth on the map entitled “Ludlow Smart Growth
Overlay District, dated May 12, 2011, prepared by Pioneer Valley Planning
Commission.” This map is hereby made a part of the Zoning By-law and is on
file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
5.5.3.2 Sub-Districts. The SGOD contains the following sub-districts:
a. East Street Corridor Mixed Use Sub-District
b. Riverside Mixed Use Sub-District
c. Ludlow Mills Mixed Use Sub-District
5.5.4 APPLICABILITY OF SGOD
5.5.4.1 Applicability of SGOD. An applicant may seek development of a Project located
within the SGOD in accordance with the provisions of the Enabling Laws and this
Section 5.5, including a request for Plan Approval by the PAA, if necessary. In
such case, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Zoning Bylaw, such
application shall not be subject to any other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw,
including limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential uses
related to a rate of development or phased growth limitation or to a local
moratorium on the issuance of such permits, or to other building permit or
dwelling unit limitations.
5.5.4.2 Underlying Zoning. The SGOD is an overlay district superimposed on all
underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use, dimension, and all other
provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the underlying zoning district(s) shall
remain in full force, except for those Projects undergoing development pursuant
to this Section 5.5. Within the boundaries of the SGOD, a developer may elect
either to develop a Project in accordance with the requirements of the Smart
Growth Zoning, or to develop a project in accordance with requirements of the
5-16
regulations for use, dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw
governing the underlying zoning district(s).
5.5.4.3 Administration, Enforcement, and Appeals. The provisions of this Section 5.5
shall be administered by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, except as otherwise
provided herein. Any legal appeal arising out of a Plan Approval decision by the
PAA under Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13 shall be governed by the applicable
provisions of M.G. L. Chapter 40R. Any other request for enforcement or appeal
arising under this Section 5.5 shall be governed by the applicable provisions of
M. G. L. Chapter 40A.
5.5.5 PERMITTED USES
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth in
Table 1 as follows:
P Use Permitted by Right in the District
PA Use Permitted with Plan Approval in the District from the Planning Board in
accordance with Section 5.5.9
N Not permitted
All Projects in a SGOD must have a residential use. Retail, service, and manufacturing uses will
not be permitted without a residential component.
Use regulations for the following Sub-Districts are detailed in Table 1:
ES East Street Corridor Mixed Use Sub-District
RS Riverside Mixed Use Sub-District
LM Ludlow Mills Mixed Use Sub-District
5-17
Table 1: Table of Use Regulations
Use Type Standards and Conditions ES RS LM
RESIDENTIAL
Single Family Detached N N N
Townhouse Townhouses will be built on
individual lots with zero side
setback requirements.
PA PA N
Two and Three Family N PA N
Multi-Family (over 4 units) PA PA PA
Assisted Living PA N PA
BUSINESS**
Dining Establishments Not including drive-in or drivethrough
restaurants
PA PA PA
Office Building PA PA PA
Banks Not including drive-in or drivethrough
banks
PA PA PA
Retail PA PA PA
Services Auto Body Shop, Auto Sales Lot
and Auto Service Station and
Repair Service are not permitted.
PA PA PA
MIXED USE**
Neighborhood scale mixed use
development projects, allowing two
or more uses within the same
building
PA PA N
Downtown scale mixed use
development projects, allowing two
or more uses within the same
building
N PA PA
INDUSTRIAL**
Light Manufacturing N N PA
General Industrial Uses N N PA
GOVERNMENT, INSTITUTIONAL & PUBLIC SERVICE
Religious PA PA PA
Educational PA PA PA
Parks, Playgrounds, Recreation &
Community Centers
P P P
Municipal Government Buildings PA PA PA
** Not permitted unless within a Mixed-Use Development Project
Additional notes:
a. All uses not specifically mentioned in Table 1 are prohibited.
b. The total gross floor area devoted to non-residential uses within a mixed-use development project shall be less than 50 % of the total gross
floor area of the Project.
c. Neighborhood scale shall mean buildings with a maximum height of three (3) stories.
d. Downtown scale shall mean a maximum height of five (5) stories.
e. The minimum allowable As-of-right density requirements for residential uses specified in Section 5.5.7 shall apply to the residential portion
of any Mixed-Use Development Project.
5-18
5.5.6 HOUSING AND HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
5.5.6.1 Number of Affordable Housing Units. For all Projects, not less than twenty
percent (20%) of housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing. For
purposes of calculating the number of units of Affordable Housing required
within a Project, any fractional unit of 0.5 or greater shall be deemed to constitute
a whole unit. Unless the PPA provides a waiver on the basis that the Project is
not otherwise financially feasible, twenty-five percent (25%) of rental dwelling
units constructed in a rental Project must be Affordable Rental Units. A Project
shall not be segmented to evade the Affordability threshold set forth above.
5.5.6.2 Monitoring Agent. A Monitoring Agent which may be the local housing
authority or other qualified housing entity shall be designated by the PAA. In a
case where the Monitoring Agent cannot adequately carry out its administrative
duties, upon certification of this fact by the designating official or by DHCD such
duties shall devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified housing
entity designated by the designating official. In any event, such Monitoring
Agent shall ensure the following, both prior to issuance of a Building Permit for a
Project within the SGOD, and on a continuing basis thereafter, as the case may
be:
1. Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly computed; rental
amounts of Affordable Rental Units are properly computed;
2. Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Housing is
properly and reliably determined;
3. The housing marketing and resident selection plan conform to all
requirements have been approved by DHCD specifically with regard to
conformance with M.G.L. c.40R and 760 CMR 59.00 and are properly
administered;
4. Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen in accordance
with the housing marketing and resident selection plan with appropriate
unit size for each household being properly determined and proper
preference being given; and
5. Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements of this section
are approved by DHCD specifically with regard to conformance with
M.G.L. c.40R and 760 CMR. 59.00, and recorded with the Hampden
County Registry of Deeds.
5.5.6.3 Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Plan Approval for a
Project within the SGOD submitted under Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13 (or, for
Projects not requiring Plan Approval, prior to submission of any application for a
Building Permit), the Applicant must submit the following documents to the PAA
and the Monitoring Agent:
5-19
1. Evidence that the Project complies with the cost and eligibility
requirements of Section 5.5.6.4;
2. Project plans that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
Section 5.5.6.5; and
3. A form of Affordable Housing Restriction that satisfies the requirements
of Section 5.5.6.6.
These documents in combination, to be submitted with an application for Plan
Approval (or, for Projects not requiring Plan Approval, prior to submission of any
application for a Building Permit), shall include details about construction related
to the provision, within the development, of units that are accessible to the
disabled.
5.5.6.4 Cost and Eligibility Requirements. Affordable Housing shall comply with the
following requirements:
1. Affordable Housing required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented
or sold to and occupied only by Eligible Households. If approved by
DHCD, preference will be given to local residents.
2. For an Affordable Rental Unit, the monthly rent payment, including
utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum monthly
income permissible for an Eligible Household, assuming a family size
equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless other
affordable program rent limits approved by the DHCD shall apply.
3. For an Affordable Homeownership Unit the monthly housing payment,
including mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance,
property taxes, condominium and/or homeowner's association fees,
insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30 percent of the maximum
monthly income permissible for an Eligible Household, assuming a family
size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one.
Prior to the granting of any Building Permit or Plan Approval for a Project, the
Applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Monitoring Agent, that the
method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are
computed shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability
applicable to the Town of Ludlow.
5.5.6.5 Design and Construction. Units of Affordable Housing shall be finished
housing units. Unless otherwise approved by DHCD, under the 40R Program,
units of Affordable Housing shall be dispersed proportionately throughout all
residential unit types contained within the Project of which they are part and be
comparable in initial construction quality and exterior design to the other housing
units in the Project. The total number of bedrooms in the Affordable Housing
shall be at least proportionate to the total number of bedrooms in all units in the
5-20
Project of which the Affordable Housing is part.
5.5.6.6 Affordable Housing Restriction. Each Project shall be subject to an Affordable
Housing Restriction which is approved by DHCD for 40R purposes, recorded
with Hampden County Registry of Deeds or Registry of the Land Court and
which contains the following:
1. Specification of the term of the affordable housing restriction which shall
be no less than fifty years;
2. The name and address of the Monitoring Agent with a designation of its
power to monitor and enforce the affordable housing restriction;
3. A description of the Affordable Homeownership Unit, if any, by address
and number of bedrooms; and a description of the overall quantity and
number of bedrooms and number of bedroom types of Affordable Rental
Units in a Project or portion of a Project which are rental. Such restriction
shall apply individually to the specifically identified Affordable
Homeownership Unit and shall apply to a percentage of rental units of a
rental Project or the rental portion of a Project without specific unit
identification;
4. Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection plan, to which the
Affordable Housing is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair
housing marketing program, including public notice and a fair resident
selection process. If approved by DHCD, the housing marketing and
selection plan may provide for preferences in resident; the plan shall
designate the household size appropriate for a unit with respect to
bedroom size and provide that the preference for such Unit shall be given
to a household of the appropriate size;
5. A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the initial sale or
initial rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of
Eligible Households compiled in accordance with the housing marketing
and selection plan;
6. Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental unit or the
maximum resale price of a homeownership will be set;
7. A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside in Affordable
Housing and that notice of any lease of any Affordable Rental Unit shall
be given to the Monitoring Agent;
8. Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and
provisions of the affordable housing restriction by the Monitoring Agent;
9. Provision that the restriction on an Affordable Homeownership Unit shall
run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and/or the Town of Ludlow, in a
form approved by Town Counsel, and shall limit initial sale and re-sale to
and occupancy by an Eligible Household;
10. Provision that the restriction on Affordable Rental Units in a rental Project
or rental portion of a Project shall run with the rental Project or rental
portion of a Project and shall run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and/or
5-21
the municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit
rental and occupancy to an Eligible Household;
11. Provision that the owner[s] or manager[s] of Affordable Rental Unit[s]
shall file an annual report to the Monitoring Agent, in a form specified by
that agent certifying compliance with the Affordability provisions of this
Bylaw and containing such other information as may be reasonably
requested in order to ensure affordability; and
12. A requirement that residents in Affordable Housing provide such
information as the Monitoring Agent may reasonably request in order to
ensure affordability.
5.5.6.7 Costs of Housing Marketing and Selection Plan. The housing marketing and
selection plan may make provision for payment by the Project applicant of
reasonable costs to the Monitoring Agent to develop, advertise, and maintain the
list of Eligible Households and to monitor and enforce compliance with
affordability requirements.
5.5.6.8 Age Restrictions. Nothing in this Section 5.5 shall permit the imposition of
restrictions on age upon Projects throughout the entire SGOD. However, the PAA
may, in its review of a submission under Section 5.5.6.3, allow a specific Project
within the SGOD designated exclusively for the elderly, persons with disabilities,
or for assisted living, provided that any such Project shall be in compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws and regulations and not
less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the housing units in such a restricted
Project shall be restricted as Affordable Units.
5.5.6.9 Phasing. For any Project that is approved and developed in phases in accordance
with Section 5.5.9.4, unless otherwise approved by the Department, the
proportion of Affordable Housing Units shall be at least 20 percent of all units
constructed in each phase.
5.5.6.10 No Waiver. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Affordability
provisions in this Section 5.5.6.0 shall not be waived.
5.5.7. DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REQUIREMENTS
5.5.7.1 Table of Requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Zoning
Bylaw, the dimensional requirements applicable in the SGOD are as follows:
5-22
Table 2: Dimensional and Density Requirements, East Street Corridor Mixed Use Sub-
District
Table 3: Dimensional and Density Requirements, Riverside Mixed Use Sub-District
Table 4: Dimensional and Density Requirements, Ludlow Mills Mixed Use Sub-District
5.5.7.2 Dimensional Waivers in Substantially Developed Sub-district. The PAA may,
in order to encourage the development of infill housing units on undeveloped lots
within a Substantially Developed Sub-district, grant a waiver to the dimensional
standards of Section 5.5.7.1, in accordance with Section 5.5.11.3.
Use Maximum
Height
(stories)
Minimum
Density
(units per acre)
Townhouse 3 8
Multi-Family (over 4 units) 3 20
Assisted Living 3 20
Mixed Use-
Neighborhood Scale
3 20
Use Maximum
Height
(stories)
Minimum
Density
(units per acre)
Townhouse 3 8
Two and Three Family 3 12
Multi-Family (over 4 units) 5 20
Mixed Use – Neighborhood
Scale
3 20
Mixed Use – Downtown
Scale
5 20
Use Maximum
Height
(stories)
Minimum
Density
(units per acre)
Multi-Family (over 4 units) 5 20
Assisted Living 5 20
Mixed Use - Downtown
Scale
5 20
5-23
5.5.8 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The parking requirements applicable for Projects within the SGOD are as follows.
5.5.8.1 Number of parking spaces. Unless otherwise approved by the PAA, the
following minimum numbers of off-street automobile parking spaces shall be
provided by use, either in surface parking, within garages or other structures, [or
on-street:], as well as the minimum numbers of bicycle parking:
Use Auto Parking Standards Bicycle Parking Standards
Single Family
Dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit None required
Duplex and Triplex 2 spaces per dwelling unit None required
Multi-family units
with one bedroom or
efficiency units
1.5 spaces per unit None required
Multi-family units
with two or more
bedrooms
2 spaces per unit None required
Housing for the
elderly
1 spaces per unit 1 bike space per 20 employees
Professional,
Business, Insurance
Offices and Banks
1 space per 300 s.f. of gross
floor area exclusive of
basements and garages used
solely for utility and storage
purposes
1 bike space per 10 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
Retail Establishments,
Services
1 space per 200 s.f. of gross
floor area exclusive of
basements and garages used
solely for utility and storage
purposes
1 bike space per 10 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
Restaurants, Taverns,
and other eating
places
1 space per 4 seats 1 bike space per 10 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
Medical and Dental
Offices and Office
Buildings
1 space per 300 s.f. of gross
floor area exclusive of
basements and garages used
solely for utility and storage
purposes
1 bike space per 20 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
Light Manufacturing
and General Industrial
Uses
1 space per 2 employees of
the two largest shifts
combined and customarily
employed on the premises
1 bike space per 50 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
Religious 1 per 4 seating spaces 1 bike space per 12 coderequiring
auto parking spaces
5-24
The PAA may require additional visitor auto and bicycle parking spaces if
deemed appropriate given the design, layout and density of the proposed
residential or other development. The PAA may allow for a decrease in the
required parking as provided in Sections 5.5.8.2 and 5.5.8.3 below.
5.5.8.2 Shared Parking. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the use of
shared parking to fulfill automobile and bicycle parking demands noted above
that occur at different times of day is strongly encouraged. Minimum parking
requirements above may be reduced by the PAA through the Plan Approval
process (or, for Projects not requiring Plan Approval, prior to submission of any
application for a Building Permit), if the applicant can demonstrate that shared
spaces will meet parking demands by using accepted methodologies (e.g. the
Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report, ITE Shared Parking Guidelines, or
other approved studies).
5.5.8.3 Reduction in auto parking requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary herein, any minimum required amount of automobile parking may be
reduced by the PAA through the Plan Approval process (or, for Projects not
requiring Plan Approval, prior to submission of any application for a Building
Permit), if the applicant can demonstrate that the lesser amount of parking will not
cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that lesser amount of
parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits, taking into
consideration:
1. The availability of surplus off street parking in the vicinity of the use being
served and/or the proximity of a bus stop or transit station;
2. The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of
the use being served;
3. Shared use of off street parking spaces serving other uses having peak user
demands at different times;
4. Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result in a lower level
of auto usage;
5. Impact of the parking requirement on the physical environment of the affected
lot or the adjacent lots including reduction in green space, destruction of
significant existing trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling
units, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways; and
6. Such other factors as may be considered by the PAA.
5.5.8.4 Location of Automobile Parking. Any surface parking lot shall, to the maximum
extent feasible, be located at the rear or side of a building, relative to any principal
street, public open space, or pedestrian way.
5.5.8.5 Bicycle Parking Standards. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in a
convenient, highly visible and well lighted area to minimize theft and vandalism,
generally within fifty (50) feet of a building entrance and within view of
5-25
pedestrian traffic and should be kept out of the public right of way. At a
minimum, bicycle parking spaces shall be at least two (2) feet in width by six (6)
feet in length to allow sufficient space between parked bicycles. A minimum five
(5) foot wide aisle or space behind all required bicycle parking should be
provided to allow room for bicycle maneuvering.
5.5.9 PLAN APPROVAL OF PROJECTS: GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.5.9.1 Plan Approval. An Application for Plan Approval shall be reviewed by the PAA
for consistency with the purpose and intent of Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13. Such
Plan Approval process shall be construed as an as-of-right review and approval
process as required by and in accordance with the Enabling Laws. Projects
requiring Plan Approval are identified within Section 5.5.5 (Table 1).
5.5.9.2 Plan Approval Authority (PAA). The Planning Board, consistent with M.G.L.
Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, shall be the Plan Approval Authority (the
“PAA”), and it is authorized to conduct the Plan Approval process for purposes of
reviewing Project applications and issuing Plan Approval decisions within the
SGOD.
5.5.9.3. PAA Regulations. The PAA may adopt administrative rules and regulations
relative to Plan Approval. Such rules and regulations must be approved by the
Department of Housing and Community Development.
5.5.9.4 Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Plan Approval submission, that
a Project be developed in phases, provided that the submission shows the full
build out of the Project and all associated impacts as of the completion of the final
phase, and subject to the approval of the PAA. Any phased project shall comply
with the provisions of Section 5.5.6.9.
5.5.10 PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES
5.5.10.1 Pre-application. Prior to the submittal of a Plan Approval submission, a
“Concept Plan” may be submitted to help guide the development of the definitive
submission for Project build out and individual elements thereof. Such Concept
Plan should reflect the following:
1. Overall building envelope areas;
2. Open space and natural resource areas; and
3. General site improvements, groupings of buildings, and proposed land uses.
The Concept Plan is intended to be used as a tool for both the applicant and the
PAA to ensure that the proposed Project design will be consistent with the Design
Standards and other requirements of the SGOD.
5-26
5.5.10.2 Required Submittals. An application for Plan Approval shall be submitted to
the PAA on the form provided by the PAA, along with application fee(s) which
shall be as set forth in the PAA Regulations. The application shall be
accompanied by such plans and documents as may be required and set forth in
the PAA Regulations. For any Project that is subject to the Affordability
requirements of Section 5.5.6, the application shall be accompanied by all
materials required under Section 5.5.6.3. All site plans shall be prepared by a
certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a
certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
All building elevations shall be prepared by a certified architect registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and
drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or
at a scale as approved in advance by the PAA.
5.5.10.3 Filing. An applicant for Plan Approval shall file the required number of copies
of the application form and the other required submittals as set forth in the PAA
Regulations with the Town Clerk and a copy of the application including the date
of filing certified by the Town Clerk shall be filed forthwith with the PAA.
5.5.10.4 Circulation to Other Boards. Upon receipt of the Application, the PAA shall
immediately provide a copy of the application materials to the Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Safety Committee, Building Commissioner,
Department of Public Works, the Ludlow Housing Authority (for any Project
subject to the Affordability requirements of Section 5.5.6), and other municipal
officers, agencies or boards for comment, and any such board, agency or officer
shall provide any written comments within 60 days of its receipt of a copy of the
plan and application for approval.
5.5.10.5 Hearing. The PAA shall hold a public hearing for which notice has been given
as provided in Section 11 of M.G.L. Chapter 40A. The decision of the PAA shall
be made, and a written notice of the decision filed with the Town Clerk, within
120 days of the receipt of the application by the Town Clerk. The required time
limits for such action may be extended by written agreement between the
applicant and the PAA, with a copy of such agreement being filed in the office of
the Town Clerk. Failure of the PAA to take action within said 120 days or
extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of the Plan
Approval application.
5.5.10.6 Peer Review. The applicant shall be required to pay for reasonable
consulting fees to provide peer review of the Plan Approval application, pursuant
to M.G.L. Chapter 40R, Section 11(a). Such fees shall be held by the Town in a
separate account and used only for expenses associated with the review of the
application by outside consultants, including, but not limited to, attorneys,
engineers, urban designers, housing consultants, planners, and others. Any surplus
remaining after
5-27
the completion of such review, including any interest accrued, shall be returned to the
applicant forthwith.
5.5.11 PLAN APPROVAL DECISIONS
5.5.11.1 Plan Approval. Plan Approval shall be granted where the PAA finds that:
1. The applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth
in the PAA Regulations; and
2. The Project as described in the application meets all of the requirements
and standards set forth in this Section 5.5 and the PAA Regulations, or a
waiver has been granted there from; and
3. Any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the Project on nearby
properties have been adequately mitigated.
For a Project subject to the Affordability requirements of Section 5.5.6,
compliance with condition (2) above shall include written confirmation by the
Monitoring Agent that all requirements of that Section have been satisfied. The
PAA may attach conditions to the Plan Approval decision that are necessary to
ensure substantial compliance with this Section 5.5, or to mitigate any
extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the Project on nearby properties.
5.5.11.2 Plan Disapproval. A Plan Approval application may be disapproved only where
the PAA finds that:
1. The applicant has not submitted the required fees and information as set
forth in the Regulations; or
2. The Project as described in the application does not meet all of the
requirements and standards set forth in this Section 5.5 and the PAA
Regulations, or that a requested waiver there from has not been granted; or
3. It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse project impacts
on nearby properties by means of suitable conditions.
5.5.11.3 Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant, the Plan Approval Authority may
waive dimensional and other requirements of Section 5.5 (excluding Section
5.5.6, except where expressly permitted herein), including the Design Standards,
in the interests of design flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding
of consistency of such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the
SGOD, or if it finds that such waiver will allow the Project to achieve the density,
Affordability, mix of uses, and/or physical character allowable under this Section
5.5.
5.5.11.4 Project Phasing. The PAA, as a condition of any Plan Approval, may allow a
Project to be phased at the request of the Applicant, or it may require a Project to
be phased for the purpose of coordinating its development with the construction
of Planned Infrastructure Improvements (as that term is defined under 760 CMR
5-28
59.00), or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse Project impacts on nearby
properties. For Projects that are approved and developed in phases, unless
otherwise approved by the Department, the proportion of Affordable units shall be
at least 20 percent (20%) of all units constructed in each phase.
5.5.11.5 Form of Decision. The PAA shall issue to the applicant a copy of its decision
containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, and
the plans that were the subject of the decision, and certifying that a copy of the
decision has been filed with the Town Clerk and that all plans referred to in the
decision are on file with the PAA. If twenty (20) days have elapsed after the
decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk without an appeal having
been filed or if such appeal, having been filed, is dismissed or denied, the Town
Clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. If a plan is approved by reason of
the failure of the PAA to timely act, the Town Clerk shall make such certification
on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision or application bearing such
certification shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds and
district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index under the
name of the owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of
title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the applicant.
5.5.11.6 Validity of Decision. A Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall run with the
land indefinitely, provided that construction has commenced within two years
after the decision is issued, which time shall be extended by the time required to
adjudicate any appeal from such approval and which time shall also be extended
if the Project proponent is actively pursuing other required permits for the Project
or there is other good cause for the failure to commence construction, or as may
be provided in a Plan Approval for a multi-phase Project.
5.5.12 CHANGE IN PLANS AFTER APPROVAL BY PAA
5.5.12.1 Minor Change. After Plan Approval, an applicant may apply to make minor
changes in a Project involving minor utility or building orientation adjustments, or
minor adjustments to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall
build out or building envelope of the site, or provision of open space, number of
housing units, or housing need or affordability features. Such minor changes
must be submitted to the PAA on redlined prints of the approved plan, reflecting
the proposed change, and on application forms provided by the PAA. The PAA
may authorize such changes at any regularly scheduled meeting, without the need
to hold a public hearing. The PAA shall set forth any decision to approve or deny
such minor change by motion and written decision, and provide a copy to the
applicant for filing with the Town Clerk.
5.5.12.2 Major Change. Those changes deemed by the PAA to constitute a major
change in a Project because of the nature of the change in relation to the prior
approved plan, or because such change cannot be appropriately characterized as a
5-29
minor change as described above, shall be processed by the PAA as a new
application for Plan Approval pursuant to Sections 5.5.9 through 5.5.13.
5.5.13 DESIGN STANDARDS
5.5.13.1 Adoption and Amendment of Design Standards. The PAA may adopt and
amend, by simple majority vote, Design Standards which shall be applicable to all
Projects subject to Plan Approval by the Plan Approval Authority. Such Design
Standards must be objective and not subjective and may only address the scale
and proportions of buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets and
sidewalks, the type and location of infrastructure, the location of building and
garage entrances, off street parking, the protection of significant natural site
features, the location and design of on-site open spaces, exterior signs, and
buffering in relation to adjacent properties. DHCD may, at its discretion, require
Design Standards to contain graphics illustrating a particular standard or
definition in order to make such standard or definition clear and understandable.
5.5.13.2 DHCD Approval. After amending Design Standards, the PAA shall submit
Design Standards to DHCD for approval. Design Standards shall not take effect
until approved by DHCD and filed with the Town Clerk. In submitting proposed
Design Standard for DHCD approval, the PAA shall also submit sufficient
documentation clearly showing that the proposed Design Standards will not add
unreasonable cost to development Projects or unreasonably impair the economic
feasibility of a development Project. A letter from a developer, property owner or
other interested party indicating that the Design Standards will not add
unreasonable costs or unreasonably impair the economic feasibility of a
development Project shall not constitute sufficient documentation. At its
discretion, DHCD may disapprove Design Standards if it finds that the PAA has
not adopted objective Design Standards or has not submitted such documentation.
5.5.14 SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Section 5.5 is found to be invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 5.5 shall not be affected but
shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision of this Section 5.5 shall
not affect the validity of the remainder of the Town’s Zoning Bylaw.
END OF SECTION 5
6-1
SECTION VI: SPECIAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
Section VI describes specific regulations that pertain to specific uses in specific districts. This
section clarifies the conditions under which certain uses can be carried on.
6.0 HORSES AND/OR PONIES
The keeping of HORSES and/or PONIES and a private stable, for personal use, are
permitted under the following conditions:
6.0.1 The location of the stable is not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from
a street line and not less than fifty (50) feet from any side lot line and not less than fifty
(50) feet from any rear lot line.
6.0.2 The minimum acreage required for a private stable shall be one acre of suitable
land per horse or pony. Acreage for this purpose excludes all area used for any residential
and accessory structures not intended for the purpose of the stable. (Amended 10/3/11)
6.0.3 Said animal or animals shall be kept under control by adequate fencing within the
area specified. The fenced area shall be to the rear of the rear line of the dwelling of the
owner or lessee except in cases where the frontage of the property is two hundred (200)
feet or more on a public or private way.
6.0.4 Stables, corrals, and yards shall be properly drained and reasonably free from
excessive odor, dust, and mud, so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard to the
community or to surrounding property owners, from an air to drainage pollution
standpoint.
6.0.5 Maintenance of the stable and property used in the keeping of horses and/or
ponies shall conform to all regulations of the local Board of Health and State Health
authorities.
6.1 EARTH REMOVAL
6.1.1 In any zoning district, removal or addition of earth products from a lot shall
require a Special Permit from the Board of Selectmen, and Site Plan Approval from the
Planning Board. No mechanical separation will be permitted on site without a gravel
bank permit.
6.1.2 Application Requirements
a. In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 7.0 SPECIAL
PERMITS, all applicants for an earth removal special permit shall submit the
following to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board:
6-2
(1) The location of the proposed excavation.
(2) A full statement as to the purposes of the earth removal.
(3) A plan of the land involved showing all man-made features,
property lines, and existing topography by ten-foot contours, plus
proposed contours at ten-foot intervals showing the finish grade of the site
after the completion of the proposed excavation project.
(4) The estimated quantity of material to be removed.
b. The Board of Selectmen may also request the following information:
(1) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(2) The amount and cost of proposed restoration materials.
6.1.3 Standards of Operation
The Board of Selectmen shall include the following conditions to be complied
with when issuing a permit:
a. No excavation shall be permitted below the grade of a road bounding the
property at any point nearer than three hundred (300) feet to such road.
b. No excavation below the natural grade of any property boundary shall be
permitted nearer than fifty (50) feet to such boundary.
c. No slope created by the removal operation shall be finished at a grade in
excess of the natural angle or repose of the materials.
d. All excavated areas shall, upon completion of the operation, be covered
with not less than four (4) inches of loam; brought to the finished grade and
seeded in a satisfactory manner.
e. Within the Floodplain District excavation of earth products shall be
prohibited if such excavation will lower the level of the water table or will
interfere with the natural flow pattern or reduce the flood storage capacity of a
stream.
f. No permit for earth products removal shall be issued if such removal will
(1) endanger the general public health or safety; or (2) constitute a nuisance; or
(3) result in detriment to the normal use of adjacent property by reason of noise,
dust, or vibration; or (4) result in traffic hazards in residential area or excessive
congestion or physical damage on public ways.
6-3
g. A permit for any earth products removal may be issued for a period not
exceeding five (5) years in duration. Upon reapplication for a permit, the Board
of Selectmen may at its discretion, grant one or more extensions of said permit,
each of which shall not exceed five (5) years duration.
h. In approving the issuance of such permit, the Board of Selectmen shall
impose reasonable requirements which shall constitute a part of the permit and
which may include: grading, seeding, and planting, fencing necessary for public
safety, methods of removal, location and use of structures, hours of operation,
routes of transportation of material removed, control of drainage and disposition
of waste incident to the operation.
i. Security
The Board of Selectmen may require suitable bond or other security adequate to
assure compliance with the provisions of this section.
6.1.4 Earth Removal Exemptions
No Special Permit shall be required for the following:
a. Moving earth products within the limits of an individual property or series
of contiguous properties of land in single ownership.
b. Removal of earth products from an operating farm, nursery, or cemetery to
the extent that such removal is necessary to the operation of same.
6.2 HOME OCCUPATIONS
The Planning Board may authorize, by issue of a SPECIAL PERMIT and Site Plan
Approval, the use of a portion of a DWELLING or building accessory thereto as the
workroom of a resident artist, craftsman, beautician, dressmaker, milliner, photographer,
cabinetmaker, skate sharpener, radio repairman or other person engaged in a customary
home occupation, or as a place for incidental work and storage in connection with his offpremises
trade by a resident builder, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber or other
artisan, resident tree surgeon, landscape gardener, or similar person. The criteria for
issuance of said SPECIAL PERMIT is as follows:
6.2.1 Such use is clearly secondary to the use of a premises for dwelling
purposes.
6.2.2 The use is pursued by a member of the family residing in the dwelling
with no more than two non-resident employees.
6-4
6.2.3 No trading in merchandise is regularly conducted except for products
made on the premises or of parts or other items customarily maintained in
connection with, and incidental to, such merchandise.
6.2.4 No external change is made which alters the residential appearance of the
building on the lot.
6.2.5 All operations, including incidental storage, are carried on within the
principal or accessory building, and that there is no outward evidence that the
premises are being used for any purpose other than residential (except for an
accessory sign or vehicle as hereinafter permitted.
6.2.6 The proposed accessory use would be suitably located in the neighborhood
in which it is proposed. The use shall not be characterized by outward
manifestations (such as traffic generation, noise, public service and utility
demand, etc.) not unlike those dwelling units in the particular neighborhood in
which the dwelling is located.
6.2.7 Only one vehicle parked on the property may be a commercial vehicle and
of not more than 10,000 pounds G.V.W (Gross Vehicle Weight). In all, the total
number of vehicles parked on the property during business hours should not
exceed by more than two (2) the number of vehicles parked during non-business
hours.
6.2.8 In Residence (RA-1, RA, RB) and Agriculture (A, AMD) districts, the use
will be reasonably compatible with other uses permitted as of right in the same
district and with adjoining uses.
6.2.9 The use will not constitute a nuisance by reason of an unacceptable level
of air or water pollution, excessive noise or visually flagrant structures and
accessories, and the use is not a serious hazard to abutters, vehicles, or
pedestrians.
6.2.10 Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper
operation of the proposed use, including special attention to safe vehicular
circulation on the site and at the intersection with abutting streets.
6.2.11 The occupational use shall not occupy more than the equivalent of twentyfive
percent (25%) of the total gross floor area of the residential structure plus
other accessory structures housing the occupation or no more than 500 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is less.
6.2.12 In connection with a home occupation there shall be no display visible
from outside the building other than an identification sign not larger than two (2)
square feet in area and shall not be lighted.
6-5
6.2.13 Adequate off-street parking for employees and customers shall be
provided and must be screened from view from the roadside and from the
neighbors.
6.3 HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
The Planning Board may issue a SPECIAL PERMIT and Site Plan Approval for the
operation of an office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, optometrist, lawyer, or similar
professional as a HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE provided that:
6.3.1 The operation is located within the private residence of the professional. Unlike
the HOME OCCUPATION, accessory building shall not be used in connection with a
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.
6.3.2 Such an office shall comply with the regulations concerning HOME
OCCUPATIONS.
6.4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
6.4.1 General Requirements
a. For all zoning districts, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
every new structure, the enlargement of an existing structure, or the development
of a new land use.
b. In granting a special permit for any use, the Special Permit Granting
Authority may require off-street parking spaces, standards, or conditions in
addition to those set forth in this bylaw, if it deems it necessary for the use.
c. Any specific, more stringent provision in any other section of the Ludlow
Zoning Bylaws relating to parking shall prevail over provisions in this section.
6.4.2 Parking Guidelines
a. The following guidelines shall be used when determining adequate
parking:
Single and Two-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-family uses:
Efficiency units and units
with one bedroom 1 1/2 spaces per unit
6-6
Units with two or more
bedrooms 2 spaces per unit
Housing for the elderly (i.e. Dwellings
designed for and occupied exclusively
by persons 60 years of age and
older.) 1/2 space per unit
Convalescent and Nursing
Homes 1 space per 4 beds
Motels 1 1/4 space per unit. (Note: any
other permitted use associated with
a motel shall be provided with
additional parking accommodations
as required herein.)
Professional, Business, Insurance
Offices and Banks 1 Space per 300 S.F. of gross floor
area exclusive of basements and
garages used solely for utility and
storage purposes.
Retail Establishments, Service,
Convenience and Repair Enterprises 1 space per 200 S.F. of gross floor
area exclusive of basements and
garages used solely for utility and
storage purposes.
Restaurants, Taverns, and other
eating places 1 space per 4 seats
Medical and Dental Offices and
Office Buildings 1 space per 300 S.F. of gross floor
area exclusive of basements and
garages used solely for utility and
storage purposes.
Industrial, Manufacturing, Warehouse,
and Wholesale uses 1 space per 2 employees of the two
largest shifts combined and customarily
employed on the premises
Auditoriums, Theaters, Stadiums, 1 space per 4 seats
and Arenas
6-7
Museums, Libraries 1 space per 300 S.F. of gross floor area
Auto Sales Lots: One space 9' X 18' for each licensed display
unit. Additional parking shall be one
parking space for each 5 display spaces with
a minimum of 3 spaces for salesmen and
customers. A front yard buffer display area
shall have on its inner side, a fence or barrier
at least eighteen inches (18") in height to
allow no part of a vehicle within the buffer
area. (Added 10/97)
East Street Revitalization Due to the non-conforming nature of the
Overlay District and lots and buildings in the East Street
Non-Conforming Use Parking: Revitalization Overlay District and other
(Added 5/9/11) non-conforming parcels and structures
throughout town, the Planning Board may
waive up to, but no more than 5 parking
spaces.
Municipal Recreational Park Parking spaces are as needed and are to be
(Added 10/3/11) determined by the Planning Board, with
input from relevant Boards, including but not
limited to, the Recreation Commission,
Board of Public Works, and the Safety
Committee.
Medical Marijuana
Treatment Center/Dispensary: 1 space per 200 S.F. of gross floor area
(Added 5/12/14) exclusive of basements and garages used
solely for utility and storage purposes.
b. Gross floor area shall mean the total area of a building measured by taking
the outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
c. When the computation of required parking spaces results in the
requirements of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or more shall require
one space.
d. Plans submitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority or the Building
Inspector for uses exempted from the requirements of this section shall indicate
required spaces and reasonable access thereto.
6-8
6.4.3 Mixed Uses
In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall be the sum of the
requirements for the various individual uses computed separately. Parking spaces for one
use shall not be considered as providing the required parking for any other use.
6.4.4 Curb Cut Permits
a. A curb cut permit must be obtained from the Department of Public Works
or the Engineering Department for all new or relocated driveways or parking lots.
b. The number of driveway entry permits allowed by right are as follows:
Single- family dwelling - one entry
Business Use in AMD district - one entry
Any other use - two entries
If an applicant wishes to modify the requirement, the applicant must obtain
approval from the Department of Public Works.
6.4.5 Parking Area Location
a. Uses permitted within the Business A, Business B and Industrial A, B,
& C districts
For uses permitted within the Business A, Business B and Industrial A, B, & C
districts, required off-street parking need not be provided on-site. Such parking
may be provided on any parcel within a radius of 600 feet of any premises used
for a purpose permitted within Business districts provided: (Amended 10/2/06)
(1) Any such parcel is not located within a Residential District;
(2) Such parcel is landscaped in accordance with the provisions of
Table 3 of this bylaw.
b. All other Districts (Amended 10/2/06)
For uses permitted in all districts except the Business districts, motor vehicles
parking accommodations shall be provided on the same lot or on an abutting lot
under common ownership and located in the same zoning district as the principal
building as follows:
6-9
6.4.6 Parking Space
a. All parking and display spaces shall be 9' X 18' exclusive of maneuvering
area and reasonable access.(Added 10/7/96)
b. Deleted 10/7/02
6.4.7 Surfacing
In all Business zones, all parking areas and driveways must be constructed of
concrete or bituminous concrete. (Amended 10/7/02 & 10/1/12)
In all Industrial zones, all driveways and all visitor/employee parking areas must
be constructed of concrete or bituminous concrete. Parking for equipment /heavy
equipment and storage of equipment/heavy equipment is allowed on gravel
surfaces. (Added 10/1/12)
In all other zoning districts, that portion of the driveway that lies within the public
way shall be constructed in accordance with the Town of Ludlow Board of Public
Works’ “Regulations for Construction Within the Public Way” in effect at the
time of construction.
6.5 SIGN REGULATIONS
6.5.1 Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, erection, alteration, use,
location, and maintenance of all signs located out-of-doors, or those signs affixed on any
part of a building for the express purpose of being visible from the exterior of the
building.
6.5.2 Definitions
Abandoned Sign: any temporary sign which applied to an event more than seven days
prior; any permanent sign for which the owner cannot be found, or which no longer has
application to the property on which it is located.
Accessory Sign: a sign which does not identify a business, service, product, or activity;
i.e. Open, Closed, Vacancy, Hours of Operation etc.
A-Frame Sign: see “Sandwich Sign.”
Animated Sign: any sign which uses actual movement or the illusion of movement.
6-10
Area of a Sign: the area of a sign shall be calculated as the smallest rectangular area
which completely encompasses all components of the sign, exclusive of its support(s); or
the smallest circular area, whichever is greater. Area of sign having no significant third
dimension and displaying information on two sides shall be considered as the area of a
single side. Area of signs having a significant third dimension, as judged by the Sign
Commissioner, and displaying information on two or more sides shall be calculated on a
case-by-case basis.
Awning Sign: a sign attached to or printed upon the tile or fabric material supported by
framing and which is attached to a building.
Banner: a flexible piece of cloth, plastic, or similar material, used for advertising
attached at one or more points to a pole, staff, or other support.
Changeable-copy Sign: a sign that is designed so that characters, letters, plaques, or
illustrations can be changed or rearranged without changing the design of the sign.
Commercial #1 Sign: any sign affixed to, suspended from, or incorporated as part of a
building that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
Commercial #2 Sign: any sign that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or commercial activity and is not a Commercial
#1 marquee, residential, political, real estate, professional announcements, lodging,
boarding and tourist, temporary, or directional or identification sign.
Construction Sign: a temporary sign identifying an architect, builder, contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier, or other participant in the construction, alteration, or
maintenance, currently being done on the property on which the sign is located.
Direct/External Lighting: illumination by means of a light source that is external to the
sign being lit.
Directional, Informational, or Safety Sign: an on-premises sign which identifies the
premises, the activity, or the business conducted upon such premises or which provides
directions for the safe and efficient flow of traffic. Such signs include those marking
entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas, or other operational features of the
premises.
Door Sign or Window Sign: any sign or poster placed inside a window or door and
legible from a public way (with characters that exceed two and one-half inches (2 ½”) in
height).
Double-Faced Sign: a sign lettered on both sides.
Flashing Sign: a sign which is illuminated by an intermittent or sequenced light source.
6-11
Free-Standing Sign: a self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence,
but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer-type signs.
Government Sign: any sign erected and maintained by the government.
Height of a Sign: the vertical distance measured from the highest point of a sign to the
ground level beneath the sign.
Internal lighting (indirect lighting): illumination by means of light sources contained
within the body of the sign.
Ladder Sign: a sign with two (2) or more crosspieces serving as individual signs.
Marquee Sign: a roof-like structure, canopy, or mobile unit bearing a signboard with or
without a scrolling message.
Nonconforming Sign: a sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with
subsequently enacted regulations.
Off Premises Sign: a sign identifying a business or residential use, facility, or service
which is not located on the premises where such activity is located.
Political Sign: a temporary sign associated with the elective process.
Portable Sign: any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported, included but not limited to: signs designed
to be transported by means of wheels; and signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and
sandwich board signs and balloons used as signs. Portable signs are temporary signs.
Projecting Sign: a sign which extends from a wall of a building.
Real Estate Sign: a temporary sign that advertises real property as being for sale, rent, or
lease.
Residential Sign: signs for the identification of residential subdivision developments,
townhouse developments, and multi-family developments; signs for institutional uses,
including schools, churches, state and federal buildings, and utilities; and identification
signs for farms, riding stables, and other agricultural or forestry uses.
Roof Sign: a sign which is located above, or projected above, the lowest point of the
eaves or the top of the parapet wall of any building, or which is painted on or fastened to
a roof.
6-12
Sandwich Sign: a self supporting, double paneled, temporary sign, with panels that are
not parallel but are connected along one (1) edge and separated along the opposite edge.
If connected on a vertical edge, it is a V-Shaped sign. If connected at the top, it is an Aframe
sign.
Sign: any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, word, model, banner, pennant,
insignia, trade flag, or representation use as, or which is in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, or direction, or is designed to attract the eye by means including
intermittent or repeated motion or illumination.
Sign Commissioner: the person appointed by and accountable to the appointing
authority and responsible for the enforcement of this Bylaw, currently the Building
Commissioner/Inspector of Buildings.
Special Event Sign: a temporary sign advertising or pertaining to a civic, patriotic,
educational, or other event.
Subdivision Identification Sign: a sign identifying a subdivision, condominium
complex, or residential development under construction.
Subdivision Lot Plan Sign: a sign depicting the lot plan of a subdivision.
Subsidiary Sign: a lesser sized sign attached to another sign.
Temporary Sign: any sign, including its support structure, intended to be maintained for
a continuous period of not more than three (3) months in any calendar year and is not
permanently mounted. This includes portable signs.
Wall Sign: any sign which is painted on, incorporated into, or affixed parallel to the wall
of a building, and which extends not more than six (6) inches from the surface of that
building.
6.5.3 Permitted Signs
Only signs which refer to a permitted use or an approved conditional use as set forth in
Section III of the Ludlow bylaw are permitted, provided such signs conform to the
provisions of this section.
6.5.4 Prohibited Signs
a. Signs in excess of 100 square feet in area.
b. Signs that constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic because of
intensity or direction of illumination.
6-13
c. Signs that incorporate, or are lighted by, flashing or blinking lights, or are
designed to attract attention by a change in light intensity or by repeated motion.
Signs indicating the current time and/or temperature are permitted provided they
meet all other provisions of this bylaw.
d. Any sign advertising or identifying a business or organization which is
defunct or no longer located on the premises is not permitted.
e. Portable signs are prohibited in the RA-1, RA, RB, A, or AMD districts.
6.5.5 Placement Standards/Sign Height in All Districts
a. If affixed to, suspended from, or incorporated as part of a building, a sign
cannot project more than twenty-four (24) inches over or into any building.
b. If supported by or suspended from a pedestal, post or tree, a sign cannot
project more than twenty-four (24) inches over or into any pedestrian or vehicular
way customarily used by the public.
c. No sign can project or extend more than six (6) feet above the eaves line
or parapet of any building to which it is affixed.
d. If free-standing, a sign cannot extend more than twelve (12) feet above
ground level.
e. No part of a free-standing sign is to be located closer than ten (10) feet to
the property line within the front yard setback. The sign cannot interfere with the
line-of-sight for traffic. This required dimension is reduced to five (5) feet for
pre-existing, non-conforming parcels. (Added 5/14/12)
6.5.6 Signs Allowed in Each Zoning District
No sign shall be erected unless it is permitted by Table 4, Permitted Signs by Type and
Zoning District:
Y - Yes Sign Permitted
N - No Sign Prohibited
6.5.7 Non-Conforming and Temporary Signs
a. Signs legally existing at the time this bylaw is adopted may continue as
non-conforming uses, and may be increased in size and height when approved by
the Board of Appeals. (revised 4/10/95)
6-14
This provision shall not apply to billboards, signs and other advertising devices
subject to the provisions of Sections 29 through 33, inclusive, of Chapter 93, and
to Chapter 93D of the General Laws.
b. A directional or identification sign may be erected and maintained in any
district where the Board of Appeals, acting under Section 7.0 finds that such a
sign will serve the public convenience, will not endanger the public safety, and
will be of such size, location, and design as will not be detrimental to the
neighborhood.
c. Nothing herein shall affect provisions in existing bylaws relating to
temporary signs permitted by the Selectmen, or posted by the Town or
government.
d. The maximum size for temporary signs is eighteen (18) inches by twentyfour
(24) inches. Temporary signs cannot be placed on town property or interfere
with the line-of-sight for traffic. (Amended 10/6/14)
6.5.8 Permits
a. Any sign over eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches shall
require a permit from the Building Commissioner. Excludes temporary signs.
(Amended 10/1/12 & 10/6/14)
b. Applicants must provide a description of all existing signs on the premises
as well as a scale drawing specifying dimensions, illumination materials and
location on land or buildings for the proposed new sign(s).
c. The Building Inspector shall issue a permit for a sign when an application
therefore has been made and the sign complies with all applicable regulations of
the Town and the State Building Code. (Amended 10/2/06)
6.6 ACCESSORY APARTMENT BYLAW (Added 10/4/93)
6.6.1 Accessory Apartments shall be permitted in all residential districts, the
agricultural district, and the agricultural moderate density district only upon issuance of a
special permit from the Planning Board, as specified in Section 7.0 of this bylaw, and in
accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
6.6.2 General Description
An accessory apartment shall mean a separate housekeeping unit, complete with its own
sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities, that is substantially contained within the
structure of a single-family dwelling, but functions as a separate unit.
6-15
6.6.3 The Planning Board may authorize, under a special permit in all residential
districts, the agricultural district, and the agricultural moderate density district, a use
known as Accessory Apartment, Owner-occupied, single-family dwelling, provided that
the following standards and criteria are met:
a. The accessory apartment will be a complete, separate housekeeping unit
that functions as a separate unit from the original unit.
b. Only one apartment will be created within a single family home.
c. The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory apartment is located
shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises.
d. The additional unit shall be occupied only by a family member. For
purposes of this article, family member shall be defined as one of the relatives of
the home owner or spouse as follows: mother, father, sister, brother, son,
daughter, uncle, aunt, grandmother, grandfather and/or their spouses.
e. The accessory apartment shall be designed so that the appearance of the
building remains that of a one-family residence as much as feasibly possible. In
general, any new entrances shall be on the side or rear of the building. Any
exterior changes made must conform with the single family character of the
neighborhood.
f. DELETED 1/25/99 STM
g. The accessory apartment shall be clearly a subordinate part of the single
family dwelling. It shall be no greater than eight hundred (800) square feet nor
have more than (1) bedroom.
h. There shall be provided at least two (2) off-street parking spaces for the
principal dwelling unit, and at least one (1) off-street parking space for the
accessory apartment. Parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of the
structure, and behind the front yard setback required for the zoning district.
i. For dwellings to be served by on-site septic system, the owner must obtain
a letter from the Board of Health that the existing sewage disposal system is
adequate for the proposed accessory apartment, before a special permit can be
obtained.
j. Dwellings must be in existence, and not substantially altered for a period
of three (3) years prior to the filing of the conversion permit.
k. There shall be no lodgers in either the original dwelling unit or the
accessory apartment.
6-16
l. The construction of any accessory apartment shall require a building
permit.
6.6.4 Application Procedure
a. The procedure for the submission and approval of a special permit for an
Accessory Apartment in owner-occupied, single family dwellings shall be the
same as prescribed in the special permit section by the Planning Board, except
that it shall include a notarized letter of application from the owner(s) stating that
he/they will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises. A non-refundable
fee shall be included with the application for an accessory apartment to cover the
cost of processing the application and code inspections. The applicant shall also
be responsible for the cost of the legal notices. As part of the public hearing
process, parties of interest, as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 11 must be
notified.
b. A special permit shall be issued for a period of not greater than four (4)
years. The special permit may be automatically renewed every four years upon
receipt of proof of owner occupancy and occupancy by a family member, as
defined in Section 6.6.3.d.
Approximately one month prior to the renewal date, the Planning Board shall
send out a renewal form to be signed by the owner(s), notarized, and returned to
the Planning Board for action by the Board. If the owner fails to return the
renewal form, the board will presume there is no interest in renewal and revoke
the Special Permit at that time. (Amended 1/25/99 STM)
c. Upon receiving a special permit, the owner(s) must file on subject
property a Declaration of Covenants at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
A time-stamped copy of the recorded Declaration shall be provided to the
Planning Board and the Building Department.
6.6.5 Transfer of Ownership of a Dwelling with an Accessory Apartment
a. The temporary special permit for an accessory apartment in an owneroccupied,
single-family dwelling shall terminate upon the sale of the property or
transfer of the title of the dwelling, or removal from the dwelling by reason of
health or death of the occupant of the accessory unit.
b. The owner(s) of the altered dwelling will dismantle the cooking facilities
for the accessory apartment and restore the dwelling to a single-family residence
upon sale or transfer of title of the dwelling, or removal from the dwelling by
reason of health or death of the occupant of the accessory unit, unless a new
special permit is obtained within three (3) months after the happening of any of
the above events.
6-17
c. The new owner(s) must apply for reapproval of a special permit for an
accessory apartment in an owner-occupied, single-family dwelling and shall
submit a notarized letter of application stating that he/they will occupy one of the
dwelling units and the additional unit will be occupied by a family member as
defined in Section 6.6.3 d. The notarized letter shall state that the original
conditions at the time of the original application remain unchanged. Minor
changes may be approved without a hearing from the Planning Board.
d. Upon receiving a special permit, the new owner(s) must file on the subject
property, a Declaration of Covenant at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
A time-stamped copy of the recorded Declaration of Covenant shall be provided
to the Planning Board and the Building Department.
6.7 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
6.7.1 INTENT. The intent of this section is to regulate the siting and design of
commercial and public utility-operated wireless communications facilities and to
minimize any adverse impact that may be associated with facilities such as, but not
limited to, cellular telecommunications towers.
6.7.2 TYPE. Wireless communications facilities may be either mounted on top of an
existing building (roof-mounted), mounted adjacent to the side or rear of an existing
building (side-mounted), mounted to the facade of an existing building (facade-mounted),
or ground-mounted. An existing building must be used and occupied, except for
buildings used in conjunction with the wireless communications facility. All facilities
must conform to applicable rules and regulations set forth by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as
well as any applicable Commonwealth of Massachusetts and municipal regulations.
6.7.3 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES (AMENDED 1/25/99 STM)
Wireless communications facilities are subject to the requirements of the
underlying zone and the following site design standards.
a. Height. Ground-mounted facilities shall not exceed the permitted
height of the underlying zone. For roof-, side-, and facade-mounted
facilities, the height of the facility shall not extend more than sixteen (16)
feet above the exiting roof line. In the case of an existing building height
of sixteen (16) feet or less, the height of a roof- or facade-mounted facility
shall not exceed the height of the existing building as defined in Table 2.
b. Facility Area. Any ground-mounted or side-mounted wireless
communications facility and any accessory structures must be enclosed
within a defined facility area. This area shall enclose all structures relative
to the operation of the facility and shall not be less than three
hundred(300) square feet.
6-18
c. Landscaping and fencing. the facility area, as defined by Section
6.7.3 b, shall be suitably landscaped and fenced. Acceptable fencing shall
cover the perimeter area, except that portion of a side-mounted facility
adjacent to the structure. Fencing shall be six feet (6') high. Fencing may
be protective in nature, but shall not include a spun barbed wire design. A
landscape buffer of evergreen shrubs or tree plantings shall be provided on
the outside of the fenced area. The shrub or tree plantings shall mature to
a height equivalent to the fence heights and be planted at a height of at
least four feet (4') and planted no less than three feet (3') apart.
All landscape plantings must be continually maintained.
d. Setback. For side- and ground-mounted facilities, the following
setbacks apply: 30% of tower height from a property line abutting a nonresidential
use and 200% of tower height from a property line abutting a
residential use, and 120% from any roadway or sidewalk. In no case shall
a ground-mounted or side-mounted facility built as an accessory use be
allowed on any portion of the lot between a street and the principal
building.
e. Co-location. Proposed side- or ground-mounted wireless
communications facilities must demonstrate adequate engineering
standards to provide for the co-location of two or more wireless
communications carriers.
f. Signs. There shall be no sign associated with a facility.
A two feet by two feet (2'X2') identification sign with a "No Trespassing"
or "In Case of Emergency" message is allowed for ground- or sidemounted
facilities.
4. Facilities requiring a Special Permit. A Special Permit from the Special
Permit Granting Authority is required when:
a. A wireless communications facility is proposed to exceed the
height restrictions in Table 2. The special permit granting authority may
review facilities up to a maximum height of 140' in Agriculture and
Agriculture Moderate Density Overlay districts; and 200' in Industrial A,
B, and C districts.
b. A side- or ground-mounted structure is proposed on a parcel with
such a facility or for a parcel abutting a parcel with such a facility.
c. A ground-mounted facility is proposed.
6-19
5. Special Permit Review Criteria. The Special Permit Granting Authority,
in reviewing a petition, shall consider the following criteria:
a. The adequacy of protection from residential dwellings;
b. The adequacy of the setback or design of the facility to ensure the
safety of persons or other property in the event of collapse;
c. Any adverse impact on other wireless communications facilities;
and
d. The aesthetic quality of the facility, including the adequacy of
screening and landscaping; and the adequacy of security for the facility.
The Special Permit Granting Authority may, but is not required to, waive
the area, height, or setback restrictions. The Special Permit Granting
Authority may only waive up to 30% of the area requirements in
Residential zones. Any waiver request must be made in writing at the
time of application with suitable documentation relative to site constraints
or location difficulties.
6. Discontinuance. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for a groundmounted
facility requiring a Special Permit, the applicant is required to post with
the Town Treasurer, a bond or other form of financial security acceptable to said
Treasurer in an amount set by the Building Inspector or his/her designee. The
amount shall be suitable to cover the demolition of the facility in the event the
Building Inspector condemns the facility or deems it vacant for more than a year.
The Building Inspector shall give the applicant 45 days notice in advance of any
demolition action. In the event that the posted amount does not cover the cost of
demolition, the Building Inspector may place a lien on the property covering the
difference in cost. (Added 4/14/97)
6.8 COMMERCIAL KENNELS: (added 10/4/10)
A special permit and site plan approval may be issued for a commercial kennel by the Planning
Board. The minimum acreage required shall be a parcel that consists of at least 10 acres. The
facility shall be located not less than 150 feet from any street line and not less than 100 feet from
any side or rear lot line. Maintenance of the facility shall conform to all regulations of the Board
of Health and State Health authorities.
6-20
6.9 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS BYLAW: (added 5/9/11)
A. Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of
Small Wind Energy Systems installed to offset the on-site consumption of utility-supplied
electricity.
B. Small Wind Energy System Diagram
6-21
C. General Requirements
(1) Small Wind Energy Systems that are accessory to a principal residential, commercial or
industrial use are permitted by right with Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board.
However, roof- or building-mounted wind turbines that extend no higher than 10 feet above
the highest point of the building’s roof are allowed by right and do not require Planning
Board review.
(2) No Small Wind Energy System, including roof- or building-mounted systems, shall be
erected, constructed, installed or modified without obtaining a Building Permit from the
Building Inspector.
(3) Meteorological towers shall be permitted under the same standards as a Small Wind
Energy System, except that the requirements apply to a temporary structure. A permit for a
temporary meteorological tower shall be valid for a maximum of 3 years after which an
extension may be granted by the Planning Board.
(4) The construction and operation of all Small Wind Energy Systems shall be consistent
with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all
applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications, and Federal
Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 77 requirements, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports.
(5) All applicants must register with the FAA and fill out the appropriate forms on the
following website: https://oeaaa.faa.gov/oeaaa/external/portal.jsp. The Federal Aviation
Administration Office of Obstruction Evaluation / Airport Airspace Analysis (OE/AAA) is
the final authority over objects that affect navigable airspace.
(6) All Small Wind Energy Systems are subject to the procedural requirements of the
Ludlow Zoning Bylaws Section 7.1 Site Plan Approval.
(7) Small Wind Energy Systems are permitted in the Aircraft Flight Overlay District.
However, proposals within the Aircraft Flight Overlay District shall be submitted by the
Planning Board to the Westover Air Reserve Base in Chicopee for review and comment, as
part of the Site Plan Approval process.
(8) Small Wind Energy Systems are not permitted in a Clear Zone (CZ) of the Westover
Air Reserve Base. This Bylaw hereby incorporates Map 1 (from the Westover Joint Land
Use Study), which indicates the Clear Zone (CZ) locations.
D. Siting Requirements
(1) No part of the wind system, support structure, or the structure on which the rotor is
located is to be located within a wetland area.
6-22
(2) Setbacks.
Wind turbines that are part of systems with a rated capacity up to 60 kW shall be set
back a distance equal to the total height of the wind turbine plus 15 feet from all
habitable structures on neighboring properties, as well as overhead utility lines and
public road or right of ways.
Wind turbines that are part of systems with a rated capacity over 60 kW and up to 100
kW shall be set back at a distance equal to 1.5 times the total height of the wind turbine
from all habitable structures on neighboring properties. Further, these turbines shall be
set back from overhead utility lines and public road or right of ways at a distance equal
to the total height of the wind turbine plus 15 feet.
The Planning Board may issue a waiver to reduce the minimum setback distance as
appropriate based on site-specific considerations and written consent of any affected
abutter(s).
E. Design Standards
(1) The wind generator and tower shall remain painted or finished in a nonreflective color
or finish.
(2) Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
Lighting of other parts of the Small Wind Energy System, such as appurtenant structures,
shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably
shielded from abutting properties.
F. Safety, Aesthetic and Environmental Standards
(1) All Small Wind Energy Systems shall be constructed and operated in a manner that
minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts.
(2) Total wind turbine height shall be limited to 150 feet from existing grade.
(3) Small Wind Energy Systems shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access.
Climbing access to the tower shall be limited by one of the following methods, or by an
alternative method approved by the Planning Board: by placing climbing apparatus no
lower than 10 feet from the ground, or by placing shielding over climbing apparatus or
access, or by installation of a fence.
(4) The Small Wind Energy System and associated equipment shall conform with the
provisions of the Department of Environmental Protection’s Division of Air Quality and
Noise Regulations (310 CMR 7.10), or shall conform with the following provisions,
whichever is more restrictive:
6-23
Noise may not:
(a) Increase the broadband sound level by more than 10 dB(A) above ambient.
(b) Produce a “pure tone” condition – when an octave band center frequency sound
pressure level exceeds the two adjacent center frequency sound pressure levels by 3
decibels or more.
These criteria are measured at both the property line and the nearest inhabited structure on
adjacent properties. Ambient is defined as a background-weighted sound level that is
exceeded 90% of the time, as measured during equipment hours.
Failure to conform to this regulation may result in legal action from the town and may
result in legal action from Mass DEP.
(5) That Planning Board shall determine that clearing of natural vegetation has been limited
to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the Small
Wind Energy System and is otherwise prescribed by applicable laws and regulations.
(6): Shadow/Flicker: Wind energy facilities shall be sited in a manner that minimizes
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does
not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses. (Added 5/14/12)
G. The applicant shall maintain the Small Wind Energy System in good condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and security
measures.
H. Abandonment or Decommissioning.
(1) Any Small Wind Energy System which has reached the end of its useful life or has
been abandoned shall be removed.
(2) A Small Wind Energy System will be considered to be abandoned if it is not operated
for a period of two years or if it is designated as a safety hazard by the Building Inspector.
If this occurs, the Building Inspector shall issue a Notice of Abandonment, and the system
owner will have 30 days to provide sufficient evidence that the system has not been
abandoned, or that the safety hazard has been addressed. After 30 days from the issue of
the Notice of Abandonment, if the issue is not resolved to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector, the town shall have the authority to enter the owner’s property and remove the
system at the owner’s expense.
(3) Once a Small Wind Energy System has reached the end of its useful life or is
designated as abandoned, the owner shall be required to immediately physically remove the
installation. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to:
6-24
Removal of Small Wind Energy System, any equipment shelters and security barriers from
the subject property.
Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid
waste disposal regulations.
Restoring the location of the Small Wind Energy System to its natural condition, except
that any landscaping and grading improvements shall remain.
I. Submission Requirements
(1) Small Wind Energy System applications shall submit the required Site Plan Contents
detailed under Section 7.1 Site Plan Approval, unless specific criteria are waived by the
Planning Board, and shall also include:
A site plan with property lines and physical dimensions of the subject property within 2
times the total height from the tower location, or as specified under Section 7.1 Site Plan
Approval, whichever is greater.
Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower
height, tower type (freestanding or guyed), color, and proposed lighting, if any.
Tower and foundation blueprints or drawings signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to
practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or direct from the turbine manufacturer
with documentation of compliance with State Building Code. Elevation drawings shall be
provided and shall show both tower and building heights.
A line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination
that the manner of installation conforms to the Massachusetts Electrical Code. This
information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer.
A Determination from the FAA (Form 7460-3).
Evidence that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this
requirement.
Proof of liability insurance for the facility in an amount and for the duration of time
sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures impacted by the failure of the
Small Wind Energy System.
(2) Additional submission requirements may be requested by the Planning Board or
Building Inspector, as necessary.
6-25
J. Expiration (Amended 5/14/12)
(1) Under the State Building Code, work must commence within twelve (12) months from
the date a Building Permit is issued. However, a project proponent may request one twelve
(12) month extension of the permit from the Building Commissioner. If the Small Wind
Energy System is not installed and functioning within 24 months from the date the original
permit is issued, further permit extensions may be granted by the Planning Board.
(2) All permits issued pursuant to this bylaw shall expire if The Small Wind Energy System
is abandoned.
K. Violations (Amended 5/14/12)
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a Small Wind Energy System
that is not in compliance with this bylaw or with any condition contained in a permit issued
pursuant to this bylaw.
L. Administration, Fees and Enforcement (Amended 5/14/12)
(1) Once an application is submitted, the Planning Board will have 90 days to review the
site plan. If approved, the Building Commissioner will then have 30 days to either deny or
approve the building permit. This bylaw shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Commissioner or another official as designated.
(2) If necessary the town may hire outside consultants, paid for by the applicant, to review
all plans, in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 44 Sec. 53G.
(3) The Building Commissioner may enter any property for which a Building Permit has
been issued under this bylaw to conduct an inspection to determine whether the conditions
stated in the permit have been met.
M. Penalties
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this bylaw or a Building Permit
issued pursuant to this bylaw shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by
applicable law.
N. Severability
The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this
section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in
full force and effect.
6-26
6-27
6.10 LARGE-SCALE, GROUND-MOUNTED, PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
(Added 5/14/12)
6.10.1 Purpose
The purpose of this subsection of the Zoning Bylaw is to establish appropriate criteria and
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification, removal
and/or repair of new large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems. These standards will
address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and provide
adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such systems.
6.10.2 Applicability
This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted photovoltaic systems proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to physical
modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of existing systems or related
equipment. Building-mounted photovoltaic systems and small-scale, ground-mounted
photovoltaic systems are exempt from the provisions under this bylaw but shall comply with the
building code and require a building permit.
6.10.3 Location
Large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems shall be allowed in the districts identified in
Table 1: Ludlow Table of Principal Uses. Large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems
shall be allowed in the Aircraft Flight Overlay District provided they conform to all applicable
rules and regulations set forth by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
6.10.4 General Requirements for Site Plan Review and Approval
Large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems shall undergo site plan review by the
Site Plan Review Authority prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in
this section.
The construction and operation of all large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to
all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings
and fixtures forming part of a large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system shall be
constructed in accordance with the Building Code.
All applications for Site Plan Approval must comply with Section 7.1 – Site Plan Approval. In
addition, the following documents are required specifically for large-scale, ground-mounted,
photovoltaic systems:
6-28
(a) Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the
photovoltaic panels, mounting system, and inverter.
(b) Contact information for the proposed system installer.
(c) Contact information and signature of the project proponent, as well as all coproponents,
if any, and all property owners.
(d) Contact information and signature of agents representing the project proponent, if
any.
(e) Contact information for the person(s) responsible for public inquiries throughout
the life of the system.
(f) Blueprints of the photovoltaic system showing the proposed layout of the system
and proposed shading from nearby structures, natural features and landscaping.
(g) One or three lined electrical diagrams detailing the photovoltaic system, any
associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National
Electric Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices.
(h) All plans and maps associated with large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic
systems shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(i) Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site
sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed photovoltaic
system.
(j) An operation and maintenance plan which shall include measures for maintaining
safe access to the system, storm water controls, and general procedures for
operational maintenance of the system.
(k) Proof of liability insurance.
(l) Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 6.10.9(c).
(m) Utility Notification. No large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system shall
be constructed until evidence has been given to the Site Plan Review Authority
that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the system is to be
located has been informed of the owner or operator’s intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt
from this requirement.
6-29
6.10.5 Design Standards
(a) Dimensional and Density Requirements
All construction shall comply with the yard, space, and height requirements of the
zoning district(s) in which the system is located as per Table 2: Table of
Dimensional Regulations. In cases where the parcel abuts residential zones, park
land, or conservation land, the setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet, unless
waived by the Site Plan Review Authority.
(b) Lighting
Lighting of the large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system and any
appurtenant structures shall be directed downward and inward and shall
incorporate full cut off fixtures to reduce light pollution. Lighting shall be limited
to that which is required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be shielded
from abutting properties.
(c) Signage
An identification sign shall be no larger than two feet by two feet, shall identify
the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. The sign shall
be made visible from a right of way where the property has frontage. Large-scale,
ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for identification of the manufacturer or operator of the system.
All signs require a Building Permit and will comply with the signage provisions
in Ludlow’s Zoning Bylaws.
(d) Utility Connections
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Site Plan Review Authority, shall be
made to place all utility connections from the large-scale, ground-mounted,
photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions,
shape and topography of the site, and any requirements of the utility provider.
Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if
required by the utility provider.
(e) Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems
shall comply with Table 2: Table of Dimensional Regulations. In the case that the
parcel abuts residential zones, park land or conservation land the setback shall be
a minimum of 50 feet, unless waived by the Site Plan Review Authority.
Structures shall be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to
avoid adverse visual impacts. All appurtenant structures shall have a Landscape
Plan. Vegetative screening shall reach a mature form to effectively screen the
installation within five years of installation.
6-30
6.10.6 Safety and Environmental Standards
(a) Emergency Services
The large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system owner or operator shall
provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the
local Fire Chief. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local
emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of
shutting down the large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system shall be
clearly marked.
(b) Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale, ground-mounted
photovoltaic system or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
bylaws. Large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic systems shall be installed on
water-permeable surfaces, as approved by the Site Plan Review Authority during
site plan review.
(c) Landscaped Buffer Strip
A landscaped buffer strip is intended to provide, within five years of installation,
a visual barrier between the large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system
and neighboring properties. Except for vehicular and pedestrian passways and
permitted signs, these areas shall be used only for an interplanting of deciduous or
evergreen trees, shrubs and other vegetative ground cover that can appropriately
create a visual barrier.
The buffer must provide coverage as outlined by Table 3: Required Landscaping.
Where considered appropriate in the judgment of the Site Plan Review Authority,
walls and fences may be used in addition to or in lieu of plantings.
A planting plan showing the types, sizes and locations of material to be used shall
be subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Authority.
The Site Plan Review Authority may waive the requirements of the visual barrier
where it deems it advisable.
6.10.7 Waivers
(a) The Site Plan Review Authority may waive strict compliance with any
requirement of this bylaw, or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder,
where:
1. Such action is allowed by federal, state and local statues and/or regulations;
2. Is in the public interest;
3. Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this by-law.
(b) Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a waiver. Such a
request shall be accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the
6-31
waiver request and demonstrating that strict application of the by-laws does not
further the purposes or objectives of this by-law and why it is believed that the
waiver meets the criteria in section 6.10.7(a).
(c) All waiver requests shall be discussed at the public hearing for the project.
(d) If in the Site Plan Review Authority’s opinion, additional time or information is
required for review of a waiver request, the Site Plan Review Authority may
continue the hearing to a date announced at the meeting. In the event the
applicant objects to a continuance, or fails to provide requested information, the
waiver request shall be denied.
6.10.8 Monitoring and Maintenance
(a) Installation Conditions
The large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to: painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site
access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Site Plan Review Authority,
Safety Committee, Emergency Services, and Department of Public Works. The
owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the large-scale,
ground-mounted, photovoltaic system and any access road(s) unless accepted as a
public way.
(b) Modification Conditions
Any material modifications to a large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system
made after issuance of the building permit shall require approval by the Site Plan
Review Authority. Maintenance and repairs will not require Site Plan Review
Authority approval.
6.10.9 Abandonment or Decommissioning
(a) Abandonment
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, a large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of
the Site Plan Review Authority. If the owner or operator of the large-scale, groundmounted,
photovoltaic system fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within one hundred and fifty (150) days of abandonment or
the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically
remove the installation utilizing the surety provided in section 6.10.9(c). If such funds are
insufficient, any additional costs will be the responsibility of the system's owner.
6-32
(b) Removal Requirements
Any large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system which has reached the end of its
useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 6.10.9(a) of this bylaw shall be
removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than
one hundred and fifty (150) days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or
operator shall notify the Site Plan Review Authority by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
i. Physical removal of the large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic system and all
related structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the
site.
ii. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
iii. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion.
iv. Return of land area to conditions prior to development.
(c) Financial Surety
The owner or operator of a proposed large-scale, ground-mounted, photovoltaic project
shall provide a form of surety through an escrow account or bond, as
determined by the Town Treasurer, to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town
must remove the installation and remediate the landscape. The surety account or bond
will be managed by the Town Treasurer's office.
The amount of the financial surety will be determined to be reasonable by the Site Plan
Review Authority, but in no event to exceed one hundred and twenty five (125%) percent
of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein.
Such surety will not be required for municipally or state owned facilities. The project
owner or operator shall submit a fully detailed and inclusive estimate for all costs
associated with removal to the Site Plan Review Authority for review. This estimate must
be prepared by a qualified engineer.
The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to
inflation and other causes over the life of the system. Such surety will not be required for
municipally- or state-owned facilities.
6-33
6.11 Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Dispensary: (Added 5/12/14)
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center/Dispensary: A non-profit facility or location that has been
registered by the Department of Public Health where medical marijuana is grown, processed
and/or made available to a qualifying patient or a personal caregiver, provided that:
6.11.1 A medical marijuana treatment center/dispensary shall not be located within 1,000 feet of
an elementary school, middle school, high school, church, public library, day care, public
park or where children commonly congregate in existence at the time of enactment of the
zoning bylaw amendment establishing this use.
6.11.2 All medical marijuana treatment centers/dispensaries need to provide a letter from the
police and fire department that the centers/dispensaries meet all standards of security, fire
code and public safety.
6.11.3 Medical marijuana treatment centers/dispensaries are allowed through site plan approval
and a special permit from the Planning Board in the Industrial A and Industrial C zoning
district.
6.11.4 A traffic study will be required.
6.12 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS ON ESTATE LOTS (Added 10/6/14)
The purpose of this regulation is to allow for the creation of lots for single-family dwelling units
only, with less than the required frontage, in exchange for increased square footage, for the
purpose of preservation of open space and decreasing density in given areas.
Single-family dwellings on estate lots shall be permitted in the Agriculture and
Residential A districts only upon the issuance of a Special Permit from the Planning Board as
specified in Section 7.0 of this bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirement
specified herein, unless waived by the Planning Board.
1. No more than two consecutive estate lots shall be located on a public way.
2. The estate lot(s) shall have a minimum street frontage of not less than 50 feet and access
width of not less than 50 feet from the front lot line to the principal structure. The front
lot shall meet all the zoning dimensional requirements normally required in the district.
3. An estate lot(s) shall be double the minimum lot area normally required for that district
inclusive of the access strip.
4. An access strip that is accessible having a maximum length not exceeding four hundred
(400) feet.
6-34
5. The width of the lot where the principal building is to be constructed shall be equal to or
exceed the distance normally required for street frontage in the district.
6. Front, rear and side yards must equal or exceed those normally required in the district.
7. The Planning Board may require that there be maintained or kept a naturally occurring or
a planted vegetated buffer strip between estate lot(s) and adjacent lots to provide effective
visual screening between the buildings at grade level.
8. The estate lot entrance/driveway shall be clearly designated with a house number sign.
Mailboxes shall not suffice.
9. The driveway is to be located, constructed, and maintained a distance of no closer than
ten (10) feet to any abutting property line.
10. Plan submitted shall include the statement, “ Lot (fill in the Lot #) is an Estate Lot;
building is permitted only in accordance with the Special Permit Estate Lot provisions of
the Ludlow Zoning Bylaw.”
11. Estate Lot Example:
END OF SECTION 6
7-1
SECTION VII: LAND USE REVIEW METHODS
7.0 Special Permits
Special Permits are requested for certain uses, structures, or conditions as specified in
Section 3.2.2, Table of Principal Uses.
7.0.1 Purpose
Special Permits are intended to provide detailed review of certain uses and structures
which may have substantial impact upon traffic, utility systems, and the character of the
Town, among other things. The Special Permit review process is intended to insure a
harmonious relationship between proposed development and its surroundings, and insure
that proposals are consistent with the purpose and intent of this bylaw.
7.0.2 Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall have those special permit granting authorities as specified in
Section 3.2.2 Table of Principal Uses.
7.0.3 Special Permit Procedures
Special permits may be issued by Special Permit Granting Authorities (SPGAs) in
accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 9, and with the
following regulations:
a. Public Hearing
Special Permits may only be issued following a public hearing which must be
held within sixty-five (65) days after a Special Permit application is filed with the
Special Permit Granting Authority. The applicant shall also file a copy of the
Special Permit application forthwith with the Town Clerk. The Special Permit
Granting Authority shall take final action on an application for Special Permit
within ninety (90) days following the public hearing. Failure to do so shall
constitute approval. A unanimous vote of a three-member board and a vote of at
least four (4) members of a five-member board is required.
b. Application procedures
(1) All applications for Special Permits shall be made in writing on
forms furnished by the Planning Board Clerk and located in the Planning
Board office and shall be accompanied by a site plan, when required, in
accordance with Section 3.1 Table of Principal Uses. Any application fees
and publication fees shall be paid by the applicant.
7-2
(2) Misrepresentation of any of the required plan items shall be cause
to revoke a Special Permit.
(3) No Special Permit shall authorize a use expressly prohibited by
these Zoning Bylaws.
c. Rules and Regulations
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall adopt and from time-to-time, amend
rules and regulations relative to the issuance of such permits, and shall file a copy
of said rules and regulations in the office of the Town Clerk.
7.0.4 Special Permit Criteria
Special Permits may only be issued after the Special Permit Granting Authority makes a
finding that the proposed use is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
bylaw, meets the specific regulations for the zoning district in which the use is located,
and complies with the specific regulations listed below. The Special Permit Granting
Authority may condition the Special Permit, including safeguards and limitations on time
or use.
The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant a Special Permit authorized by this
bylaw if said Board finds, when applicable, that:
a. The proposal is suitably located in the neighborhood in which it is
proposed and/or the total Town, as deemed appropriate by the Special Permit
Granting Authority;
b. The proposal is compatible with existing uses and other uses permitted by
right in the same district;
c. The proposal would not constitute a nuisance due to air and water
pollution, flood, noise, dust, vibrations, lights, or visually offensive structures and
accessories;
d. The proposal would not be a substantial inconvenience or hazard to
abutters, vehicles, or pedestrians;
e. Adequate and appropriate facilities would be provided for the proper
operation of the proposed use;
f. The proposal reasonably protects the adjoining premises against any
possible detrimental or offensive uses on the site, including unsightly or
obnoxious appearance;
7-3
g. The proposal ensures that it is in conformance with the sign regulations of
the bylaw. (See Section 6.5)
h. The proposal provides convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site, and in relation to adjacent streets, property, or
improvements;
i. The proposal ensures adequate space for the off-street loading and
unloading of vehicles, goods, products, materials, and equipment incidental to the
normal operation of the establishment or use;
j. The proposal provides adequate methods of disposal and/or storage for
sewage, refuse, and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted or permissible
on the site, and methods of drainage for surface water;
k. The proposal ensures protection from flood hazards, considering such
factors as the following: elevation of buildings; drainage; adequacy of sewage
disposal; erosion and sedimentation control; equipment location; refuse disposal;
storage of buoyant materials; extent of paving; effect of fill, roadways or other
encroachments on flood runoff and flow;
l. The proposal is in general harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this bylaw;
m. The proposed use complies with any and all additional Special Permit
criteria or special use regulations imposed on individual uses in Section VI of this
bylaw.
7.0.5 Expiration
A Special Permit shall lapse within one year if substantial use thereof has not commenced
except for good cause or in the case of a Special Permit construction if construction has
not begun within such time period without good cause. Included within the one year time
limit shall be the time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal as
specified in Section 17 of M.G.L. Chapter 40A.
7.0.6 Special Permit - Scientific Research/Development Accessory Use
Special Permits for uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a
matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are
necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related
production, may only be granted after the Planning Board makes a finding that the
proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
7-4
7.1 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
7.1.1 General Purpose
To accomplish the purposes set forth in Section I of this bylaw as to the specific goals of
facilitating traffic channelization and control, assuring adequate drainage of surface
water, protecting the environment, property values, abutting properties and visual
amenities, and to facilitate the administration of the Section, no permit for the
construction, exterior alteration, relocation, occupancy or change in use of any building,
structure or premises, shall be granted until the provisions of this bylaw have been
fulfilled. Upon the fulfillment of the Site Plan Approval criteria, a Plan Approval will be
issued by the Planning Board to the Building Inspector.
7.1.2 Projects Requiring Site Plan Approval
Within all districts, no special permit or building permit shall be issued and no
application for such permits shall be accepted for any of the following uses:
a. The construction or occupancy of a new building;
b. Additions over twenty-five percent (25%) to the gross floor area of an
existing building;
c. Any exterior alteration, addition, occupancy, or change in use of an
existing construction or premises whose site sketch did not receive the Town of
Ludlow Planning Board waiver;
**Unless a site plan has been endorsed by the Planning Board after consultation
with other boards, including but not limited to the following: Fire Department,
Department of Public Works, Building Office and/or Town Engineer,
Conservation Commission, and Board of Health.
7.1.3 Exemption From Site Plan Approval
Site plan approval shall not be required for:
a. The construction or enlargement of any single family dwelling; or
b. any building used exclusively for agriculture, horticulture, or floriculture.
c. No site plan approval shall be required in those instances where a lawful
use change is proposed, and no physical changes (other than signs) will occur to
the site or building exterior, and where no new or additional requirements of the
Zoning Bylaw must be met for the proposed use.
7-5
In the above case (c. only) the Planning Board will only require a "Change of
Occupancy" application with the application fee in force at the time.(Added
10/7/96)
7.1.4 Applications For Site Plan Approval
a. Each application for Site Plan Approval shall be submitted to the Planning
Board by the current owner of record, accompanied by the original or
reproducible Mylar and ten (10) sets of prints.
b. The Planning Board shall obtain with each submission a deposit sufficient
to cover any expenses connected with a public hearing, public notification, and
review of plans.
7.1.5 Required Site Plan Contents
All site plans shall be prepared by a person or persons registered under the Massachusetts
General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to practice architecture and/or
engineering, and land surveying and shall show the seals of the architect and/or engineer,
and land surveyor. All site plans shall be on standard 24" X 36" sheets at a scale of 1
inch equals 40 feet, with additional narrative as necessary: (Amended 1/25/99 STM)
All site plans shall also include the property owner’s names, date of plan, and scale of
plan; and a space for endorsement by the Planning Board (3” X 5”) (Added 10/2/06)
a. Provision for adequate drainage of surface water from paved areas. Use of
landscaped areas to provide such drainage in order to relieve storm drainage
systems is encouraged. The piping for the storm water drainage systems shall be
designed using the ten (10) year storm curve for parking area drains and the
twenty-five (25) year storm curve for culverts over existing natural waterways
and retention areas.
b. Existing and proposed vegetation. Such vegetation shall be indicated by:
(1) Type and location (whether woods, brush, shrubs, etc.)
(2) Number of plants (if appropriate)
c. Existing natural features such as wetlands, rock outcroppings, slopes, hills,
etc.
d. Pedestrian facilities, if any, including walks, plazas, benches, etc.
e. 1. Parking spaces and circulation area for automobiles as well as the location
of landscaped areas within them. Existing and proposed curb cuts shall be
indicated together with approval for such cuts from the appropriate town or state
7-6
agency. The number of spaces shall be in accordance with Section 6.4.2 of the
bylaw
e. 2. All parking areas shall be paved and noted on the site plan as either “paved”
or “to be paved,” with the type of pavement to be used. “See Section 6.4.7
Surfacing for any exemptions that may apply.” (Amended 10/1/12)
e. 3. Area where deliveries will be made on site. (Revised 10/06/08)
f. Existing and proposed fencing to be used to buffer abutting residential
dwellings and/or districts from the intended development (if appropriate). Section
3.0.4 of this bylaw.
g. Existing natural features and vegetation to be retained shall be so
indicated. Due regard shall be shown for all existing vegetation and natural
features which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the development.
h. The location and type of monumentation at all property corners shall be
shown and maintained.
i. Existing and proposed elevations and contours. The contour interval shall
be two (2) feet or any interval which adequately depicts the grading.
j. All existing and proposed utilities, and to include utilities with easements.
(Revised 10/06/08)
k. All site plans required herein shall display names of all abutters.
l. All existing and proposed sidewalks and curbings.
m. Landscaping Requirements
(1) Required landscaping shall be provided as set forth in Table 3.
(2) Buffer strips required by Table 3 shall be reserved exclusively for
plantings, pedestrian facilities such as benches and walkways, required
fences, necessary traffic control signs and those free standing signs which
conform to the requirements of Section 6.5.2e of this bylaw.
n. The plan shall also include a chart showing the following information:
(1) Area of lot.
(2) Area and size of building.
(3) Maximum area of building to be used for selling, offices, business,
industrial, or other uses, if applicable.
7-7
(4) Maximum number of employees, where applicable.
(5) Maximum seating capacity, where applicable.
(6) Maximum sleeping capacity, where applicable.
(7) Number of parking spaces required for the intended use, based on
Section 6.4.
(8) Number of parking spaces existing at the site (including street
parking adjacent to site).
(9) Number of trees and/or shrubs.
(10) Number of trees and/or shrubs shown on plan.
o. Additional Requirements: (Added 10/4/10 & Amended 5/14/12) All site
plans need to have the following information unless waived by the Planning
Board: (1.) Lighting Plan with Luminaire Schedule, prepared by an engineer. (2.)
Elevations showing the front, rear and sides of the building design. (3.) Signage
design with dimensions and locations. (4.) Area where snow will be stored.
(5.) Traffic Study.
7.1.6 Procedures for Site Plan Approval
a. The Planning Board shall request recommendations from the Fire
Department, Department of Public Works, Safety Committee, Building Official,
and/or Town Engineer, Conservation Commission, and Board of Health. The
Planning Board secretary shall date the plans and distribute the plans to the listed
town officials. The site plan shall be revised to show those recommendations
which are approved by the Planning Board.
Failure of other Boards to make recommendations within twenty-one (21) days of
the referral of the application will be deemed to be a lack of opposition.
b. A public hearing shall be held within sixty-five (65) days, from the date of
filing of such plans. After due consideration of the recommendations received,
the Board shall take final action within 90 days from the time of hearing. The
Planning Board's final action, in writing, shall consist of either:(Amended
10/2/95)
(1) Approval of the site plan based on a determination that the
proposed project will constitute a suitable development and is in
compliance with the standards set forth in this bylaw.
7-8
(2) Disapproval of the site plan based on a determination that the
proposed project does not meet the standards for review set forth in this
bylaw; or
(3) Approval of the project subject to any conditions, modifications,
and restrictions.
c. The period of review for a Special Permit requiring Site Plan Approval
shall be the same as any other special permit and shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 40A, Section 9, "Special Permits." Specifically, a joint
public hearing to address the Special Permit application and Site Plan Approval
application shall be held within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of a special
permit application with the Planning Board or Board of Appeals. The Planning
Board shall then have 90 days following the public hearing in which to
act.(Amended 10/2/95)
d. If the approving Board fails to take action within the time frame detailed in 7.1.6,
sections b and c, approval shall be deemed granted following the procedures for
constructive approval of Special Permits in Section 9, Chapter 40A, of the General
Laws. (Added 5/10/10)
7.1.7 Site Plan Approval Waiver
a. Projects That May Seek to Waive Site Plan Approval
(1) No permit for any of the following uses and no others shall be
granted by the Town of Ludlow Building Inspector until a determination is
made by the Town of Ludlow Planning Board that the change involved
will not create an additional parking or traffic problem and/or site hazard;
(2) The exterior alteration, addition, occupancy, or change in use of
any existing construction or premises; and/or
(3) Any new construction that constitutes less than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the gross floor area of an individual existing building.
b. Applications for Site Plan Approval Waiver
Each application for Site Plan Approval Waiver shall be submitted to the Planning
Board, accompanied by a site sketch prepared by the applicant
c. Required Site Sketch Contents
Site sketches shall be prepared by the applicant at a scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet,
with additional narrative as necessary:
7-9
(1) A sketch of the lot with all buildings on said lot including
dimensions and the lot's location.
(2) The area where cars are parked on the property and/or street.
(3) Name of owner and/or applicant.
(4) A table containing the following information:
(i) Area of Lot.
(ii) Area and size of buildings.
(iii) Number of parking spaces required for the intended use,
based on Section 6.4
(iv) Number of parking spaces existing at the site (including
street parking adjacent to site).
(5) For non-residential uses the additional information is necessary:
(i) Maximum area of building to be used for selling, offices,
business, industrial, or other uses.
(ii) Maximum number of employees, where applicable.
(iii) Maximum seating capacity, where applicable.
(iv) Maximum sleeping capacity, where applicable.
(6) For two-family dwellings, the additional information is necessary:
(i) The area of the lot.
(ii) The area and size of the building.
(iii) Location of parking spaces.
(iv) Landscaping plans.
(v) Existing natural features.
7-10
d. Procedures for Site Plan Approval Waiver.
(1) A public hearing shall be scheduled within sixty-five (65) days,
excluding weekends and legal holidays, of the date the sketch was
submitted. The Board shall take final action within ninety (90) days from
the time of the hearing. The Planning Board's final action, in writing,
shall consist of either: (Amended 10/97)
(i) Approval of the site sketch and waiver of the need for a
registered site plan submission based on the determination that the
proposed project will not create additional parking or traffic
problems and/or site hazard;
(ii) Disapproval of the site sketch and waiver based on the
determination that the proposed project will create additional
parking or traffic problems and/or site hazard; or
(iii) Approval of the site sketch and waiver subject to any
conditions, modifications, and restrictions, which will ensure that
the project will not create additional parking or traffic problems
and/or site hazard.
(2) A vote of four to five members of the Planning Board is necessary
to waive the need for a registered site plan, public hearing, and/or the
request for recommendations from the Fire Department, Safety
Committee, Building Official, Department of Public Works, and/or Town
Engineers, Conservation Commission, and Board of Health and public
hearing. For other projects, a majority vote of the Planning Board is
necessary.(Amended 10/97)
(3) If the Planning Board fails to waive the site plan approval
requirements and/or disapproves the site sketch and waiver, procedures
shall then be followed on the basis of Site Plan Approval (Sections 7.1.2 -
7.1.6)
7-11
7.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BYLAW
A. Purpose, Authority and Administration
1. Purpose
a. The purpose of this bylaw is to better manage land development in
order to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Ludlow by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated
with stormwater runoff.
b. Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
storm drain system is necessary for the protection of the Town of
Ludlow's water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment.
c. Limit the harmful impacts of soil erosion and sedimentation. Said
impacts include, but are not limited to impairing water quality and flow in
lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater, contamination of
drinking water supplies, alterations or destruction of aquatic and wildlife
habitats, cause flooding, and overload and/or clog municipal storm
drainage systems.
d. This bylaw has the following objectives:
(1) Reduce the adverse water quality impacts of stormwater
discharges to rivers, lakes, reservoirs and streams in order to attain
federal water quality standards;
(2) Prevent the discharge of pollutants, including hazardous
chemicals, into stormwater runoff;
(3) Minimize the volume and rate of stormwater which is
discharged to rivers, streams reservoirs, lakes and combined
sewers that flows from any site during and following development;
(4) Prevent erosion and sedimentation from land development,
and reduce stream channel erosion caused by increased runoff;
(5) Provide for the recharge of groundwater aquifers and
maintain the base flow of streams;
7-12
(6) Provide stormwater facilities that are attractive, maintain
the natural integrity of the environment, and are designed to
protect public safety;
(7) To prohibit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(8) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
(9) Maintain or reduce pre-development runoff characteristics
after development to the extent feasible;
(10) Minimize damage to public and private property from
flooding;
(11) Ensure that these management controls are properly
maintained.
2. Authority and Administration
The Board of Public Works shall administer, implement and enforce this bylaw.
Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board of Public Works may be
delegated in writing by the Board of Public Works to its employees or agents.
B. Definitions
The following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this bylaw;
Adverse impact means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including
their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness
for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to
human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or
stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property,
including outdoor recreation.
Alterations of Drainage Characteristics is any activity on an area of land that
changes the water quality, force, direction, timing or location of runoff flowing
from the area. Such changes include: change from distributed runoff to confined,
discrete discharge, change in the volume of runoff from the area; change in the
peak rate of runoff from the area; and change in the recharge to groundwater on
the area.
Authorized Enforcement Agency is the Board of Public Works its employees or
agents designated to enforce this bylaw.
7-13
Best Management Practices (BMP) are structural or biological devices that
temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants,
and provide other amenities. They can also be nonstructural practices that reduce
pollutants at their source. BMPs are described in a stormwater design manual,
Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook
(March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as updated or
amended) and MA DEP’s Erosion Control and Sediment Guidelines for Urban
and Suburban Areas (March 1997, as updated or amended).
The Board means the Town of Ludlow Board of Public Works.
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §
1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
Construction activity is disturbance of the ground by removal of vegetative
surface cover or topsoil, grading, excavation, clearing or filling.
Clearing is any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
Design storm is a rainfall event of specified size and return frequency that is used
to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate to a BMP.
Detention is the temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to
control the peak discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.
Development is the modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion
of use, usually involving construction.
Discharge of Pollutants means the addition from any source of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system or into the waters
of the United States or Commonwealth from any source.
Disturbance of Land is any land clearing, grading, bulldozing, digging or similar
activities.
Drainage Area means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in
a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line.
Drywell is similar to an infiltration trench but smaller with inflow from a pipe;
commonly covered with soil and used for drainage areas of less than one acre
such as roadside inlets and rooftops runoff.
Easement means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such
land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in
the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
7-14
Flow attenuation means prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak
discharge.
Groundwater means all water beneath the surface of the ground.
Hydrology model may include one of the following:
• TR-20, a watershed hydrology model developed by the natural Resources
Conservation Service that is used to route a design storm hydrograph
through a pond;
• TR-55, or Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
is a publication developed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service
to calculate stormwater runoff and an aid in designing detention basins;
• Hydro cad.
Illicit Connection means a surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which
allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system, including
without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any
connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said
connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective
date of this bylaw
Illicit Discharge means direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in
Section D. The term does not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES
Storm Water Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Discharge Permit, or resulting
from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to Section D of this bylaw.
Impervious surfaces are areas such as pavement or rooftops, which prevent the
infiltration of water into the soil.
Infiltration is the downward movement of water from the surface to the
permeable subsoil.
Infiltration trench is a subsurface stormwater management facility constructed
to introduce stormwater to subsoil and trap/remove both suspended solids and
particulate pollutants. Trenches are not intended to trap coarse sediments.
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy is the Policy issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection, and as amended, that coordinates the
requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of
the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act G.L. c. 131 § 40 and Massachusetts
Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21, §. 23-56. The Policy addresses stormwater impacts
through implementation of performance standards to reduce or prevent pollutants
from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
7-15
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain
System means the system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter,
curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin,
natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage
structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by
the Town of Ludlow.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Permit Discharge Permit is a permit issued by United States Environmental
Protection Agency or jointly with the State that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States.
Non-Storm Water Discharge means discharge to the municipal storm drain
system not composed entirely of stormwater.
Operation and Maintenance Plan is a plan setting up the functional, financial
and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a
stormwater management system to insure that it continues to function as designed.
Outstanding Resource Waters (ORWs) means waters designated by
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as ORWs. These waters
have exceptional sociologic, recreational, ecological and/or aesthetic values and
are subject to more stringent requirements under both the Massachusetts Water
Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) and the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards. ORWs include vernal pools certified by the Natural
Heritage Program of the Massachusetts Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and
Environmental Law Enforcement, all Class A designated public water supplies
with their bordering vegetated wetlands, and other waters specifically designated.
Outfall is the terminus of a storm drain or other stormwater structure where the
contents are released.
Peak discharge is the maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a storm,
usually in reference to a specific design storm event.
Permeable soils are soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration rate so as
to greatly reduce or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff. These soils are
generally classified as NRCS hydrologic soil types A and B.
Person is any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business, organization, trust, estate, administrative agency,
public or quasi-public corporation or body, the Commonwealth or political
subdivision thereof.
7-16
Point Source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
Process Wastewater is water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes
into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material,
intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
Redevelopment means development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition or
phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the impervious area on
previously developed sites.
Retention is the holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass.
Runoff means rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
Recharge: The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation
through the percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
Start of construction is the first land-disturbing activity associated with a
development, including land preparation such as: clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements; footings, piers or
foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings
such as garages.
Stormwater Management Plan is a plan required as part of the application for a
Stormwater Management Permit. See Section F, part 8.
Stormwater means storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
Surface Water Discharge Permit is a permit issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Swale is a natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to temporarily store,
route, or filter runoff.
TSS means Total Suspended Solids.
Uncontaminated means water containing no pollutants.
Watercourse means a natural or man-made channel through which water flows
or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
7-17
Wastewater means any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes
into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
C. Applicability
1. This bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system
2. This bylaw shall apply to all activities that result in disturbance of one or
more acres of land that drains to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Except as authorized by the Department of Public Works or its agent, hereafter
known as “The Board”, in a Stormwater Management Permit or as otherwise
provided in this bylaw, no person shall perform any activity that results in
disturbance of an acre or more of land. Prior to the issuance of any Special Permit
or Site Plan Approval or development permit for any proposed development listed
below, a Stormwater Management Permit, or a waiver of the requirement for
Stormwater Management Permit, must be approved by the Department of Public
Works. No person shall, on or after the effective date of the bylaw, initiate any
land clearing, land grading, earth moving or development activities without first
complying with this bylaw. The following uses and activities shall require
submittal of drainage reports, plans, construction drawings, specifications and asconstructed
information in conformance with the requirements of this bylaw:
a. Multi-family residential developments involving four or more
housing units;
b. Any new commercial, industrial, and institutional structures under
the same ownership, with at least 5,000 square feet of gross floor area,
and/or 10,000 square feet of impervious surface, or that requires 10 or
more parking spaces.
c. Redevelopment or additions to existing commercial, industrial, and
institutional uses which result in an additional impervious surface area or
gross floor area of greater than 5,000 square feet, or which results in an
increase of 10 or more parking spaces.
d. Subdivisions and construction activities of any kind disturbing
greater than one acre.
e. Development or redevelopment involving multiple separate
activities in discontinuous locations or on different schedules if the
activities are part of a larger common plan of development that all together
disturbs one or more acres.
7-18
D. Exemptions
1. To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the Department of
Public Works has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at
new development sites. These standards apply to construction activities as
described under Section C.2. The following activities may be exempt from these
stormwater performance standards:
a. Any agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil
conservation plan prepared or approved by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service;
b. Any logging which is consistent with a timber management plan
approved under the Forest Cutting Practices Act by Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Management;
c. Additions or modifications to existing single family structures;
d. Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land,
provided that they are not part of a larger common development plan; and
e. Repairs to any stormwater treatment system deemed necessary by
the Ludlow Planning Board or Department of Public Works.
f. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or the environment, as determined by the
Ludlow Planning Board or Department of Public Works.
E. Stormwater Design Manual
1. A stormwater design manual, Stormwater Management, Volume Two:
Stormwater Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of
Environmental Protection, as updated or amended) is hereby incorporated by
reference as part of this bylaw, and shall furnish additional policy, criteria and
information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation
of the requirements of this bylaw.
2. This manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices,
including the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice. The manual
may be updated and expanded from time to time, based on improvements in
engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience, at the
discretion of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection or
supplemented by the Ludlow Planning Board. Storm water treatment practices that
are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria
will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.
7-19
F. Stormwater Management Permit Procedures and Requirements
No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading, or other
land development permits required for land disturbance activities, and no land
owner shall commence land disturbance activities, without approval of a
Stormwater Management Permit from the Department of Public Works and
meeting the requirements of this bylaw.
1. Application Requirements
A. Application for approval of a Stormwater Management Permit
shall include the following:
1. stormwater management plan or an application for waiver shall be
submitted to the Department of Public Works for review and a
approval for any proposed development specified in
Section C.2. Two copies of the application and stormwater
management plan shall be submitted, and clearly labeled. The plan
shall contain supporting computations, drawings, and sufficient
information describing the manner, location, and type of measures
in which stormwater runoff will be managed from the entire
development. The plan shall serve as the basis for all subsequent
construction.
2. An erosion and sediment control plan, which shall contain
sufficient information to describe the nature and purpose of the
proposed development.
3. An ongoing maintenance agreement.
4. A non-refundable permit review fee. See separate fee
schedule.
The applicant may request, and the Department of Public Works may
grant, a waiver from any information requirements or fee it judges to be
unnecessary to the review of a particular plan.
B. Application for Waiver of Stormwater Permit
1. Each Application for Waiver of Stormwater Permit shall be
submitted to the Department of Public Works accompanied by 2
copies of a site plan prepared by a registered land surveyor and
registered professional engineer.
2. Approval of the Application for Waiver of the Stormwater
Permit will be endorsed on the application.
7-20
3. If the Department of Public Works denies the Application
for Waiver of Stormwater Permit, the procedure for Application
for Stormwater Permit must be followed.
4. The waiver may be rescinded by the Department of Public
Works or its designates upon the recommendation of the DPW
Director, Town Engineer, Building Inspector, or Conservation
Commission if during construction it is found that construction
activities generates intolerable circumstances affecting the
municipal stormwater system, adjacent properties, or adjacent
water bodies. This issuance of any waiver may only be granted for
sites disturbing less than one acre, which are not part of a greater
development that disturb more than one acre and do not affect the
municipal stormwater system or flow into territorial waters of the
United States.
2. Procedures for Review and Approval of Stormwater Permits
a. The procedures for review and approval of stormwater
management plans shall be consistent with Section F Part 4 Criteria for
Review of Stormwater Management Permits and Section F Part 5
Department of Public Works Action, as appropriate to the use.
b. The Department of Public Works shall have seven days from the
receipt of the application to review for administrative completeness.
c. The Department of Public Works shall take final action within
twenty-one (21) days of the receipt of a completed application unless such
time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Department
of Public Works. The twenty-one (21) days shall include the seven day
administrative completeness review period for applications found to be
complete.
3. Criteria for Review of Stormwater Permits
In addition to other criteria used by the Department of Public Works in making
permit decisions, for the uses specified in this bylaw, the Department of Public
Works must also find that the Stormwater Management Plan submitted with the
permit application meets the following criteria:
a. The Stormwater Management Plan and the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan are consistent with the Purposes and Objectives of this bylaw
in Section A;
b. The Stormwater Management Plan meets the performance
7-21
Standards described in Section H;
c. The Erosion and Sediment Control plan must meet the Design
Requirements in Section I.
4. Board Action
The Department of Public Works action, rendered in writing, shall consist of
either:
a. Approval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application
based upon determination that the proposed plan meets the purposes in
Section A and the standards in Section F and will adequately protect the
water resources of the community and is in compliance with the
requirement set forth in this bylaw;
b. Approval of the Stormwater management Permit Application
subject to any conditions, modifications or restrictions required by the
Board which will ensure that the project meets the purposes in Section A
and the standards in Section F and adequately protects water resources set
forth in this bylaw;
c. Disapproval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application
based upon a determination that the proposed plan as submitted does not
meet the purposes in Section A and the standards in Section H or
adequately protect water resources as set forth in this bylaw.
Failure of the Department of Public Works to take final action upon an
application within the time specified above shall be deemed to be approval of said
application and shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the
plans filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and
the Department of Public Works.
5. Inspections
No plan will be approved without adequate provision for inspection of the
property before development activity commences. The applicant shall arrange
with the Department of Public Works or other agents designated by the
Department of Public Works for scheduling the following inspections:
a. Initial inspection – prior to approval of any plan;
b. Erosion Control inspections – after site clearing, rough grading
and final grading to ensure erosion control practices are in accord with the
plan.
7-22
c. Bury inspection – prior to backfilling of any underground
drainage or stormwater conveyance structures;
d. Final inspection – when all work including construction of
stormwater managements facilities and landscaping have been completed.
The Department of Public Works or other agents shall inspect the work and either
approve it or notify the Department of Public Works and applicant in writing in
what respects there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the
approved plan. The applicant shall promptly correct any portion of the work
which does not comply or the applicant will be subject to the bonding provisions
of Section K or the penalty provisions of Section L. The Town may conduct
additional inspections as needed to ensure effective control of erosion and
sedimentation during all phases of construction.
6. Right of Entry for Inspection
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when
any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage
control system or sanitary sewer, the filing of an application shall be deemed as
the property owner’s permission to the Town of Ludlow for the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of the
inspection.
7. Application Review Fees
The fee for review of any Stormwater Permit application shall be based on the
amount of land to be disturbed at the site and the fee structure established by the
Board of Public Works.
8. Stormwater Management & Erosion Control Plan
A. Plan Requirements
The application for a Stormwater Management Permit shall consist of
submittal of a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan,
prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, which meets the design requirements provided by this
bylaw. The plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of
the proposed development on water resources; and the effectiveness and
acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The
plan must be designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards as set forth in this bylaw and the DEP Stormwater
Management Handbook Volumes I and II. The applicant shall certify on
the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and
7-23
development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. The
minimum information submitted for support of a stormwater management
plan shall be as follows:
1. A locus map;
2. The existing zoning and land use at the site;
3. The proposed land use;
4. The location(s) of existing and proposed easements;
5. The location of existing and proposed utilities;
6. The site’s existing and proposed topography with contours
at two foot intervals;
7. The existing site hydrology;
8. A description and delineation of existing stormwater
conveyances, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the
site or into which stormwater flows;
9. A delineation of 100-year flood plains, if applicable;
10. Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation (November
to April) in areas to be used for stormwater retention, detention, or
infiltration;
11. The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces
with runoff coefficient for each;
12. A drainage area map showing pre and post construction
watershed boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow paths;
13. A description and drawings of all components of the
proposed drainage system including:
(a) locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks,
streams, drainage swales and their method of stabilization;
(b) all measures for the detention, retention or
infiltration of water;
(c) all measures for the protection of water quality;
7-24
(d) the structural details for all components of the
proposed drainage systems and stormwater management
facilities;
(e) notes on drawings specifying materials to be used,
construction specifications, and typicals;
(f) Typical hydrology with supporting calculations;
(g) Proposed improvements including location of
buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, and
drainage facilities, if applicable;
(h) A description of construction and waste materials
expected to be stored on-site, and a description of controls
to reduce pollutants from these materials including storage
practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(i) Timing, schedules, and sequence of development
including clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction,
final grading, and vegetative stabilization; and
(j) A maintenance schedule for the period of
construction.
B. Specific Design Criteria
Additional policy, criteria, and information including
specifications and design standards may be found in the
Stormwater Design Manual.
1. Infiltration systems
(a) Infiltration systems shall be equipped with clean stone
and or filter fabric adjacent to the soil or other sediment
removal mechanisms;
(b) Infiltration systems greater than three feet deep shall be
located at least 10 feet from basement walls;
(c) Due to the potential for groundwater contamination from
dry wells, they shall not be an acceptable method for
management runoff containing pollutants;
(d) Infiltration systems designed to handle runoff from
7-25
commercial or industrial impervious parking areas shall be a
minimum of 100 feet from any drinking water supply well;
(e) Infiltration systems shall not be used as sediment
control basins during construction unless specific plans are
included to restore or improve the basin surface;
(f) Infiltration basins shall be constructed with a three
foot minimum separation between the bottom of the
structure and the seasonal high groundwater elevation, as
determined by a certified soil evaluator; and
(g) Provisions shall be made for safe overflow passage,
in the event of a storm which exceeds the capacity of an
infiltration system.
2. Retention and detention ponds shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the criteria of the Stormwater
Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook
(March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as
updated or amended).
3. The applicant shall give consideration in any plan to
incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as
natural swales, and depressions as they exist prior to development
to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of
water.
4. The Department of Public Works shall give preference to
the use of swales in place of the traditional use of curbs and gutters
based on a case by case review of stormwater management plans.
5. The applicant shall consider public safety in the design of
any stormwater facilities. The banks of detention, retention, and
infiltration basins shall be sloped at a gentle grade into the water as
a safeguard against personal injury, to encourage the growth of
vegetation and to allow the alternate flooding and exposure of
areas along the shore. Basins shall have a 4:1 slope to a depth of
two feet below the control elevation. Side slopes must be stabilized
and planted with vegetation to prevent erosion and provide
pollutant removal. The banks of detention and retention areas shall
be designed with sinuous rather than straight shorelines so that the
length of the shoreline is maximized, thus offering more space for
the growth of vegetation. All detention and retention basins must
be fenced in.
7-26
6. Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of
some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements
or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water.
Approval of a stormwater management plan does not create or
affect any such rights.
7. All applicants for projects which involve the storage or use
of hazardous chemicals shall incorporate handling and storage
“best management practices” that prevent such chemicals from
contaminating runoff discharged from a site into infiltration
systems, receiving water bodies or storm drains, and shall include
a list of such chemicals in the application.
8. Runoff from parking lots shall be treated by oil and water
separators or other controls to remove oil and sediment;
9. The basis design criteria methodologies, and construction
specifications, subject to the approval the Planning Board and
Town Engineer, shall be those generally found in the most current
edition of the Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater
Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of
Environmental Protection, as updated or amended) and in MA
DEP’s Erosion Control and Sediment Guidelines for Urban and
Suburban Areas (March 1997, as updated or amended).
C. Design Requirements for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
1. The design requirements of the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan are:
a. Minimize total area of disturbance
b. Sequence activities to minimize simultaneous areas
of disturbance
c. Minimize peak rate of runoff in accordance with the
MA DEP Stormwater Policy
d. Minimize soil erosion and control sedimentation
during construction. Prevention of erosion is preferred over
sedimentation control
e. Divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas
f. Maximize groundwater recharge
7-27
g. Install and maintain all erosion and sediment
control measures in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications and good engineering practices.
h. Prevent off-site transport of sediment from the time
of initial site disturbance forward
i. Protect and manage on and off-site material storage
areas (overburden and stockpiles of dirt, materials, borrow
areas, or other areas used solely by the permitted project
are considered a part of the project)
j. Comply with applicable Federal, State and local
laws and regulations including waste disposal, sanitary
sewer or septic system regulations, and air quality
requirements, including dust control
k. Prevent adverse impact from the proposed activities
to habitats mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage
& Endangered Species Program as endangered, threatened
or of special concern, estimated habitats of rare wildlife and
certified vernal pools, and priority habitats of rare species.
l. Institute interim and permanent stabilization
measures. The measures shall be instituted on a disturbed
area as soon as practicable but no more than 14 days after
construction activity has temporarily or permanently ceased
on that portion of the site.
m. Properly manage on-site construction and waste
materials.
n. Prevent off-site vehicle tracking of sediments.
10. Stormwater Management Performance Standards
A. Minimum Control Requirements
Projects must meet the standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Policy. These standards are:
1. No new stormwater conveyances (e.g. outfalls) may
discharge untreated stormwater directly to or cause erosion in
wetlands or water of the Commonwealth.
2. Stormwater management systems must be designed so that
7-28
post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed predevelopment
peak discharge rates.
3. Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be
minimized through the use of infiltration measures to the
maximum extent practicable. The annual recharge from the postdevelopment
site should approximate the annual recharge rate from
the pre-development or existing site conditions, based on soil
types.
4. For new development, stormwater management systems
must be designed to remove 80% of the average annual load (post
development conditions) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS). It is
presumed that this standard is met when:
(a) Suitable nonstructural practices for source control
and pollution prevention are implemented;
(b) Stormwater management best management
practices (BMPs) are sized to capture the prescribed runoff
volume; and
(c) Stormwater management BMPs are maintained as
designed.
5. Stormwater discharges from areas with higher potential
pollutant loads require the use of specific stormwater management
BMPs (see Stormwater Management Volume I: Stormwater Policy
Handbook). The use of infiltration practices without pretreatment
is prohibited.
6. Stormwater discharges to critical areas must utilize certain
stormwater management BMPs approved for critical areas (see
Stormwater management Volume I: Stormwater Policy
Handbook). Critical areas are Outstanding Resource Waters
(ORWs), shellfish beds, swimming beaches, cold water fisheries
and recharge areas for public water supplies.
7. Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet
the Stormwater Management Standards to the maximum extent
practicable.
However, if it is not practicable to meet all the Standards, new
(retrofitted or expanded) stormwater management systems must be
designed to improve existing conditions.
7-29
8. Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to
prevent impacts during disturbance and construction activities.
9. All stormwater management systems must have an
operation and maintenance plan to ensure that systems function as
designed.
When the proposed discharge may have an impact upon a sensitive receptor,
including water bodies and wetlands, storm sewers and/or combined sewers, the
Department of Public Works may require an increase in these minimum
requirements, based on existing water quality conditions and/or stormwater
system capacity.
B. Stormwater Management Measures
1. Stormwater management measures shall be required to
satisfy the minimum control requirements and shall be according to
the following order of preference:
(a) Infiltration, flow attenuation, and pollutant removal
of runoff on-site to existing areas with grass, trees, and
similar vegetation and through the use of open vegetated
swales and natural depressions;
(b) Use of stormwater on-site to replace water used in
industrial processes or for irrigation;
(c) Stormwater detention structures for the temporary
storage of runoff which is designed so as not to create a
permanent pool of water; and
(d) Stormwater retention structures for the permanent
storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
(e) Retention and evaporation of stormwater on
rooftops or in parking lots.
2. Infiltration practices shall be utilized to reduce runoff
volume increases. A combination of successive practices may be
used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements.
Justification shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each
practice based on site conditions.
3. Best Management Practices shall be employed to minimize
pollutants in stormwater runoff prior to discharge into a storm
drainage system or water body.
7-30
4. All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to
provide an emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures
to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along its length and at
any outfall.
5. The designed release rate of any stormwater structure shall
be modified if any increase in flooding or stream channel erosion
would result at a downstream dam, highway, structure, or normal
point of restricted stream flow.
G Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System
1. Illicit Discharges
No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any
pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4), into a watercourse, or into the waters of the
Commonwealth.
2. Illicit Connections
No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any illicit
connection to the municipal storm drain system, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at
the time of connection.
3. Obstruction of Municipal Storm Drain System
No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater
into or out of the municipal storm drain system without prior written
approval from The Department of Public Works.
4. Exemptions
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the
prohibition of non-stormwaters provided that the source is not a
significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system:
a. Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities;
b. Waterline flushing;
c. Flow from potable water sources;
d. Springs;
7-31
e. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
f. Diverted stream flow;
g. Rising groundwater;
h. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
i. Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems, such as dewatering
excavations for foundations or pipelines), crawl space pumps, or air
conditioning condensation;
j. Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
k. Water from individual residential car washing and temporary fundraising
car wash events;
l. Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water provided the
water is allowed to stand for one week prior to draining or tested for
chlorine levels with a pool test kit prior to draining (less than one ppm
chlorine)and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance;
m. Discharges from street sweepers of minor amounts of water during
operation;
n. Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the
Department of Public Works prior to the time of the test;
o. Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
Surface Water Discharge Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the Department of Environmental Protection,
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations; and
p. Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the Department of Public Works as necessary to protect public health,
safety, welfare or the environment.
H. Emergency Suspension of Storm Drainage System Access
1. The Department of Public Works, Board of Health, Conservation Commission,
7-32
Fire Department, Police Department or Building Department may suspend
municipal storm drain system access to any person or property without prior
written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health,
safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with
an emergency suspension order, the Authorized Enforcement Agency may take
all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
2. Any person discharging to a municipal storm drain system in violation of
this Bylaw may have their municipal storm drain system access terminated if
such a termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Department of
Public Works will notify a violator of the proposed termination of municipal
storm drain access. The violator may petition the Department of Public Works for
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates
municipal storm drain system access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without prior approval from the Department of Public Works.
I. Notification of Spills
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a
person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of or suspects a release of
materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may result in discharge
of pollutants to the municipal drainage system or waters of the Commonwealth,
the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the
release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall
immediately notify the Town of Ludlow Fire, Police, Health, and Public Works
Departments. In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, the reporting
person shall notify the Authorized Enforcement Agency no later than the next
business day. The reporting person shall provide to the Authorized Enforcement
Agency written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications
within three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is
from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the
facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
J. Maintenance
1. Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Agreement
a. Prior to issuance of any building permit for which stormwater management is required,
the Department of Public Works shall require the applicant or owner to execute an operation,
maintenance and inspection agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the
private stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be designed to
7-33
ensure that water quality standards are met in all seasons and throughout
the life of the system. Such agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the town or its
authorized representative and for regular or special assessments of
property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any provision established. The
agreement shall include:
1. The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the
system.
2. Maintenance agreements that specify:
a. The names and addresses of the person(s)
responsible for operation and maintenance.
b. The person(s) responsible for financing
maintenance and emergency repairs.
c. A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures,
including swales and ponds.
d. A list of easements with the purpose and location of
each.
e. The signature(s) of the owner(s).
3. Stormwater management easements as necessary for:
a. Access for facility inspections and maintenance.
b. Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including
flood routes for the 100-year storm event.
c. Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to
structures requiring regular cleanout.
4. Stormwater management easement requirements:
a. The purpose of each easement shall be specified in
the maintenance agreement signed by the property owner.
b. Stormwater management easements are required for
all areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a
waiver is granted by the Town.
7-34
c. Easements shall be recorded with the Registry of
Deeds prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion.
5. Changes to Operation and Maintenance Plans:
a. The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify
the Planning Board of changes in ownership or assignment of financial
responsibility.
b. The maintenance schedule in the Maintenance Agreement may be
amended to achieve the purposes of this bylaw by mutual agreement of the
Planning Board and the responsible parties. Amendments must be in
writing and signed by all responsible parties. Responsible parties must
include owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and persons with
operational responsibility.
b. Prior to the release of the bond and/or granting certificate of
occupancy, this agreement shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner
in the land records of the Registry of Deeds.
c. The agreement shall also provide that if after notice by the Town
Engineer to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory
corrections are not made by the owner(s) within thirty days, the
Department of Public Works may perform all necessary work to place the
facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be
assessed the cost of the work and any penalties.
2. Maintenance Responsibility
a. The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant
to this bylaw for private stormwater management facilities, or any other
person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good
condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains,
dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures
and other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance
shall be in accordance with approved plans.
b. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be
completed, the time period for completion, and who shall be legally
responsible to perform the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall
be printed on the stormwater management plan.
c. Records of installation and maintenance shall be maintained by the
property owner and shall be made available to Town officials by request.
These records shall be stored by the property owner for a period of five
7-35
years.
d. Failure to maintain practices any stormwater management facility
shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties identified in Section L
herein.
K. Performance Bond
The Department of Public Works shall require from the developer a surety
or cash bond, or other means of security acceptable to the Department of
Public Works prior to the issuance of any building permit for the
construction of all uses and activities listed in Section C of this bylaw
requiring a stormwater management facility. The amount of the security
shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the
stormwater management facility. The bond so required in this section
shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work
specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with
all of the provisions of this bylaw and other applicable laws and
regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released
without a final inspection of the completed work by the Town Engineer,
submission of “As-built” plans, and certification of completion by the
Department of Public Works of the stormwater management facilities
being in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this
bylaw and proof that the operation and maintenance agreement has been
recorded in land records at the Registry of Deeds.
L. Enforcement and Penalties
1. Authority
The Department of Public Works or an authorized agent of the
Department of Public Works shall enforce this bylaw, regulations, orders,
violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.
2. Violations
A. Any development activity, as specified in Section C of this bylaw,
that has commenced or is conducted contrary to this bylaw may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
B. The Department of Public Works or an authorized agent of the
Department of Public Works may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions of this bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include:
(a) elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4; (b)
performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; (c) that unlawful
7-36
discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and (d)
remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
3. Notice of Violation
When the Department of Public Works determines that an activity is not
being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Bylaw it
shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The
notice of violation shall contain:
a. The name and address of the owner applicant;
b. The address when available or the description of the building,
structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring;
c. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
d. A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this bylaw and a time schedule
for the completion of such remedial action;
e. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
f. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15)
days of service of notice of violation.
3. Stop Work Orders
Persons receiving a notice of violations will be required to halt all
construction activities. This “stop work order” will be in effect until the
Department of Public Works confirms that the development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to
address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil,
criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this bylaw.
7-37
4. Orders
A. If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which
such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate
or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town of
Ludlow may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof
shall be charged to the violator.
B. Within thirty (30) days after completing all measures necessary to
abate the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the
property owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town of
Ludlow, including administrative costs. The violator or property owner
may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with
the Department of Public Works within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
notification of the costs incurred.
C. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in
which to file a protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of
the Department of Public Works affirming or reducing the costs, or from a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs be recovered
by the Town through the procedure specified in M.G.L. Chapter 40,
Section 58.
4. Criminal and Civil Penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, valid regulation, or
the terms or conditions in any permit or order prescribed or issued there
under, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300.00 for each day such
violation occurs or continues, or subject to a civil penalty which may be
assessed in an action brought on behalf of the Town in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
5. Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town of
Ludlow may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set
forth in Ludlow’s Town Bylaws. The Department of Public Works shall
be the enforcing entity. The penalty for the first violation shall be
$100.00. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200.00. The
penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300.00. Each day
or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
7-38
6. Restoration of Lands
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition.
In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time
after notice, the Department of Public Works take necessary corrective
action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
L Transitional Provisions
Residential property owners shall comply with this Sections G of this bylaw on
such a schedule set forth by the Board of Public Works compliance order, but such
property owners shall in no case have more than six months from the effective
date of the Bylaw to comply with its provisions, unless good cause is shown for
the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period.
M. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision thereof.
END OF SECTION 7
8-1
SECTION VIII: ADMINISTRATION
8.0 BOARD OF APPEALS
8.0.1 There shall be a Board of Appeals to consist of five (5) members to be appointed
by the Selectmen for terms of such length that the terms of one appointee will expire each
year.
8.0.2 There shall be three (3) associate members of the Board of Appeals, to be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of such length that the term of one
associate will expire each year.
8.0.3 The Board of Appeals shall have the power, after public hearing for which notice
has been given by publication and posting as provided in Section 11 of Chapter 40A of
the General Laws and by mailing to all parties in interest, to grant upon appeal or upon
petition with respect to particular land or structures, a variance from the terms of the
applicable zoning ordinance or bylaw where such permit granting authority specifically
find that owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape, or topography of
such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting
generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of the ordinance or bylaw would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to
the petitioner or appellant, and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the
intent or purpose of such ordinance or bylaw. Except where local ordinances or bylaws
shall expressly permit variances for use, no variance may authorize a use or activity not
otherwise permitted in the district in which the land or structure is located provided,
however, that such variances properly granted prior to January first, nineteen hundred and
seventy-six but limited in time, may be extended on the same terms and conditions that
were in effect for such variance upon said effective date.
8.0.4 The permit granting authority may impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations
both of time and use, including the continued existence of any particular structures but
excluding any condition, safeguards, or limitation based upon the continued ownership of
the land or structures to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner, or any
owner.
8.0.5 If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date
of grant of such variance, they shall lapse, and may be re-established only after notice
and a new hearing pursuant to this section.
8.1 ENFORCEMENT
8.1.1 This bylaw and any amendments thereto, shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector. He shall issue no permit for the erection or alteration of any building or part
thereof, plans and specifications and intended use of which are not in all respects in
8-2
conformity with the provisions of this bylaw. With each application for a permit to build
or alter, there shall be filed a plan showing the lot and the location of a building thereon.
8.1.2 No building shall be occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by
the Building Inspector where required.
8.1.3 The Building Inspector shall issue a cease and desist order on any work in
progress or on the use of the premises, either of which are in violation of the provisions
of this bylaw.
8.1.4 Construction or operations under a building or Special Permit shall conform to
any subsequent amendment of this bylaw unless the use or construction is commenced
within a period of six (6) months after issuance of the permit and in the cases involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously
and expeditiously as is reasonable.
8.1.5 PENALTIES
a. Non-Criminal Disposition/Violations
Any violation of the provisions of this bylaw, the conditions of a permit granted
under this bylaw, or any decisions rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals or
Planning Board under this bylaw, shall be liable to a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day such violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
In addition to the procedures for enforcement as described above, the provisions
of this bylaw, the conditions of a permit granted under this bylaw, or any
decisions rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or Planning Board under this
bylaw, may be enforced, by the Building Commissioner, by non-criminal
complaint pursuant to the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D.
The fine for any violation disposed of through this procedure shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
b. Criminal Disposition/Violations
Persons violating any of the provisions of this bylaw shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
8-3
8.2 CONDITIONS OF CONSTRUCTION
8.2.1 To accomplish the purposes set forth in Section I of this bylaw as well as the
specific goals of this paragraph, no building permit for the construction of new dwellings
shall be issued until a plot plan showing that all property corners are bounded or pinned,
existing and proposed grading, proposed building location, and all utilities certified by a
person or persons registered under the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts to practice architecture, engineering and/or land surveying has been
submitted to the Building Official as part of the application for said building permit and
approved in writing by him.
8.2.2 In the case of additions to existing structures or the construction of accessory
buildings, a plot plan will not be required unless, in the opinion of the Inspector of
Buildings, there may be a conflict in property line locations.
If a Plot Plan is required, the plot plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional
Engineer and/or a Registered Land Surveyor and submitted to the Building Official as
part of the application for a building permit.
END OF SECTION 8
9-1
SECTION IX: REPEAL, VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE
9.0 REPEAL
All bylaws or parts of bylaws heretofore passed, inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed.
9.1 VALIDITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or
provision hereof.
9.2 EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of the adoption of this bylaw or any amendment to this bylaw shall be the date
on which the adoption or amendment was voted upon by the town meeting, if this bylaw or any
amendments are subsequently approved by the Attorney General and if this bylaw or any
amendments to this bylaw are published in a town bulletin or pamphlet and posting has been
made or publication in a newspaper has been completed in accordance with M.G.L.
END OF SECTION 9
10-1
SECTION X: DEFINITIONS
The words defined in this section shall be capitalized through the bylaw. Where a defined word
has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning of the word be the same as the meaning
ascribed to it in this section unless another meaning is clearly intended by its context. In this
bylaw the word "lot" includes "plot"; the word "building" includes "structure"; the word
"occupied" includes "designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied"; and the word "uses"
includes "designed, arranged or intended to be used."
ABANDONED SIGN: Any temporary sign which applies to an event more than seven days
prior; any permanent sign for which the owner cannot be found, or which no longer has
application to the property on which it is located. (Added 10/2/06)
ABUTTING LOT: Any lot or position of a lot that adjoins the lot in question or is located
across a road or street.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A separate dwelling unit located in a building originally
constructed as a single family residence, provided that such separate dwelling unit has been
established pursuant to the provisions of 6.6.3 of this ordinance. (Added 10/4/93)
ACCESSORY LIVESTOCK AGRICULTURE: The keeping of farm animals on land used
other than for farming for the use of the occupants only.
ACCESSORY SIGN: A sign which does not identify a business, service, product or activity;
i.e. Open, Closed, Vacancy, Hours of Operation etc.(Added 10/2/06)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same
lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal
structure.
ADULT CARE FACILITIES: Any of the various types of development designed to provide
some form of assisted living to elderly adults, the disabled, or chronically ill. This includes
Adult Day Care Facilities, Assisted Living Residences, Congregate Living Facilities, Continuing
Care Retirement Communities, Custodial Care Facilities, Elderly Housing, Group Care
Facilities, Hospices, Independent Living Facilities, Long-term Care Facilities, Nursing Homes,
Convalescent Homes and similar developments, as well as medical offices and other ancillary
facilities appropriate to the principal use. These terms may be used interchangeably for the
purpose of this bylaw. (Added 10/3/11)
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having no greater than 20% of its stock in trade:
books, magazines, and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in Section 31
Chapter 272 Massachusetts General Laws.(Added 10/7/96)
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or
10-2
sexual excitement as defined in Section 31, Chapter 272 Massachusetts General Laws.(Added
10/7/96)
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock devices, objects, tools, or toys which are distinguished or characterized by
their association with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in
Section 31, Chapter 272 Massachusetts General Laws.(Added 10/7/96)
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: An establishment or business presenting
performances involving nudity as defined by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272 Section
31.(Added 10/7/96)
ADULT VIDEO STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade, videos, movies, or other film material which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in Section 31, Chapter 272 Massachusetts General Laws.(Added 10/7/96)
ADVERSE IMPACT: means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their
quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural
uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or
property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with
the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. (Added 10/2/06)
A-FRAME SIGN: SEE Sandwich Sign (Prohibited) and V-Shaped sign. (Added 10/2/06)
AGRICULTURE: Agriculture, floriculture, and horticulture, excluding the keeping of farm
animals.
AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK: The keeping of farm animals, including horses and ponies,
for commercial use.
AGRICULTURE, MODERATE DENSITY OVERLAY DISTRICT: A zoning district that
allows a greater range of uses than is allowed within the Agriculture District. The overlay
district is defined as all areas within the underlying Agriculture District that are measured from
the mean center line of the street to a point 1000 feet from the sewer line that was in
existence on July 1, 1991.
AIRCRAFT FLIGHT OVERLAY DISTRICT: District which is in the Ludlow Aircraft
Flight Overlay Map dated January 15, 1992.
ALTERATIONS OF DRAINAGE CHARACTERISTICS is any activity on an area of land
that changes the water quality, force, direction, timing or location of runoff flowing from the
area. Such changes include: change from distributed runoff to confined, discrete discharge,
change in the volume of runoff from the area; change in the peak rate of runoff from the area;
and change in the recharge to groundwater on the area. (Added 10/2/06)
10-3
ANIMATED SIGN: any sign which uses actual movement or the illusion of movement.
Prohibited. (Added 10/2/06)
APPURTENANT STRUCTURES: Adjacent or accessory structures. (Added 5/14/12)
AREA OF SIGN: the area of a sign shall be calculated as the smallest rectangular area which
completely encompasses all components of the sign, exclusive of its support(s); or the smallest
circular area, whichever is greater. Area of sign having no significant third dimension and
displaying information on two sides shall be considered as the area of a single side. Area of signs
having a significant third dimension, as judged by the Building Commissioner, and displaying
information on two or more sides shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis. (Added 10/2/06)
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING: As-of-Right Siting shall mean that development may proceed without
the need for a special permit. As-of-right development shall be subject to Site Plan Approval by
the Site Plan Review Authority to determine conformance with the zoning bylaw. (Added 5/14/12)
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: An entity which provides room and board and where the
operator provides a minimum of two meals a day and assistance with activities of daily living for
three or more elderly or disabled residents, as defined and licensed, or as may be defined and
licensed in the future by Massachusetts General Laws. (Added 10/2/06)
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY is the Board of Public Works its employees or
agents designated to enforce this bylaw. (Added 10/2/06)
AUTO BODY SHOP: A structure where motor vehicle bodies and frames are repaired.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE: A structure, or part thereof, where repairs, other than to body and
frame, are made.
AUTO SALES LOT: A structure and surrounding lot where motor vehicles are on display for
sale and serviced.
AUTO SERVICE STATION: A building, or part thereof, whose chief activity is the selling of
gasoline, oil, and related products for motor vehicles or the provision of lubricating service or
general auto repair.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINCE (ATM): an automated device that performs banking
or financial functions. (Added 5/13/13)
AUTOMATED VENDING KIOSK: a machine which dispenses retail and consumer products
after the consumer inserts currency or credit into the machine. This does not include machines
that are solely for the purpose of food and beverage. (Added 5/13/13)
AWNING SIGN: A signed attached to or printed upon the tile or fabric material supported by
framing and which is attached to a building. (Added 10/2/06)
10-4
BANNER: A flexible piece of cloth, plastic, or similar material, used for advertising attached at
one or more points to a pole, staff, or other support. (Added 10/2/06)
BEAUTY SALON BOOTH RENTAL: occupancy of a booth in a beauty salon. A booth
rental is also applicable to the following professions; hairstylist, barber, massage therapist, nail
technician, colorist, acupuncturist, and any other profession associated with the cosmetology
field. (Added 5/13/13)
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) are structural or biological devices that
temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants, and provide
other amenities. They can also be nonstructural practices that reduce pollutants at their source.
BMPs are described in a stormwater design manual, Stormwater management, Volume Two:
Stormwater Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection,
as updated or amended) and MA DEP’s Erosion Control and Sediment Guidelines for Urban and
Suburban Areas (March 1997, as updated or amended). (Added 10/2/06)
BOARD, THE means the Town of Ludlow Board of Public Works. (Added 10/2/06)
BOARDER: The same as "Lodger".
BOARDING HOUSE: The renting of rooms or the furnishing of table board for more than four
persons in a dwelling either occupied as a private residence or used exclusively as a boarding
house.
BREWERY: a large scale facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of producing more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to
thirty-one (31) gallons per year), where malt, wine, or hard cider beverages are produced and
packaged for retail or wholesale distribution, which may include a tap room, where beverages
produced on the premises may be sold and consumed. (Added 10/3/16)
BREW PUB: a restaurant, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, to produce and
sell beer and/or ale at the location and whose primary business is the sale and preparation of food
to be consumed on the premises. (Added 10/3/16)
BUILDING LINE: The line of the face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This
face includes sun parlors and covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not
include steps.
BUILDING-MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A photovoltaic installation that is
structurally mounted on a building’s footprint. (Added 5/14/12)
BUILDING PERMIT: A construction permit issued by an authorized building commissioner;
the building permit evidences that the project is consistent with state and federal building codes
as well as the zoning bylaw. (Added 5/14/12)
10-5
BUFFER AREA: Land used to visibly separate a lot zoned Business, Agriculture Moderate
Density Overlay, or Industrial from a residential lot.(Added 10/97)
BUFFER STRIP: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block
noise, lights, or other nuisances.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage which the ground floor of all buildings on the lot
bears to the area of the lot. Structures below the finished lot grade shall not be included in
building coverage.
CHANGE OF USE: Any use which substantially differs from the previous use of a building or
land.
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN: A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, plaques, or
illustrations can be changed or rearranged without changing the design of the sign. (Added
10/2/06)
CLEAN WATER ACT: means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.) as hereafter amended.(Added 10/2/06)
CLEARING: is any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. (Added 10/2/06)
CLEAR ZONE: A zone with high accident potential that extends outward 3,000 feet from the
end of the runway of an Air Force base. This zone was established by the United States Air
Force using historical crash patterns. (Added 5/9/11)
COMMUNITY CENTER: A facility operated by a religious, nonprofit or municipal
organization primarily to provide public facilities for meetings, classes, teen centers, and similar
uses. A community center may include artists’ space and offices for nonprofit organizations if
such uses are clearly secondary to the primary use of the building and do no include any
residential or overnight components. (Added 10/2/06)
CONDOMINIUM: A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually,
and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional,
undivided basis. May be either residential, business or industrial. (Added 10/2/06)
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: is disturbance of the ground by removal of vegetative surface
cover or topsoil, grading, excavation, clearing or filling. (Added 10/2/06)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying an architect, builder, contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier, or other participant in the construction, alteration, or
maintenance currently being done on the property on which the sign is located. (Added 10/2/06)
10-6
CONTACT INFORMATION: Any and all information necessary to make contact under both
normal and emergency conditions. This information shall include, but may not be limited to:
names, addresses, telephone and fax numbers, as well as e-mail addresses. This information shall
be kept up-to-date. (Added 5/14/12)
DESIGN STORM is a rainfall event of specified size and return frequency that is used to
calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate to a BMP. (Added 10/2/06)
DETENTION is the temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to control the
peak discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.(Added 10/2/06)
DEVELOPMENT is the modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of use,
usually involving construction. (Added 10/2/06)
DIRECT/EXTERNAL LIGHTING: Illumination by means of a light source that is external to
the sign being lit. (Added 10/2/06)
DIRECTIONAL, INFORMATIONAL, OR SAFETY SIGN: An on-premises sign which
identifies the premises, the activity, or the business conducted upon such premises or which
provides directions for the safe and efficient flow of traffic. Such signs include those marking
entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas, or other operational features of the premises.
(Added 10/2/06)
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS means the addition from any source of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system or into the waters of the United
States or Commonwealth from any source. (Added 10/2/06)
DISTILLERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, where distilled
spirits are produced, manufactured or distilled. (Added 10/3/16)
DISTURBANCE OF LAND: is any land clearing, grading, bulldozing, digging or similar
activities. (Added 10/2/06)
DOOR SIGN OR WINDOW SIGN: Any sign or poster placed inside a window or door and
legible from a public way (with characters that exceed two and one half inches (2 1/2”) in height.
(Added 10/2/06)
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN: A sign lettered on both sides.(Added 10/2/06)
DRAINAGE AREA: means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a
horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line. (Added 10/2/06)
DRYWELL: is similar to an infiltration trench but smaller with inflow from a pipe; commonly
covered with soil and used for drainage areas of less than one acre such as roadside inlets and
rooftops runoff. (Added 10/2/06)
10-7
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE: A feature or structure that allows commerce, service, or other
similar activity while a customer or client is able to remain in his/her vehicle. This does not
include uses limited to Full Service Gas Stations.
DWELLING: A house or building, or portion thereof, which is occupied by one or more
families that are sleeping and doing their cooking on the premises.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling on one lot containing separate dwelling units
for three or more families, having separate or joint entrances, services, or facilities. The term
multiple dwelling includes row dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY; A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1)
or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.
EARTH REMOVAL: The removal of earth products from a lot, including but not limited to
sand, gravel, soil, loam, and mineral products. The removal of earth products which is incidental
to and in connection with (1) the necessary excavation and grading of a site for a building, or
structure and its appurtenant driveways or parking facilities for which a permit has been granted
by either the Building Commissioner, the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board, or the Board
of Appeals, or (2) the construction of a street approved under the Subdivision Control Law, shall
not be considered as earth removal for the purposes of this bylaw.
EASEMENT means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by
others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in the conveyance of land
affected by such easement. (Added 10/2/06)
FAMILY: Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, provided that a group of not more than four (4)
persons living and cooking together, but not necessarily related by blood or marriage each to the
other, may be considered a family. This section, however, does not apply to non-related
disabled persons as defined by any applicable Federal and/or State law and/or regulations.
FARM BUSINESS: Business established for the processing of farm products, fifty percent
(50%) by volume of which must have been raised or produced on the premises, or elsewhere in
the Town of Ludlow. (Added 10/2/06)
FARM STAND: A booth or stall established for the display or sale of farm products to the
general public. During the months of June, July and August, fifty percent (50%) by volume of
which must have been raised or produced on the premises or elsewhere in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. (Added 10/2/06)
FLAG: See Banner (Added 10/2/06)
10-8
FLASHING SIGN: A sign which is illuminated by an intermittent or sequenced light source. (Added
10/2/06)
FLEA MARKETS: An occasional or periodic sales activity held within a building or open area
in which stalls or sales areas are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are
intended for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that are either homemade,
homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete, or antique and may include the selling of goods at retail
by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade. Not to include private
garage sales. (Amended 10/2/95)
FLOODPLAIN: a flood prone area where land is susceptible to being inundated by a water
source. (Added 5/13/13)
FLOW ATTENUATION means prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak
discharge. (Added 10/2/06)
FORESTS AND WOODLOTS: Forestry and the harvesting of forest products.
FREE-STANDING SIGN: A supported sign not attached to any building. (Added 10/2/06)
FRONT YARD: A space across the full width of the lot and extending from the front line of the
building located on such lot to the front line of such lot. (See Diagram 1)
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot fronting upon a street to be measured continuously along
one street line between its side lines and their intersection parallel with the street line. The
required frontage shall extend from the street line to the required setback line. Frontage shall
provide both rights of access and potential vehicular access across that lot line to a potential
building site. (See Diagram 1)(Amended 10/97&10/01)
FUNERAL HOME: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the
display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
(Added 10/2/06)
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A structure which is accessory to a residential building and which is
used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, available to the
public for the storage of motor vehicles; may be operated for profit. (Added 10/2/06)
GOVERNMENT SIGN: Any sign erected and maintained by government. (Added 10/2/06)
GROUNDWATER: means all water beneath the surface of the ground. (Added 10/2/06)
HEIGHT OF A SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the highest point of a sign to the
mean ground grade beneath the sign. (Added 10/2/06)
10-9
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation customarily associated with a home, carried on within
a dwelling or in a permitted accessory building exclusively, and carried on by a resident of the
premises (employing not more than two (2) persons not residents on the premises.) Provided that
such is secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the
residential character thereof, but excluding the sale of food or beverages for consumption on the
premises.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The use of a portion of a dwelling for the operation of an
office of a physician, dentist, ophthalmologist, lawyer, or other similar professional. Said office
must be located within the private residence of the professional.
HORSES AND/OR PONIES: The keeping of horses and/or ponies and a private stable, for
personal use.
HOUSE ADDITION: External construction to an existing house which increases the number of
dwelling units. In no case shall an ADDITION be approved if it will result in more units per
structure or per lot than are allowed in that zoning district.
HOUSE CONVERSION: Internal changes to a house which increase the number of dwelling
units. In no case shall an ADDITION be approved if it will result in more units per structure or
per lot than are allowed in that zoning district.
HYDROLOGY MODEL: may include one of the following: (Added 10/2/06)
• TR-20, a watershed hydrology model developed by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service that is used to route a design storm hydrograph through a pond;
• TR-55, or Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds is a publication
developed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service to calculate stormwater runoff
and an aid in designing detention basins;
• Hydro cad.
ILLICIT CONNECTION means a surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an
illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system, including without limitation sewage,
process wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets,
regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the
effective date of this bylaw. (Added 10/2/06)
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: means direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in Section D. The term does not
include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit or a Surface
Water Discharge Permit, or resulting from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to Section D
of this bylaw. (Added 10/2/06)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Materials or structures on or above the ground that do not allow
precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil. (Added 10/2/06)
10-10
INFILTRATION is the downward movement of water from the surface to the permeable
subsoil. (Added 10/2/06)
INFILTRATION TRENCH is a subsurface stormwater management facility constructed to
introduce stormwater to subsoil and trap/remove both suspended solids and particulate
pollutants. Trenches are not intended to trap coarse sediments. (Added 10/2/06)
INTERNAL LIGHTING (INDIRECT LIGHTING): Illumination by means of light sources,
where all such sources are shielded from view. (Added 10/2/06)
KENNELL: An accessory building or enclosure in which more than six dogs or domesticated
animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold. (Added
10/2/06)
LADDER SIGN: A sign with two (2) or more crosspieces serving as individual signs. (Added
10/2/06)
LARGE-SCALE, GROUND-MOUNTED, PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A photovoltaic
installation that is structurally mounted on the ground and has a rated nameplate capacity
greater than 60 kW, measured in Direct Current (DC). (Added 5/14/12)
LIVING AREA: Living area shall mean the sum of the area of habitable rooms. Habitable
room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
LODGER: A person who occupies space for living and sleeping purposes without separate
cooking facilities, paying rent, which may include an allowance for meals, and who is not a
member of the housekeeping unit.
LOT: A parcel of land.
LOT, BUILDING: A parcel of land in one ownership meeting the dimensional requirements
of this bylaw for the district in which such land is situated, and if occupied by a building or
buildings, meeting the minimum yard requirements of that district, and defined on a plan or deed
recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
LOT, CORNER: A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or more intersecting
streets, the interior angle of intersection of the street lot lines, or extended lot lines in case of a
curved street being not more than 135 degrees. For purposes of this bylaw, the yard adjacent to
each street shall be considered a front yard. At least one front lot line shall conform to the
minimum lot frontage requirement.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: A lot lawfully existing at the effective date of this bylaw, or any
subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this bylaw.
10-11
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area of a lot lying within the lot lines.
LOT LINE: A division line between adjoining properties or a division line between individual
lots established by a plan filed in the Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
LOT WIDTH: The straight line distance between lot sidelines measured parallel to ant the front
yard setback distance (depending on the zoning) from a straight line connecting the intersections
of the road line with the lot sidelines. If the line connecting the intersections of the road line
with the lot sidelines crosses the road line at any point, the lot width line shall be measured by
the front setback distance (depending on the zoning) from the point within the lot on the road
line which is farthest from the line connecting the intersections of the road line and lot sidelines.
(See Diagrams #4 & #5) (Amended 1/25/99 STM)
MANUFACTURING: Heavy or light industry, assembly of a product including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, and allowed accessory uses. (Added 10/2/06)
MARQUEE SIGN: A roof-like structure, canopy, or mobile unit bearing a signboard with or
without a scrolling message and with or without internal lighting. (Added 10/2/06)
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY is the Policy issued by
the Department of Environmental Protection, and as amended, that coordinates the requirements
prescribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act G.L. c. 131 § 40 and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21, § 23-56. The
Policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards to reduce
or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
(Added 10/2/06)
MEDICAL CENTER: A building or group of buildings used for the offices and facilities
accessory to the practice of licensed medical practitioners, (including physicians, dentists,
optometrists, ophthalmologists, and persons engaged in all fields related generally to medicine,
but not including veterinarians) and may include such common facilities as an outpatient clinic
or emergency treatment rooms, but not including inpatient facilities. (Added 10/2/06)
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER/DISPENSARY: shall mean a not-forprofit
entity, as defined by Massachusetts law only, registered by the Department of Public
Health as a Registered Marijuana Dispensary, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes
(including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils or ointments),
transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing
marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal
caregivers. (Added 5/12/14)
MEMBERSHIP CLUB: A Private building or grounds, which specifically includes country
clubs and fraternities, as well as other organizations to which membership is limited or
controlled. (Added 10/2/06)
10-12
METEOROLOGICAL TOWERS: Towers installed to measure the wind speed and direction
at a site. (Added 5/9/11)
MICRO-BREWERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirtyone
(31) gallons a year), for production and packaging of malt, wine, or hard cider beverages for
retail or wholesale distribution, on or off the premise, and which may include a tap room where
beverages produced on the premises may be sold and consumed. May include other uses such as
a restaurant and/or outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the zoning district. (Added 10/3/16)
MICRO-CIDERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirtyone
(31) gallons a year), for the production and packaging of hard cider beverages for retail and
wholesale distribution, on or off premise, and may include a tap room where beverages produced
on the premises may be sold and consumed. May include other uses such as a restaurant and/or
outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the zoning district. (Added 10/3/16)
MICRO-WINERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirtyone
(31) gallons a year), for the production and packaging of wine beverages for retail and
wholesale distribution, on or off premise, and may include a tap room where beverages produced
on the premises may be sold and consumed. May include other uses such as a restaurant and/or
outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the zoning district. (Added 10/3/16)
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet
or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with permanent foundation, when connected to the
required facilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein. (Added 10/4/99)
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any premises used or permitted to be used for parking of more
than one occupied mobile home.
MOTELS: Any building or group of buildings which provide sleeping accommodations for
transient motorists and which is not licensed as an inn. Furthermore, each motel shall have at
least one non-resident staff person on duty at all times and shall not rent any room to any guests
for more than 14 consecutive nights in any 30-day period.(Added 10/2/95)
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES: Municipally-owned facilities utilized in the provision of services
normally provided by municipalities, such as schools, parks, playgrounds, municipal office
building and the like. (Added 10/2/06)
10-13
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) OR MUNICIPAL STORM
DRAIN SYSTEM means the system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or
conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet,
piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered
drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm
drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Ludlow. (Added 10/2/06)
NANO-BREWERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than six thousand (6,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirty-one
(31) gallons per year), for the small scale production of malt, wine, or hard cider beverages
primarily for on premises consumption and sale with limited retail or wholesale distribution.
May include other uses such as a restaurant and/or outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the
zoning district. (Added 10/3/16)
NANO-CIDERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than six thousand (6,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirty-one
(31) gallons per year), for small scale production of hard cider beverages primarily for on
premises consumption and sales with limited retail and wholesale distribution. May include
other uses such as a restaurant and/or outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the zoning
district. (Added 10/3/16)
NANO-WINERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, with a
capacity of not more than six thousand (6,000) barrels, (a barrel being equivalent to thirty-one
(31) gallons per year), for the small scale production of wine beverages primarily for on premises
consumption and sales with limited retail and wholesale distribution. May include other uses
such as a restaurant and/or outdoor dining, if otherwise permitted in the zoning district. (Added
10/3/16)
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM
WATER PERMIT DISCHARGE PERMIT is a permit issued by United States Environmental
Protection Agency or jointly with the State that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters
of the United States. (Added 10/2/06)
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which was previously erected legally but which does not
comply with subsequently enacted regulations. (Added 10/2/06)
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE means discharge to the municipal storm drain system
not composed entirely of stormwater. (Added 10/2/06)
NURSING HOME: Also known as extended care home, rest home, or convalescent home. A
nursing home is any state licensed facility for two or more patients that provides beds and
domiciliary and/or nursing care for chronic or convalescent patients and which is properly
licensed by the State, but not including assisted living residences. (Added 10/2/06)
10-14
OFFICE: A place for the transaction of a professional service or business, not including the
sale of articles at retail.
OFFICE TRAILER: A trailer of various lengths, which will accommodate office furniture,
heating, electricity, possible room separations, and optional toilet/sink room. The Office Trailer
will not include facilities for cooking and sleeping. (Added 10/05/09)
OFF STREET PARKING: A parking space(s) plus adequate access driveways and aisles
within a structure, or in an open area which is not part of a dedicated street right-of-way, for the
parking of a motor vehicle on any land owned, rented, or leased for such purposes.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign identifying a business or residential use, facility, or service
which is not located on the premises where such activity is located. (Added 10/2/06)
ON-PREMISES SIGN: A sign identifying a business or residential use, facility, or service
which is located on the premises where such activity is located. (Added 10/2/06)
ON-STREET PARKING: A parking space within a dedicated street right-of-way and along
the frontage of a site for the purpose of parking a motor vehicle. No part of such space may be
within areas where parking is not allowed (curb cuts, posted no parking areas, etc.). (Added
10/2/06)
OPEN SPACE: The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings or structures, unobstructed to the
sky by man-made objects other than walks, swimming pools, and terraced areas not devoted to
streets, driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces and expressed as a percentage of total lot
area. (Amended 10/2/06)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN is a plan setting up the functional, financial and
organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater
management system to insure that it continues to function as designed. (Added 10/2/06)
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION USE: A principal (but not accessory) use
operated with the principal purpose being the provision of outdoor recreational facilities, whether
these be provided to the public at large or to the members of any particular organization, and
including but not limited to any of the following uses: country, fishing, golf, tennis, or swimming
club, or golf driving range, sports camp, campground, marina, or horseback riding establishment.
(Added 10/2/06)
OUTFALL is the terminus of a storm drain or other stormwater structure where the contents are
released. (Added 10/2/06)
10-15
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS (ORWs) means waters designated by
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as ORWs. These waters have
exceptional sociologic, recreational, ecological and/or aesthetic values and are subject to more
stringent requirements under both the Massachusetts Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00)
and the Massachusetts Stormwater management Standards. ORWs include vernal pools certified
by the natural Heritage Program of the Massachusetts Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and
Environmental Law Enforcement, all Class A designated public water supplies with their
bordering vegetated wetlands, and other waters specifically designated. (Added 10/2/06)
PARKING GARAGE: A building used for the storage of motor vehicles for compensation.
PARKING SPACE: An off-street parking space shall be as set forth in Section 6.4.6 of this
Bylaw. (amended 10/2/06)
PEAK DISCHARGE is the maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a storm, usually in
reference to a specific design storm event. (Added 10/2/06)
PERMEABLE SOILS are soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration rate so as to greatly
reduce or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff. These soils are generally classified as NRCS
hydrologic soil types A and B. (Added 10/2/06)
PERSON is any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation,
company, business, organization, trust, estate, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof. (Added 10/2/06)
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) INSTALLATION: A series of components which uses one or
more panels to convert sunlight into electricity. (Added 5/14/12)
PLAQUE SIGN: A sign affixed to a common background. (Added 10/2/06)
POINT SOURCE means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from
which pollutants are or may be discharged. (Added 10/2/06)
POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign associated with the elective process. (Added 10/2/06)
PRINCIPAL USE: The main or primary use of any land or lot.
PRIVATE GARAGE: An accessory building, or part thereof, or a portion of a principal
building used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles belonging to the occupant of the
premises and used in connection with a use permitted on the premises. The accessory buildings
or affected portion of a principal use shall not exceed the following dimensions and are subject to
the total area limitations for accessory structures (Section 3.3.1 b (4)). (Amended 10/2/06)
10-16
PROCESS WASTEWATER is water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into
direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product,
finished product, or waste product. (Added 10/2/06)
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which extends from a wall of a building.
PUBLIC WAY: Any way, publicly or privately owned, over which the public has a right to
pass. (Added 10/2/06)
QUARTER BOARD SIGN: A sign designed to imitate a sign such as may be found attached to
the stern of a vessel. (Added 10/2/06)
QUONSET HUT: A prefabricated shelter set on a foundation and built of semi-circular arching
roof of corrugated metal.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY: The maximum rated output of electricity produced
by an energy-generating system. (Added 5/14/12)
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign that advertises real property as being for sale, rent, or
lease. (Added 10/2/06)
REAR YARD: A space across the full width of a lot, and extending from the rear of the
building located on such lot to the rear line of such lot. (See Diagram 1.)(amended 10/1/01)
RECHARGE: The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation through the
percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil. (Added 10/2/06)
RECREATION, ACTIVE: Leisure time activities, usually of a formal or organized nature,
usually performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places,
sites or fields. (Added 10/2/06)
RECREATION, PASSIVE: Those leisure time activities not considered active, such as biking,
hiking, or picnicking. (Added 10/2/06)
RECREATION, PUBLIC: A recreation use or facility operated by a government agency and
open to the general public. (Added 10/2/06)
REDEVELOPMENT means development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition or phased
projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the impervious area on previously developed
sites. (Added 10/2/06)
10-17
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential care facility shall consist in part of
independent dwelling units, and shall contain a combination of central cooking and dining
facilities, recreation facilities, and shall provide to all its residents, specified medical services,
which medical services shall include, but are not limited to, nursing and dietary assistance,
together with the availability on the premises of full-time nursing care in a licensed care facility.
(Added 10/7/02)
RETENTION is the holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass. (Added 10/2/06)
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of the building on which it
is partially or wholly supported. (Added 10/2/06)
ROOM RENTALS: The renting of rooms or the furnishing of table board to three or fewer
persons in a dwelling occupied as a private residence.
RUNOFF means rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. (Added
10/2/06)
SADDLE HORSE OR RIDING STABLE: The use of horses or ponies, stables, riding
grounds, and/or riding facilities for commercial gain or education purposes.
SALES OF AGRICULTURE PRODUCTS: The sale of agricultural and dairy products raised
on the premises.
SANDWICH SIGN: A self supporting, double paneled, temporary sign, with panels that are not
parallel but are connected along one (1) edge and separated along the opposite edge. If connected
on a vertical edge, it is a V-Shaped sign. If connected at the top, it is an A-frame sign.
Prohibited. See A-frame sign and V-shape sign. (Added 10/2/06)
SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for individuals, business,
and government establishments and other organizations; including hotels and other lodging
places; establishments providing personal, business, repair, and amusement services; health,
legal, engineering, and other professional services; educational institutions; membership
organizations, and other miscellaneous services.
SETBACK: The minimum required unoccupied space or area between the street line on which
the building is numbered or would be numbered, and the part of the building nearest such street
line, such unoccupied space or area extending the entire width or distance across the lot.
SIDE YARD: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the
adjacent side of the lot on which said building is located (See Diagram 1)
10-18
SIGN: Any device visible from a public way that is intended to visually advertise or promote a
business, product, or service; or to visually advocate a political candidate or a position on an
issue; or to inform the public of an event; or to inform motor vehicle operators of road conditions
or directions; or to identify the occupant(s) of a property.
SKETCH: For the purpose of this bylaw, the word sketch shall mean a scale drawing one
(1") inch equals forty (40') feet, unless different scale is required by Planning Board. All
lettering should be one-eight (1/8") inch and legible.
SMALL-SCALE, GROUND-MOUNTED, PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A photovoltaic
installation that is structurally mounted on the ground and has a rated nameplate capacity up
to 60 kW, measured in Direct Current (DC). (Added 5/14/12)
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
not more than 100 kW. (Added 5/9/11)
SMOKEHOUSE: A building where meat or fish is cured by means of dense smoke.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN: A temporary sign advertising or pertaining to a civic, patriotic,
educational, or other event. (Added 10/2/06)
SPECIAL PERMIT: A special authorization to conduct a particular use or to take advantage of
a particular situation set forth in this bylaw subject to the provisions of the Table of Use
Regulations, where applicable, and the particular section authorizing the special permit, where
applicable.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY: The Planning Board shall act as the special
permit granting authority and shall have the power to issue special permits in accordance with
the General Laws, Chapter 40A unless another Board is authorized to issue a special permit for a
specific type of use. For the purpose of Section 3.4 NON-CONFORMING USE AND
BUILDING REGULATIONS, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit
Granting Authority. (Amended 10/6/14)
START OF CONSTRUCTION is the first land-disturbing activity associated with a
development, including land preparation such as: clearing, grading and filling; installation of
streets and walkways; excavation for basements; footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. (Added 10/2/06)
STORAGE TRAILER: A box unit, of various lengths, made of steel, aluminum or both, with
attached or unattached wheels, usually flat roofed with rear double doors, overhead doors and in
some cases side doors. (Added 10/05/09)
STORMWATER means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water runoff and
drainage. (Added 10/2/06)
10-19
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN is a plan required as part of the application for a
Stormwater Management Permit. See Section F, part 8. (Added 10/2/06)
STREET: A public way or a way opened to the public use or other right-of-way giving access
to the lot, but excluding an alley used for service access only. Street shall be deemed to include
the entire right-of-way.
STREET LINE: The dividing line between a street and a lot; and in case of a public way, the
street line established by the public authority laying out said way upon which the lot abuts.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials for permanent or temporary occupancy or use, such
as a building, bridge, tower, framework, retaining wall, tanks, tunnel, tent, stadium, platform,
swimming pools, bins, signs, flagpoles, reviewing stands, or the like.
SUBDIVISION: Including re-subdivision, shall be defined in the Subdivision Control Law
(M.G.L. Chapter 41).
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign identifying a subdivision, condominium
complex, or residential development under construction. (Added 10/2/06)
SUBDIVISION LOT PLAN SIGN: A sign depicting the lot plan of a subdivision. (Added
10/2/06)
SUBSIDIARY SIGN: A lesser sized sign attached to another sign. (Added 10/2/06)
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT is a permit issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. (Added 10/2/06)
SWALE is a natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to temporarily store, route, or filter
runoff. (Added 10/2/06)
SWIMMING POOLS: A facility used for swimming, diving, and water sports, and may be
either:
a. A below ground, artificial, or semi-artificial receptacle or container of a pool of water
located below surrounding grade and having a depth of at least twenty-four (24") inches, as
measured from the lowest point in the pool, a vertical distance to the ground level and/or having
a surface area more than two hundred and fifty (250') square feet and/or having a circulation
system; or
b. An above-ground, artificial, or semi-artificial receptacle or container of a pool of water
located above surface grade with a diameter of fifteen (15') feet or greater at the outside
dimension and a capacity to hold water at a depth of twenty-four (24") inches or more, and/or
having a circulation system.
10-20
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended for limited term use. (Added 10/2/06)
TRAILERS: "Trailers" shall mean any so-called automobile trailer, trailer coach, including any
portable structure, means of conveyance, or vehicle so designed, constructed, and/or altered or
converted in any manner so as to permit occupancy thereof, for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
TRANSMISSION LINES: Those conductors and their necessary supporting or containing
structures which are located entirely outside of buildings and are used for transmitting
electric energy which is not connected to individual users/property owners.(Added 5/14/12)
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used
for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; with the manufacturer’s
permanent identification “Travel Trailer” thereon; and when factory equipped for the road, being
of any length provided its gross weight does not exceed 4500 pounds, or being of any weight
provided its overall length does not exceed 28 feet. (Added 10/4/99)
TSS means Total Suspended Solids. (Added 10/2/06)
UNCONTAMINATED means water containing no pollutants. (Added 10/2/06)
USE, NONCONFORMING: A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this bylaw, or any
subsequent amendment thereto, which does not conform to one or more provisions of this bylaw.
VARIANCE: A departure from the provisions of a zoning bylaw relating to setbacks, side
yards, frontage requirements, and lot size, but no involving the actual use and structure. A
variance is granted because strict enforcement of the zoning bylaw as it applies to a specific lot
would work an undue hardship and present site-specific practical difficulties that are not relevant
to other lots in the districts.
VIEWING BOOTHS: An enclosed portion of any commercial building or structure smaller
than 20' X 20' used for the purpose of the private showing, displaying, or projecting of any
motion pictures, other film products, or video tapes for a fee. (added 4/10/95).
V-SHAPED SIGN: See Sandwich Sign and A-frame sign. (Added 10/2/06)
WALL SIGN: A single-faced sign attached parallel to or painted on a vertical exterior wall not
projecting more than twelve inches (12”) beyond the wall surface to which it is attached and not
extending beyond the edges of that wall. (Added 10/2/06)
WASTEWATER means any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and
water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product,
byproduct or waste product. (Added 10/2/06)
WATERCOURSE means a natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a
stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream. (Added 10/2/06)
10-21
WIND TURBINE HEIGHT: The height of a wind turbine is measured from natural grade to
the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point. (Added 5/9/11)
WIND TURBINE ROTOR: The blades and hub of the wind turbine that rotate during turbine
operations. (Added 5/9/11)
WINERY: a facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal statutes, where wine is
produced, rectified, blended or fortified from fruits, flowers, herbs, or vegetables. (Added
10/3/16)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS: A structure, with antennas, if any, designed
to facilitate cellular telephone service, personal communications service, and enhanced
specialized mobile radio service.(Added 4/14/97)
ZOO: A park where live wild and/or domestic animals are kept in cages or enclosures as
exhibits. Such a park would include facilities for visitors. (Added 5/14/12)
END OF SECTION 10
• Section XI: Temporary Moratorium on the Sale and Distribution of Recreational
Marijuana remove 10/1/18. Replaced with SECTION III: GENERAL USE
REGULATIONS. 3.2 PROHIBITED USES. Subsection 3.2.3 Prohibition on Marijuana
Establishments.





















































LUDLOW CONSERVATION COMMISSION BYLAWS
_________________________________________________________________
1. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to assist the Conservation Commission in protecting the wetlands, water
resources, and adjoining land areas in the Town of Ludlow by controlling activities deemed by the
Conservation Commission likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon resource area values,
including but not limited to the following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control,
erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water quality, water pollution control,
fisheries, wildlife habitat, rare species habitat including rare plant species, agriculture, aquaculture,
and recreation values, deemed important to the community.
2. Jurisdiction
No person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into, or otherwise
alter the following resource areas: any freshwater wetlands, marshes, wet meadows, bogs, swamps,
vernal pools, banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, rivers, streams, creeks, beaches, lands
under water bodies, lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water, and
lands abutting any of the aforesaid resource areas (collectively the “resource areas protected by this
By-law”). Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not they border surface waters. This
jurisdiction shall extend to a buffer area of 100 feet away from any of the above described resource
areas, and is extended to a buffer area of 200 feet away from a river or stream. Except where
permitted by the Wetlands Protection Act, no person shall develop or disturb an area within 25 feet of
the above described resource areas, to be known as a minimum non-disturb zone.
2.a. Exceptions:
In a case of Public Utilities, where no feasible alternatives exist and no
permanent damage will occur to the wetland, the Conservation Commission
may at its discretion grant a variance to the “25 foot no disturb zone”.
In the case where no feasible alternatives exist but to encroach upon the wetland in order to
allow the applicant access to his/her property, the Conservation Commission may at its
discretion grant a variance to the “25 foot no disturb zone” provided no permanent damage
will occur to the wetland and/or proposed replication is agreed upon by all parties.
(Amended 5/14/2001)
2.b. Flood Control:
Any proposed work in the Floodplain or Isolated Areas or Bordering Land subject to Flooding
may not begin without first filing a Notice of Intent with the Conservation Commission and
must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws,
and 310 CMR 10.57, and the Massachusetts Building Code pertaining to construction in the
Floodplains (currently Section 3107.0) (revised 9/19/97).
The Floodplain District is delineated on the Ludlow Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated
May 19, 1981, as Zones A, A 1-30 to indicate the 100-year floodplain. The precise boundaries
Of the district are defined by the 100-year flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further
defined by the Flood Profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study dated May 19, 1981.
Within Zone A, where the 100-year flood elevation is not provided on the FIRM, the
developer/applicant shall obtain any existing flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed by
the Department of Public Works. If the data is sufficiently detailed and accurate it shall be
relied upon to require compliance with this Bylaw and the State Building Code. (added
10/3/2005)
Ludlow Conservation Commission Bylaws
Page 2
3. Coordination with Other Boards
Any person filing a permit application or a Request for a Determination of Applicability under the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act with the Commission shall provide a copy thereof at the same
time, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to the Conservation Commission of
the adjoining municipality, if the application or Request for a Determination of Applicability pertains to
property within 300 feet of that municipality. An affidavit of the person providing notice, with a copy of
the notice mailed or delivered shall be filed with the Commission.
In order to insure that the Conservation Commission is aware of any property being built upon or
development within its jurisdiction as defined above, the Conservation Commission shall be provided
by the applicant with a copy of any permit application submitted to other Town Boards and Officials
including but not limited to the Building Department, Department of Public Works, Planning Board and
Board of Health. Notice of said requirement shall be posted in appropriate permitting places by the
Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission shall provide Public Hearing Notices to
the above-mentioned Boards. (Amended 5/8/00)
4. Performance Guarantees and Security
As part of a permit issued under this bylaw, except for permits issued for work being performed or
contracted by any department or agency of the Town of Ludlow, and in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board or agency, the Commission may require that the
performance and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by
one or more of the methods described below:
(a) A financial guarantee, such as a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or
other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission.
Surety performance bonds, cash escrows, and standby letters of credit are the usual forms of
financial guarantees that will be accepted. Property escrows will not be accepted. Permittee
shall submit their estimates of what the required improvements will cost, preferably with
contractors bids to perform the work.
The term of any financial guarantees must be at least nine months longer than the time a
permittee has to complete a project. The Commission, at its discretion, may allow partial or
complete release of guaranteed funds as sections of a project are completed. The
Commission has the right not to release part of the guaranteed funds until after the project is
finished and a certificate of compliance is issued.
The Commission has the right to reject the terms of a proposed financial guarantee, including
the financial institution holding guaranteed funds if it is not a local bank, and to determine the
amount of funds that must be guaranteed. The Commission's only duty to secure release of
guaranteed funds is to certify that required improvements or conditions have not been
completed on time or to a satisfactory standard, as defined by the Commission.
At the discretion of the Commission, a joint financial guarantee may be used to comply with
Commission requirements and that of other agencies, boards, and commissions in the Town
of Ludlow, provided however that all relevant parties agree on the terms and the principal
amount of the guarantee, and that the guarantee is structured so that all relevant parties
agree before any funds are released.
(b) A conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant enforceable in a court of law, shall be
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of this
municipality and observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed.
Ludlow Conservation Commission Bylaws
Page 3
5. Enforcement
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter resource areas protected
by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise
fail to restore illegally altered land to its original conditions, or fail to comply with a permit or an
enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately
owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to be
made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission deems necessary, subject to the
constitutions and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this bylaw, its regulations, and permits issued
thereunder by violation notices, administrative orders, and civil and criminal court actions. Any person
who violates provisions of this bylaw may be ordered to restore the property to its original condition
and take other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, or both.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and the town counsel shall take legal action
for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the chief of police shall take legal
action for enforcement under criminal law.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers, shall
have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, or regulations, permits, or administrative orders
issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00. Each day or portion thereof
during which a violation continues, or
unauthorized fill or other alteration remains in place, shall constitute a separate offense, and each
provision of the bylaw, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Commission may issue citations
under the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M. G.L. Ch 40 §21D, which has been
adopted by the Town in Chapter 13, Section 1 of the general bylaws.(Added 4/13/98 ATM)
6. Payment of Fees and Commission Expenses (added 5/8/2006)
At the time of a permit application (Notice of Intent or Request for Determination of
Applicability) the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified in the Regulations of the
Ludlow Conservation Commission. This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands
Protection Act (M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00.) At any
point in its deliberations prior to a final decision, if in the judgment of a majority of the
Commission, consulting services are necessary for the Commission to comprehend the
project impact completely, the applicant will reimburse the Town of Ludlow for consultant
fees. The town is to be reimbursed in full prior to a decision on the request or application.
Failure to reimburse the town for such necessary consultant fees will be sufficient grounds to
deny the application or request. (Added May 8, 2006)
REGULATIONS OF THE LUDLOW
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
PURPOSE: The purpose of these regulations is to clarify and define the 1998 Ludlow
Conservation Commission Bylaw (hereinafter referred to as the “Bylaw”) administered by the
Ludlow Conservation Commission (hereinafter “Commission”).
These regulations are intended to minimize post-application re-design and minimize delay in
the permitting process by providing applicants and their consultants with a list of information
that the Commission will need in order to properly review a proposed project.
2
REGULATIONS
These regulations supplement regulations and requirements for permit applications under the
MA Wetlands Protection Act, (Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws)
and amendments thereto, Wetlands Protection Act Regulations 310 CMR 10.00, and the
Town of Ludlow Conservation Commission Bylaw (Chapter XV of the Town of Ludlow
Bylaws).
WHO SHOULD SUBMIT
Any property owner intending to remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon or within 100 feet of
any wetland as defined in the Wetlands Protection Act, including an isolated wetland (Ludlow
Conservation Commission Bylaw requirement), within 100 feet of land subject to flooding or
inundation or within 100 feet of the 100 year flood line, or within 200 feet of any river or
perennial stream, all as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40,. In accordance with 310
CMR 10.05 (4) (a), if a person files a Notice of Intent on a property other than their own,
they must submit written permission of the property owner (except for work proposed on
Great Ponds or Commonwealth tidelands).
WHEN TO SUBMIT
Application with all required documentation must be received by the Commission two (2)
weeks prior to a scheduled hearing. Conservation Commission hearings are held on the first
and third Wednesdays of each month.
WHAT TO SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION
1. The original and one copy of the Notice of Intent, Request for Determination of
Applicability, or any other application for permit. The state forms are available on the
D.E.P. web site at www.state.ma.us/dep or in the Conservation Commission Office.
The Commission reserves the right to request that copies of the filing, including plans,
be mailed to each of the Commissioners at their homes at least one week prior to the
scheduled hearing to facilitate review.
2. Plans – (2 copies - with a scale not more than 1” = 50’) that shall contain the
following information:
a. All wetland resource areas and their 100 foot buffer zones, clearly defined and
legibly labeled
b. Town of Ludlow 25 foot “no disturb” boundary (including permanent
monumentation placed at every turn in a wetland line but no further apart than
40 feet)
c. 200 foot riverfront area, flood zone, bordering vegetated wetlands, isolated
wetlands, and any other areas within the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts
3
Wetlands Protection Act, Rivers Protection Act, Flood Plain Regulations and
Town of Ludlow Conservation Commission Bylaws.
d. Plans must include an approved (by Ludlow Conservation)
wetland/resource delineation of the entire parcel on which the project will
take place, either prior to or as part of application for work on said
parcel. When filing a Notice of Intent application, the Commission also
requires a recordable plan, either a sheet 8 ½ by 14 inches (maximum), if
legible, to be used as a photo exhibit or a Mylar that conforms to the
Registry of Deeds Specifications. For a subdivision consisting of five (5)
lots or more, a Mylar will be required unless an exemption is granted by
the Conservation Commission.
e. In order for the Commission to approve a wetland delineation, an Appendix G
form (from the manual Delineating Bordering Vegetated Wetlands Under the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act) shall be required. Appendix G must
be provided and signed by the individual who performed the delineation.
f. Existing and proposed grades for the entire area of proposed work/disturbance.
The above requirements are minimum requirements and the Commission reserves the right
to request any additional information it deems necessary to the review of the project. All of
the requirements (a through f) must be clearly depicted on the plan and legibly labeled.
3. Applicants submitting wetland delineations to the Commission for approval on
parcels five (5) acres or greater, must also provide a Digital CAD File according
to the standards and format listed on a separate sheet available in the
Conservation Commission Office and Engineering Department.
4. Fees/Payments Required by the Wetlands Protection Act
• Check for the Town’s portion of the state filing as explained in the fee
transmittal portion of the D.E.P. form
• For a Notice of Intent filing, a check or money order for $75 payable to
Hampden County Registry of Deeds (or current fee required by the Registry of
Deeds) for the recording of the Order of Conditions, and a separate check or
money order equal to $75 per page (or current fee) for the recording of the plan
of work and wetland information (If a Mylar is used). This should also be
made payable to Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
• A check (bring to the hearing where amount can be filled in) to cover the
required legal notice. Check should be payable to Turley Publications. In rare
cases, when a holiday would result in non-compliance with notice
requirements, the Commission may post the legal notice in “The Register” and
“The Republican” which would require two legal notice fees from the
4
applicant, unless the applicant requests (in writing) a delay to the next
available hearing date that would meet notice deadline requirements.
5. TOWN OF LUDLOW FEES AS FOLLOWS: (These are in addition to
fees/payments required by the Wetlands Protection Act)
a. Consultant Fees – when required by the Commission as specified in Chapter XV,
Section 6 of the Town of Ludlow Bylaws.
b. Request for Determination of Applicability (except for approval of wetland line
on a parcel or parcels 5 acres or greater, or 5 acres total for contiguous lots by
the same owner or applicant) - $50 check payable to Town of Ludlow and check(s)
for the legal notice as required by M.G.L.Chapter 131, § 40.
Request for Determination of Applicability for approval of wetland line on
parcels 5 acres or greater (or 5 acres total for contiguous lots by the same owner
or applicant) – A check payable to Town of Ludlow equal to the town portion of
the amount that would be calculated in an A.N.R.A.D. (Abbreviated Notice of
Resource Area Delineation – See A.N.R.A.D. Fee Transmittal Form for calculation
information) filing for approval of a wetland line and check(s) for the legal notice as
required by M.G.L. Chapter 131, § 40.
c. Notice of Intent – Check(s) for the legal notice as required
by M.G.L. Chapter 131, § 40 and a check payable to Town of Ludlow based on the
following:
• Single family dwelling $50
• Residential Sub-Division $75/each lot within the
jurisdiction of the MA Wetlands Protection Act or Ludlow Conservation
Bylaw
• Commercial or Industrial Project $100
• Multi-family dwelling/condominiums $100/each structure within the
jurisdiction of the MA Wetlands Protection Act or Ludlow Conservation
Bylaw
d. Amended Notice of Intent $50/each lot or structure within
the jurisdiction of the MA Wetlands Protection Act or Ludlow Conservation Bylaw
All required fees/payments must be received by the Commission with the application except
the fee for the legal notice which much be paid at the Public Hearing.
Fees described in a through d above shall be waived for Town of Ludlow projects, with the
exception of the fee for advertising of the legal notice, which will be paid by department
submitting the application.
OTHER PERMITS
The applicant is required to obtain or apply for all other permits, variances, and approvals
required by any other applicable statute, bylaw, or regulation, and the Commission may
5
require copies of said applications or permits. Failure to comply may be cause for denial
or revocation of permit issued by the Commission.
VERNAL POOLS
The Commission may require the certification of any vernal pool discovered on the
property during or prior to the permitting process, and the protection of said vernal pool
and its 100 foot perimeter as a certified vernal pool as per the definition in 310 CMR
10.04.
Closing a Public Hearing and issuing a decision: The Commission shall not close any
hearing on request of the applicant unless a D.E.P. File number (if applicable) has been
issued and comments have been satisfactorily addressed.
ENFORCEMENT
See Town of Ludlow Conservation Commission Bylaws, Chapter XV, Section 5.
APPEALS
Conservation Commission decisions based on the Wetlands Protection Act may be
appealed to the MA Dept. of Environmental Protection within 10 working days of the
issuance of the decision as per the instructions on the decision form.
Conservation Commission decisions based solely on the Ludlow Conservation
Commission Bylaw and/or these regulations cannot be appealed to D.E.P. They must be
appealed to Superior (Housing) Court within 10 working days of the issuance of the
decision.

$15.00
SUBDIVISION
RULES
&
REGULATIONS
EFFECTIVE - May 24, 2012
TOWN OF LUDLOW
MASSACHUSETTS
ATIEST TRUE COPY~w JJJL
TOWN CLERK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I - GENERAL
A. Definitions 2
SECTION II - PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION FOR PLANS
A.
B.
c.
Preliminary Plan
Definitive Plan
Plans Not Requiring Approval under Subdivision Control Law
SECTION III - DESIGN STANDARDS
A.
B.
c.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Streets
Easements
Open Spaces
Protection of Natural Features
Utilities
Sidewalks
Driveway Aprons
Monuments
Construction Methods & Standards
Retention/Detention Ponds - Standards
Street Shade Trees
5
7
15
16
18
18
18
19
21
22
22
22
24
25
SECTION IV - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IN AN APPROVED SUBSIVISION
A. General 26
B. Inspection of Construction 28
c. Preparation of Roadway 28
D. Utilities 28
E. Curb Construction 29
F. Standard Bottom & Top Courses of Pavement 29
G. Sidewalk 29
H. Driveway Apron & Construction 29
I. Streets & Traffic Signs 29
J. Grassed Areas 29
K. Monuments 30
L. Clearing up of Right-of-Way 30
M. Supplemental Water Supply 30
SECTION V -ADMINISTRATION
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Form A
FormB
FormC
FormD
FormE
Variation
Reference
Validity
Resubdivision
Legal Instrument
As Built Drawings
Designer's Certificate
Dedication of Public Area
Easements
Quit Claim Deed
Development Agreement
FORMS
FormF Extension of Development Agreement
FormG Performance Bond
FormH Certificate of Inspection
OTHER INFORMATION
Definitive Plan Checklist Form (Must accompany submission)
Recommended Tree Species
Subdivision Fee Schedule
35
35
35
35
35
36
37
38-39
40
41
42-43
44
45
46-47
48
49
50
PURPOSE
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING
THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
The subdivision control law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the cities and towns in which it is, or may
hereafter be, put in effect by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions
providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and
ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks and open areas. The
powers of a planning board and of a board of appeals under the subdivision control law shall be
exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision
by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in
the adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles;
for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for ensuring
compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate provision for
water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire, police, and other similar municipal
equipment, and street lighting and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for
coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the city or
town in which it is located and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions. It is the intent of the
Subdivision Control Law that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive
the approval of such board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of Health
and to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of
land; provided, however, that such board may, when appropriate, waiver, as provided for in
Section 81R, such portions of the rules and regulations as is deemed advisable. (Section 81M of
Chapter 41, M.G.L.)
AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Ludlow by Section 810 of
Chapter 41 of the Massachusetts General Laws, said board hereby adopts these Rules and
Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Ludlow.
EFFECT OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL IA W
These Rules and Regulations shall include Section 81K to 81GG inclusive of Chapter 41 of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts General Laws as if these sections were set forth herein at
length.
A. DEFINITIONS
SECTION I
GENERAL
CALIPER: Diameter of a tree trunk in inches measured six inches above the ground for
trees up to and including four inch diameter and 12 inches above the ground for larger
trees. (added 6/29/04)
DBH (Diameter at Breast Height): The diameter in inches of the tree trunk (or for
multiple trunk trees, the aggregate diameters of the multiple trunks) measured 4 Yz feet
from the existing grade at the base of the tree. (added 6/29/04)
DRIPLINE: An area encircling the base of a tree which is delineated by a vertical line
extending from the outer limit of a tee's branch tips down to the ground. (added 6/29/04)
ESSENTIAL ROOT ZONE: An area located on the ground between the tree trunk and
10 feet beyond the dripline of the tree which is required for protection of a tree's root
system. (added 6/29/04)
PRELIMINARY PLAN shall mean a plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of
land drawn on tracing paper, or a print thereof, showing (a) the subdivision name,
boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend, and title "Preliminary Plan"; (b) the names of
the record owner and the applicant and the names of the designer, engineer, or surveyor;
( c) the names of all abutters, as determined for the most recent local tax list; ( d) the
existing and proposed line of streets, ways, easements, and public areas within the
subdivision, in a general manner; (e) the proposed system of drainage, including adjacent
existing natural waterways, in a general manner; (t) the approximate boundary lines of
proposed lots, with approximate location and widths of adjacent streets; (h) and the
topography of the land in a general manner. (Section 81L of Chapter 41, M.G.L.)
SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall
include resubdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdivision or the land or territory subdivided; provided, however, that the division of a
tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within
the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law if, at the time it is made, every lot within the
tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public way which the clerk of the city or town
certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan theretofore
approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or (c) a way in existence
when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the city or town in which the land
lies, having in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and
adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the
proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of
municipal services to serve such land and the building erected or to be erected thereon.
2
Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by zoning or other
ordinances or bylaw, if any, of said city or town for erection of a building on such lot,
and if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be of at least twenty feet.
Conveyance or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and
shape of lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage
above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were
standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the city or town in which
the land lies into separate lots on each of which one of the buildings remain standing,
shall not constitute a subdivision. (Section 81 L of Chapter 41, M.G.L.)
WAY shall mean a right-of-way or means of access to a lot. A public way is a way
which has been accepted by, and the land owned by, the Town of Ludlow.
3
B. PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
Any person wishing to cause to be recorded a plan of land situated in a city or town in
which the subdivision control law is in effect, who believes that his plan does not require
approval under the subdivision control law, may submit his plan to the Planning Board of
such city or town in the manner prescribed in Section Eighty-One T, and if the board
finds that the plan does not require such approval, it shall forthwith, without a public
hearing, endorse thereon or cause to be endorsed thereon by a person authorized by it the
words "Approval under the subdivision control law not required" or words of similar
import with appropriate name or names signed thereto and such endorsement shall be
conclusive on all persons. Such endorsement shall not be withheld unless such plan
shows a subdivision. If the board shall determine that in its opinion the plan requires
approval, it shall, within twenty-one days of such submittal, give written notice of its
determination to the clerk of the city or town and the person submitting the plan, and
such person may submit his plan for approval as provided by law and the rules and
regulations of the board, or he may appeal from the determination of the board in the
manner provided in Section Eighty-One BB. If the board fails to act upon a plan
submitted under this section or fails to notify the clerk of the city or town and the person
submitting the plan of its action within twenty-one days after its submission, it shall be
deemed to have determined that approval under the subdivision control law is not
required, and it shall forthwith make such endorsement on said plan, and on its failure to
do so forthwith the city or town clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect. The plan
bearing such endorsement or the plan and such certificate, as the case may be, shall be
delivered by the Planning Board, or in the case of the certificate, by the city or town
clerk, to the person submitting such plan. The Planning Board of a city or town which
has authorized any person, other than a majority of the board, to endorse on a plan the
approval of the board or to make any other certificate under the subdivision control law,
shall transmit a written statement to the registrar of deeds and the recorded of the land
court, signed by a majority of the board, giving the name of the person so authorized.
(Section 81-P of Chapter 41, M.G.L.)
C. SUBDIVISION
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law
of any land within the city or town or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a
subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein,
unless and until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted and approved
by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided. (Section 81-0 of Chapter 41, M.G.L.)
4
SECTION II
PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS
A. PRELIMINARY PLAN
1. General
A preliminary plan of a residential subdivision may (A preliminary plan of a nonresidential
subdivision must) be submitted by the subdivider to the Planning
Board and to the Board of Health for discussion and approval, modification, or
disapproval by each board. The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable
the subdivider, the Planning Board, and the Board of Health, to discuss and clarify
the problems of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. Therefore,
it is strongly recommended that a Preliminary Plan be filed in each case. A
properly executed application shall be filed with the Preliminary Plan submitted
to the Planning Board. The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a
notice with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission for such approval of a
Preliminary Plan and said notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the completed
application. (Amended 5/24/12)
2. Contents
Any person who submits a Preliminary Plan of a subdivision to the Planning
Board shall submit the following:
(1). Nine (9) sets of prints of the plan with a preferable scale of one (1") equals
one hundred (100') feet. (Amended3/10/11)
(2). The application fee. (Amount in effect at the time of submission.)
(3). Application (Amended 5/24/12)
The Plans shall show the following:
(1) The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend, and
title "Preliminary Plan".
(2) The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of the
designer, engineer, and land surveyor.
(3) Names and plan location of all abutters indicating approximate limits of
contiguous boundaries and those owners of land separated from the subdivision
only by a street, as determined from the most recent tax list.
5
(4) The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and any
public areas within the subdivision in a general manner. The length and the
square footage of the new street shall be indicated on the plan. (Amended
3/10/11)
(5) The proposed system of drainage in a general way, the location and
direction of flow of adjacent natural waterways, and all water bodies or areas
classified as wetlands adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision.
(6) The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas
and dimensions.
(7) The names, approximate location, and widths of adjacent streets.
(8) The topography of the land in a general manner.
(9) The names of proposed streets.
(10) Center line grades of the proposed roadways noted on plan.
(11) A locus plan showing the area of the subdivision and its relationship to the
surrounding area and roadways at a minimum scale of l" = 600'.
(12) In all cases, a statement shall appear on the first sheet of the subdivision
preliminary plan stating that this subdivision does or does not lie within the
Aircraft Flight Overlay District of the Town of Ludlow.
(13) Statement of compliance with the Town of Ludlow Subdivision Rules and
Regulations.
(14) Waivers: All requests for waivers must be submitted on a separate sheet of
paper. After the waivers are approved, all approved waivers must be on the
approved preliminary site plan. (Added 3/10/11)
3. Approval
The preliminary plan will be studied in order to determine whether it is in
compliance with the requirements of design adopted by the board. Within 45
days after submission of the plan, the Planning Board shall tentatively approve,
disapprove, or approve with modifications the preliminary plan, noting thereon
any changes that should be made. One copy of the plan will be returned to the
subdivider. Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of the
subdivision.
6
A preliminary plan submitted to the Planning Board, for which written notice has
been given to the Town clerk, and any definitive plan evolved therefrom shall be
governed by the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and zoning provisions in
effect at the time of submission of the preliminary plan, provided the definitive
plan evolved therefrom is duly submitted within seven months from the date on
which the preliminary plan was submitted.
B. DEFINITIVE PLAN
1. General
Any person who submits a Definitive Plan of a subdivision to the Planning Board
for approval shall file with the Planning Board, for the initial review process, the
following:
a. Nine (9) sets of prints (dark line on white background) shall be submitted
to the Planning Board. (Amended 3/10/11)
b. A deposit in an amount to cover the cost of advertising and notices.
c. Application (Amended 5/24/12)
d. A list, approved by the assessors office, of the abutters within 300' of the
proposed subdivision containing the names, addresses, mailing addresses (if
different), and Assessors map and parcel numbers.
e. A statement of deed restrictions, if any.
Every person submitting a definitive plan of land to the Planning Board for its
approval, shall give written mail, postage prepaid, that he has submitted such a
plan and said notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the completed application.
If the notice is given by delivery, the clerk shall, if requested, give a written
receipt therefore to the person who delivered such notice. Such notice shall
describe the land to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification, and shall
state the date when such plan was submitted and the name and address of the
owner of such land. (Amended 5/24/12)
f. Definitive Plan Checklist Form. All submissions must include all items
listed on the Definitive Plan Checklist Form. (Added 5/24/12)
2. Contents
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Engineer and Registered
Land Surveyor. The plan shall be at a scale of one (1") inch equals forty ( 40')
feet or such other scale as the Planning Board may accept to show details clearly
7
and adequately. Sheet sizes shall be of 24" X 36". If multiple sheets are used,
they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The
Definitive Plan prints shall contain the following information:
a. Subdivision names, boundaries, north point, date, scale, and legend.
b. Name and address of record owner, subdivider, engineer, and land
surveyor.
b.l. All lots must be under one ownership; otherwise each ownership must be
shown with each square footage and/or acreage, with a notation on the plan, to be
combined into one parcel when transferred. (Added 3/10/11)
c. Names, addresses, and plan location of all abutters indicating approximate
limits of contiguous boundaries and those owners of land separate from the
subdivision only by a street, as they appear in the most recent tax list.
d. Lines of existing and proposed streets, way, lots, easements, and public or
common areas within the subdivision. The length and the square footage of the
new street shall be indicated on the plan. (Amended 3/10/11)
e. Sufficient data to determine the location and length of every street and
way line, lot line and boundary, and to establish these lines on the ground. If any
part of the subdivision is within five hundred (500) feet of any Massachusetts
coordinate survey monument, the subdivision shall be tied to said monument or
monuments.
f. All perimeter monuments shall be set prior to submission of the definitive
plan. Show calculated areas of all parcels and streets right of way areas.
g. Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to whether
existing or proposed.
h. Location, names, and present widths of streets bounding, approaching or
within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
1. Indication and purpose of easements.
j. Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and the
signatures of the members of the Planning Board and subsequent action by the
Town Clerk.
k. Existing and proposed topography at a contour interval of 2' except of
areas of greater than 30% slope where a contour interval of 10' is acceptable.
8
1. Existing and proposed profile on the center-line of proposed streets at a
horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet and vertical scale of one (1)
inch equals four (4) feet, or such other scale acceptable to the Planning Board.
All elevations shall refer to the U.S.G.S. datum.
m. Proposed layout of storm drainage, water supply, and sewage disposal
systems including profiles.
1. A proposed residential subdivision plan shall, for each lot not
serviced by a sanitary sewer, show a proposed building envelope and location of
septic system (including tank and soil absorption system) which complies with
Title V of the state sanitary code. If a private well is required, a well location
must be shown which meets the state sanitary code and town bylaws in relation to
the proposed building envelope and septic system component locations.
2. If any part of the subdivision is within one thousand (1000) feet of
a public sewer of the Town of Ludlow, it shall be connected to the municipal
system.
3. If any part of the subdivision is within fifteen hundred (1500) feet
of the public water supply serving the Town of Ludlow, the proposed water
supply system shall include fire protection service including sufficient fire
hydrants to satisfy all requirements of the Ludlow Fire Department. (amended
6/29/04)
n. Location and elevation using the U.S.G.S. datum of at least three (3)
benchmarks for the subdivision. The bench marks shall be located within the
boundaries of the subdivision.
o. Design calculations, certified by a registered, professional engineer, of the
storm water drainage system in compliance with the requirements of Section III.
p. All definitive plans submitted shall include the Town of Ludlow Standard
Specifications sheets 1-3 (latest revision) and any other pertinent special
specifications and details requested by the Department of Public Works.
q. The survey performed for the establishment of the street and lot lines of
the approved subdivision shall meet the standards as outlined in 250 CMR; Board
of Registration of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, subsection 250
SMR 6.00; procedural and Technical Standards for the Practice of Land
Surveying.
r. A construction cost estimate for the project shall be submitted by the
subdivider by specific quantity and unit costs, including installation costs, for the
following items; 1) roadway, 2) storm drain system, 3) sewer system (if any),
9
4) sidewalk, 5) loam and seed of tree belts, 6) roadway and lot monumentation, 7)
street lighting, 8) as-built drawings on Mylar.
s. In the case of a subdivision which does not encompass or contain the total
area of the parcel to be subdivided, the plan shall indicate the proposed land
use( s) of the entire parcel.
t. In all cases where the subdivision has more than sixteen (16) lots, a traffic
study showing the effect of the subdivision on all public and private streets within
one (1) mile shall be prepared by a Massachusetts Registered Professional
Engineer.
u. Items K, L, M, and R, are to be submitted on the separate sheets from the
definitive plan.
v. All Definitive Plans shall have the following statement attached for all
buildable lots: "I hereby certify that lots# __ as shown on this Definitive Plan
meet all the requirements set forth in 310 CMR 15.00 Title V." This statement
must be dated and signed by the Developer & Engineer.
w. Location of natural features such as water courses, wetlands, scenic vistas,
historic locations, stone walls, location of species of large trees (trees with a DBH
of eight (8") or greater), and similar community assets. The plan shall identify
which of these features shall be left undisturbed. These features shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. Removal, modification, or destruction
of these features shall only occur with the written approval of the Planning Board.
(added 6/29/04)
Replacement value for trees removed without permission will be the value of
existing shade trees to be calculated on an inch by inch replacement basis.
Replacements shall be at least two-inch diameter, nursery grown stock. Larger
tree replacements may be required by the Planning Board and the Tree Warden.
For example, if an 18" diameter tree, measured four feet above grade is to be
removed, the applicant must sufficiently reimburse the Town to provide for the
purchase and planting of nine, two-inch diameter replacements. Planting will
occur within the spring or fall months following the substantial completion of
construction. (Added 3/10/11)
x. No grade changes will be made to any portion of lots in the subdivision,
unless the owners of said lots have previously obtained written approval for said
grade changes from the following town Departments; Planning, Public Works,
Conservation, and Building. The grade restriction shall run with the land. This
statement needs to be on the plan and all relative deeds. (Added 4/30/09)
y. Waivers: All requests for waivers must be submitted on a separate sheet of
paper. After the waivers are approved, all approved waivers must be on the
approved definitive site plan. (Added 3/10/11)
10
3. Initial Review
a. Review of the Board of Health
As to suitability of the land. At the time of filing of the definitive plan for
initial review, the subdivider shall also file with the Board of Health two
contact prints of the Definitive Plan, dark line on white background. The
Board of Health shall within forty-five days after filing of the plan, report
to the Planning Board in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan. If
the Board disapproves said plan, it shall make specific findings as to
which, if any of the lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building
sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific findings
and the reasons therefore in such report, and, where possible, shall make
recommendation for the adjustment thereof.
b. Review by the Department of Public Works
At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan prints for initial review, the
subdivider shall also file with the Department of Public Works two (2) sets
of prints for review as to conformity with the Town of Ludlow
Subdivision Regulations and construction standards, as well as to any
objective comments that may be made.
4. Public Hearing
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of the Definitive Plan
is given , a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board, notice of the time
and place of which and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification, shall be
given by the Planning Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Ludlow, once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days
before the day of such hearing or if there is no such newspaper in such Town by
posting such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not
less than fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing, and by mailing a copy
of such advertising to the applicant to all owners of land abutting upon the land
included in such plan as appearing on the most recent tax list.
5. Performance Guarantee (Amended 3/10/11)
Before endorsement of its approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the
subdivider shall agree to complete within thirty (30) months and without cost to
the town all improvements required by this regulation and shall provide security
11
that he will do so, in accordance with the provision of the Subdivision Control
Law.
Such security will be by one, or in part by one and in part by another, of the
methods described in the following clauses (1) and (2) which method or
combination of methods may be selected and from time to time varied by the
applicant:
(1) By a proper performance bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning
Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of
municipal services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan. The
performance bond will need to be verified by the Town Treasurer and Town
Counsel. Bonds will need to be made favorable to the Town of Ludlow.
(2) By a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion
of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and the
installation of municipal services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the
plan. Such money and/or negotiable securities must be approved as a form and
manner of execution by the Town Treasurer and Town Counsel.
6. Certificate of Approval
After all comments, corrections, and revisions generated by the public hearing
and the review process have been completely addressed and incorporated into the
final Definitive Plans, the original black India ink on Mylar drawings, and one (1)
set of Mylar reproducibles (made either by the Xerox or the fixed-line Mylar
process), each bearing original signatures and stamps of the R.L.S. and P.E. shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for final approval and signatures. Also,
completed Forms D (Designer's Certificate), Form E (Dedication of Public
Areas), Form G (Easements), Form H (Quit Claim Deed), and Form I
(Development Agreement) shall be submitted at this time.
The action of the Planning Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote, copies
of which shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered
mail to the applicant. If the Planning Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it
shall state in its vote the reason for its action. Approval, if granted shall be
endorsed on original drawing of the Definitive Plan by the signatures of a
majority of the Planning Board but not until the statutory twenty-day (20) appeal
period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the action of the
Planning Board with the Town Clerk.
In case of approval of a plan by action of the Planning Board, after the expiration
of twenty-days (20) without notice of appeal to the superior court or Housing
Court, or if appeal has been taken after the entry of a final decree of the court
sustaining the approval of such plan, the Planning Board shall cause to be made
12
upon the plan a written endorsement of its approval. In case of the approval of a
plan by reason of the failure of the Planning Board to act within the time
prescribed, the city or town clerk shall, after the expiration of twenty-days (20)
without notice of appeal to the superior court or Housing Court or if appeal has
been taken, after receipt of certified records of the superior court or Housing
Court indicating that such approval has become final, issue a certificate stating the
date of the submission of plan for approval, the fact that the Planning Board failed
to take final action and that the approval resulting from such failure has become
final.
The plan bearing such endorsement or the plan and such certificate, as the case
may be, shall be delivered by the Planning Board, or in the case of the certificate,
by the city or town clerk, to the person who submitted such plan. Except as
provided in Section eighty-one E, the existence of an official map in a city or
town shall not affect the operation on the Subdivision Control Law therein.
Approval by the Planning Board does not constitute approval of the streets as
public ways.
If within 30 months from the date of the agreement with a subdivider, the terms
and conditions have not been performed, the Board will, upon the motion of the
Planning Board or on the petition of any person interested, rescind the agreement
and its approval of the plan, provided no lots, sites or divisions which have been
sold or mortgaged in good faith and for a valuable consideration subsequent to the
approval of the plan, or any sites, appurtenant thereto shall be affected unless the
owner and the holder of the mortgage or mortgages of the same shall consent in
writing. If, however, at the end of 30 months an attempt in good faith to fulfill the
terms of said agreement has been prevented by events beyond the control of the
subdivider, the Board will consider extension of the time limit. If, at the
expiration of 30 months, the work has not been performed acceptable to the
Planning Board, any such bond may be enforced and any such deposit may be
applied by the Planning Board for the benefit of such town as provided in Section
eighty-one Y of Chapter 41 upon failure of the performance for which any such
bond or deposit was given to the extent of the reasonable cost to such town of
completion of such construction and installation. See Fee Schedule for fee
pertaining to extensions. (amended 6/29/04) If the subdivision is prepared to be
accepted at the next Town Meeting, the Planning Board may waive the extension
fee. (Amended 3/10/11 & 5/24/12)
7. Rescission
Failure of the developer to record the Definitive Plan within six (6) months of its
endorsement or to comply with the construction schedule of the performance
agreement (Covenant or Performance Bond) shall constitute sufficient reason for
the rescission of such approval, in accordance with the requirements of the
13
Subdivision Control Law.
8. Reduction of Bond or Surety (Amended 3/10/11)
The penal sum of any such performance bond, or the amount of any deposit held
under clause (1) or (2) above, may from time to time, be reduced by the Planning
Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by said Board in whole or
in part.
The Board may modify its requirements for any or all improvements and the face
value shall be reduced or increased respectively by an appropriate amount, if it is
decided at any time during the term of the performance surety that:
1. Improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner in sufficient amount
to warrant reductions in the face amount of such performance bond and/or deposit
or both; or, 2. the character and extent of the subdivision requires improvements
according to the approved definitive plan.
The DPW needs to provide a letter to the Planning Board that the appropriate
amount of work has been completed and has satisfactorily passed inspection, and
that the remaining incomplete work can be covered by the reduced security,
which will be determined by the DPW.
9. Release of Performance Guarantee (Amended 3/10/11)
Upon the completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Planning Board,
security for the performance of which was given by performance bond or deposit,
the applicant shall send by registered mail to the city or town clerk and the
Planning Board a written statement that the said construction or installation in
connection with which such performance bond or deposit, has been completed in
accordance with said rules and regulations, such statement to contain the address
of the applicant. If the Planning Board determines that said construction or
installation has been completed, it shall release the interest of the town in such
performance bond or the deposit to the person who furnished same. If the Board
determines that said construction or installation has not been completed, it shall
specify in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and to the clerk of the
city or town the details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply
with its rules and regulations and upon failure to do so within forty-five (45) days
after receipt by said clerk of said statement all obligations under the bond shall
cease and terminate by operation by law, and deposit shall be returned. In the
event that said forty-five (45) day period expires without such specification or
14
without the release and return of the performance bond or return of the deposit as
aforesaid, the said clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly
acknowledged, which may be recorded.
The proceeds of any such bond or deposit shall be made available to the Town for
expenditure to meet the cost and expenses of the municipality in completing the
work as specified in the approved plan. If such proceeds do not exceed one
hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars, the expenditures may be made without
specific appropriations under Section Fifty-three of Chapter Forty-five; provided,
however, that such expenditure is approved by the Board of Selectmen.
Warranty ofFinished Product: The Town will keep 5% of the estimated cost
of construction, as determined at the discretion of the Planning Board, in the form
of a performance bond or cash, for 1 year after the way is accepted at Town
Meeting as a guarantee for work that fails or becomes evident during such time;
the funds can be accessed to make the needed repairs and/or to pay legal or expert
costs incurred by the Town to enforce the Town's rights, as determined at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
C. PLANS NOT REQUIRING APPROVAL UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL
LAW (Chapter41, Section 81-P)
1. Plans submitted to the Board for endorsement which are believed not to require
approval shall be accompanied by a complete application. A copy of the latest deed shall
accompany the application. (Amended 5/24/12)
2. Plans submitted under Chapter 41, Section 81-P of the Subdivision Control Law
shall have the following statement attached for all buildable lots: "I hereby certify that
lots# __ as shown on this ANR plan meet all the requirements set forth in 310 CMR
15.00 Title V." This statement must be signed by the surveyor.
15
A. STREETS
SECTION III
DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Location and Alignment
a. Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing streets appropriate to
the topography, and designed to afford a safe access to the abutting lots giving
due consideration to contours and natural features. Where required by the Board,
provisions shall be made in the proper locations for extension of streets to
abutting undeveloped land.
b. The proposed streets shall conform, so far as practicable, to the Strategic
Plan as adopted in whole or in part by the Planning Board.
c. Provision satisfactory to the Planning Board shall be made for the proper
protection of streets, or for access to adjoining property which is not yet
subdivided.
d. Subdivisions that abut any property, all or in part, which is classified as
agriculture or horticulture land under M.G.L. Chapter 61A, or has been used in
the past year for crop land, pasture, meadow, or orchard as determined by the
Planning Board, shall retain and include an open space strip (undisturbed) of not
less than twenty-five (25') feet directly abutting said land, and shall be shown on
the plan. The buffer strip shall remain in its natural state, and at the discretion of
the Planning Board, be conveyed in the form of a deed restriction, deed, or
easement to the town or homeowner's association.
e. Street junctions with center line directly opposite or with offsets of less
than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided.
f. The minimum center line radii of curved streets shall be one hundred and
fifty (150) feet. Greater radii may be required for principal streets.
g. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than an angle of seventyfive
(75) degrees.
h. Property lines at street intersections are to be designed to provide a
minimum of ten (10) feet from the finished curb or berm radius.
i. All subdivisions containing more than eight (8) lots shall provide no less
than two (2) street entrances from an existing roadway. (Amended 4/30/09)
16
2. Width
a. The minimum width of street right-of-ways shall be fifty (50) feet.
Greater width may be required by the Planning Board when deemed necessary for
present and future vehicular travel.
b. The minimum width and alignment or roadway pavement within the rightof-
way shall be shown on the Standard Construction Details.
3. Grade
a. Grades of streets shall be not less than 0.5%. Grades shall not be more
than 6.0% for connector streets, and not more than 8.0% for minor and major
residential streets. As far as practicable, all roads shall follow natural contours.
4. Dead-end Streets
a. Dead-end streets shall not be longer than one-thousand (1,000) feet, unless
in the opinion of the Planning Board, a greater length is necessitated by
topography or other local conditions.
b. Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround
having an outside roadway diameter of at least one hundred and thirty (130) feet,
and a property line diameter of at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet. A center
island shall be installed with a diameter of seventy (70) feet. The return radius
from the cul-de-sac to the street intersection shall have a radius of twenty-five
(25) feet and the corresponding property line shall be designed to leave a
minimum of ten (10) feet from the finished curb or berm radius. Land inside the
turnaround shall be landscaped to match the surrounding area.
5. Street Classifications
a. Minor Residential Street - A street which provides access to less than
ten (10) residential only properties and has no future potential for expansion on
continuation.
b. Major Residential Street - A street which serves only the subject
subdivision and does not provide connection between two existing streets nor
which would be subject to non-subdivision traffic and which has no abutting
property, either used or zoned for business or industry and which is not a minor
residential street.
c. Collector Street - Any street not classified as Major or Minor Residential
Street.
17
B. EASEMENTS
1. Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided where necessary, and shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide.
2. Where the subdivision is traversed by a water course drainage way, channel, or
stream, the Planning Board may require that there be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way of adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of such
water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, and to provide for construction or other
necessary purposes.
3. Where the limits of highway slopes exceed the limits of the highway, slope
easements shall be provided in favor of the Town of Ludlow.
4. Drainage easements outside of the area of the subdivision, but occasioned by it,
may be required of the subdivider.
C. OPEN SPACES
Before approval of a plan, the Planning Board may also in proper cases, require the plan
to show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes or for
providing light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area, in relation to
the land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Planning Board
may, by appropriate endorsement of the plan, require that no building be erected upon
such park or parks without its approval for a period of three years.
D. PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES
All natural features, such as large trees (greater than 8 inches in diameter DBH), water
courses, wetlands, scenic points, historic locations, stone walls, and similar community
assets which will contribute to the attractiveness and value of the property shall be shown
on the plan and preserved. Appropriate reseeding and replanting of the non-paved areas
of the public way is a component part of the construction of the subdivision, and is to be
completed by the developer prior to acceptance.
Existing vegetation shall be disturbed at a minimum. Except where necessary to conform
to road design, driveways, safety, and drainage, major earth grading shall be avoided.
The Board, at its discretion, shall require portions of the public way to be planted with
groups of shrubs or trees for aesthetic value and effect as to enhance the property. At
least two trees per lot shall be preserved or planted within the right-of-way or within 10
feet of the right-of-way. (amended 6/29/04)
18
E. UTILITIES
1. Storm Water System
a. Storm water drains, including any of their related structures, shall be
designed and installed by the applicant, wherever and whenever, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, such are necessary to provide adequate disposal of surface
water from all streets and lots within the subdivision and those lands and
roadways immediately adjacent to the subdivision.
b. The storm drainage system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the A.S.C.E. Manual of Practice No. 37, Design and
Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers. Computations supporting the design
of the drainage system may be required by the Board. The area to be used in the
design computations of the storm drainage system, shall include the entire natural
drainage basin tributary to the area being developed, including adjacent
undeveloped land which shall be based on the ultimate development of the area in
accordance with the existing zoning laws.
c. The hydrology calculations for the subdivision must be submitted showing
the 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 year storm curves using the TR-55 system.
d. The piping for the storm water drainage system shall be designed using the
10-year storm curve for street drains and the 25-year storm curve for culverts over
existing natural water ways.
e. Catch basins shall be designed for both sides of the proposed way, on
continuous grades, at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet, at low
points and sags in the way, and near the corners of the way at intersected ways.
f. All storm water systems that eventually outlet to either a detention pond or
a wetland area shall have hoods installed in all catch basins within the system.
g. The following are minimum sizes and strengths of storm water pipes.
Existing conditions and design criteria, using Engineering Department standards,
shall determine the actual sizes and strengths of pipe to be used in all cases.
OR:
(1) Main Lines
A. Twelve (12") inch reinforced concrete Class IV unless
volume indicates a larger size is required. Minimum Slope - .005
(1/2 foot per 100 feet)
19
B. Twelve (12") inch smooth interior polyethylene drain pipe
· minimum slope - .005 (1/2 foot per 100 feet)
(2) Catch Basin Connections
A. Twelve (12") inch reinforced concrete pipe, Class IV,
minimum slope - .005 (1/2 foot per 100 feet)
OR:
· B. Twelve (12") inch smooth interior polyethylene drain pipe,
minimum slope - .005 (112 foot per 100 feet)
2. Sanitary System
a. Sanitary sewers and their related equipment shall be designed and installed
in conformance with the requirements of the Town of Ludlow Department of
Public Works.
b. Whenever septic tanks, or other similar systems, are allowed by the Board
of Health of the Town of Ludlow, they shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with their requirements and standards.
c. The following are minimum sizes and strengths of sanitary sewers.
Existing conditions and designs criteria using Engineering Department Standards,
shall determine the actual sizes and strengths of pipe to be used in all cases:
(1) Main Line - eight (8") inch, PVC (poly-vinyl chloride) sewer pipe,
type RSM SDR-35, ASTM standard specifications D-3034 (latest
revision), minimum slope -.004.
(2) House Laterals - six (6") inch PVC sewer pipe, type PSM, SDR-
35, ASTM standard specifications D-3034 (latest revision), minimum
slope - W' per foot.
3. Water Systems
a. Water Mains, including house laterals, and their related equipment, shall
be designed to serve all lots on each street within the subdivision, in conformance
with the specification of the Water Department of the City of Springfield.
b. Whenever a well, or other private water system is allowed by the Board of
Health of the Town of Ludlow, it shall meet the required standards of said
Department.
20
4. Electrical Transmission Lines
a. All line and/or wires used for the transmission of electricity and/or
intelligence shall be placed underground within the subdivision, in a location as
approved by the Planning Board, and in accordance with the Building Code of the
Town of Ludlow as amended.
(1) All lines and appurtenances for the distribution of electricity shall be
buried at a minimum of three (3) feet below the approved final grade of streets,
walks, or tree belts.
(2) Street lights shall be installed by the servicing power company at the
developer's expense and the developer shall be responsible for the cost of street
lighting until the street shall be accepted by the Town of Ludlow. No street shall
be accepted by the town until a homeowners' association has been formed for the
subdivision in question and until the homeowners' association has assumed the
annual cost of street lighting and maintenance since the town will not be
responsible for such costs. The street lights and standards shall be the type (Town
& County Decorative Light) used by the servicing power company and shall be
installed on a street prior to any occupancy of any building. Solar powered street
lights are acceptable alternatives to the above mentioned street lighting standards.
(Amended 4/30/09 & 3/10/11)
(3) All lines and appurtenances for the distribution of intelligence shall be
buried at a minimum depth of eighteen (18") inches below the approved final
grade of the streets.
(4) In areas serviced by cable television, appropriate provisions shall be
included for such services.
5. Gas Transmission Lines
a. All main or distribution pipelines used for the transmission of gas shall be
placed underground within the subdivision, in a location and at a depth approved
by the Planning Board. Related equipment and accessories shall be installed in
conformance with the Department of Public Safety Standards.
F. SIDEWALKS
1. Sidewalks having not less than (5') feet width are required on one side of the
street. (Amended 4/30/09)
2. The alignment of sidewalks shall be shown on the Standard Construction Details.
3. Sidewalks shall be pitched at the rate of three sixteenths (3/16") to the foot, as
shown on the Standard Details.
21
G. DRIVEWAY APRONS
1. Driveway aprons shall be six (6') feet wider than the driveway width, with a
minimum width of fourteen (14') feet and shall have a two (2') foot radius at the gutter
line.
2. The grade of the driveway apron shall be as shown on the Standard Construction
Details.
3. The nearest line of the driveway shall not be any closer than fifty (50') feet from
the intersection of any two (2) street lines.
4. The driveway aprons shall be constructed within the tree belt of the subject
property determined by the projection, in a continued straight line, of the property lines to
the edge of the roadway surface.
H. MONUMENTS
1. Reinforced concrete or granite monuments shall be installed at all street
intersections, at all points of change in direction or curvature of streets and at other points
where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, permanent monuments are necessary.
All subdivision site boundary monuments are to be set prior to signature of the Definitive
Plan. No permanent monument shall be installed until all construction which would
destroy or disturb that location is completed.
2. Iron pins shall be placed at the comers of all lots within the subdivision that are
not monumented with reinforced or granite monuments.
3. Large radius curves with a length which exceeds 300 feet shall have
monumentation installed along the curve at a maximum spacing of 300 feet.
I. CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND STANDARDS
1. Construction of all elements of subdivision streets within the street lines shall
conform to the latest revision of the Standard Construction Details.
2. All utility lines shall be constructed with laterals of appropriate size installed to
the street line and appropriately staked and located on the "As-built" plans.
3. In areas served by cable television, appropriate provisions shall be included for
such service.
4. The roadway surfacing shall be installed in two stages as follows:
22
(a) The binder course and berm shall be installed during the initial roadway
construction immediately following installation of underground utilities and the
gravel base.
The Building Commissioner shall not issue any permit for the erection of a
building until phases 1 through 6 of Form L "Certificate of Inspection" have been
completed. No lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been
provided to serve such lot, and any security being held on such lot has been
released by the Planning Board. (amended 6/29/04)
(b) The top course shall be installed only after the binder course has been
cleaned and a tack course applied. (Refer to Section IV, Item F,
Paragraph 1) the top course shall be installed only after the binder course has been
subject to one winter and thaw cycle, and when authorization has been requested
and received from the Town Engineer;
(c) And only after all deficiencies from the time of initial construction,
including cleaning and installation of tack course, have been corrected.
5. Street Shade Trees (added 6/29/04) (See also Section K)
(a) Street shade trees shall be on both sides of subdivision streets in the rightof-
way or within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way. There shall be one tree planted
or preserved an average of forty ( 40) feet along street frontage and not less than
two trees per lot. Trees that will be preserved shall be mature deciduous trees of
at least 8" DBH and of a species approved by the Tree Warden, or newly planted
trees no less than 2.5 inch caliper at time of installation. Species, size and
planting procedure for such trees shall be as approved in writing by the Tree
Warden.
(b) Planting operations and requirements for trees and planting contained
herein shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the
American Nurserymen Association and the Associated Landscape Contractors of
Massachusetts, and shall have a two (2) year growth warranty and shall be
guaranteed by a security deposit by the developer for a period of two (2) years.
The trees must be planted prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
Any tree deemed unsatisfactory by the Planning Board within two years shall be
removed at the direction of the Tree Warden and replaced at the expense of the
developer. Such replacement must occur within six months.
6. Tree Protection During Construction: (added 6/29/04) (See also Section K)
(a) During construction, all vegetation to be retained shall be surrounded by
temporary protective fencing at least 3.5 feet high, or other approved protective
measures, before any clearing or grading occurs. Such fences shall be maintained
until all construction and site work is completed. Barriers shall be large enough
23
to encompass the essential root zone of all vegetation to be protected. All
vegetation within the protective fences shall be retained in an undisturbed state.
No storage of materials or equipment may occur within the fenced areas.
(b) Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area
necessary to maneuver a backhoe or other construction equipment. Roots should
be cut cleanly rather than pulled or ripped out during utility trenching. Tunneling
for utilities installation should be utilized wherever feasible to protect the root
system of trees.
(c) Any tree that is to be preserved that is subsequently damaged during
construction shall be removed and replaced as directed by the Tree Warden and at
the expense of the developer. Replacement shall be on the basis of 1/2 inch caliper
of new tree(s) for each inch of DBH of tree(s) removed. The replacement shall
occur within six months from the event that damaged the tree. The species of the
replacement tree(s) shall be approved by the Tree Warden.
J. RETENTION/DETENTION PONDS - STANDARDS
Retention Pond -A pond designed without a pipe outlet. Water cap is percolated into
the soil substrata.
Detention Pond - A pond designed with a pipe outlet.
All ponds shall comply with U.S. Department of Agriculture Standards, available at 4
Walley Street, Hadley, MA 01035.
1. Last manhole before entry of piped water to enter pond shall be accessible to
paved area of street.
2. Exit pipe shall be equipped with a trash rack of at least Yz inch metal with
openings of no more than 4 inches in one direction.
3. All retention/detention ponds shall be provided with an emergency spillway
capable of passing the 100 year flood event, and satisfactory to the Planning Board, the
Board of Public Works and the Conservation Commission.
4. Computation for the sizing of the pond shall be provided with definitive plan
submission. Said computation shall be based on a 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 design
storm and a zero increase in runoff assumption. All outlet structures shall have a three
stage design. ·
5. Construction details of the pond shall be provided with the definitive plan.
Included in the detailing shall be typical section through the pond (and berm); pipe inlet
and outlet works; outletting channel (if channel lining is used, provide computations);
energy dissipaters; grading plan; and landscaping.
24
6. An easement shall be provided for Town access. Said easement shall be sufficient
in dimensions to allow for Town vehicles and personnel to perform routine maintenance
work.
7. If embankment is higher than eight (8 ') feet above main water level, or depth of
pond is in excess of two (2') feet in a 10 year design storm, it must be fenced.
8. All retention/detention ponds must be on their own separate parcel with access to a
public way. The minimum width of the right-of -way must be 25 feet, in some cases the
width may need to be wider to accommodate topography or grading. (Added 3/10/11)
9. All retention/detention ponds must be surrounded by chain link fencing to include a
gate for maintenance with access to a public way. Fencing height will be at a minimum 4
feet and will not exceed a maximum of 6V2 feet. (Added 3/10/11)
K. STREET SHADE TREES (added 6/29/04) (See also Section I, #5 & 6)
(a) Street shade trees shall be on both sides of subdivision streets in the right-of-way
or within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way. There shall be one tree planted or preserved
an average of forty ( 40) feet of street frontage, and not less than two trees per lot. Trees
that will be preserved shall be mature deciduous trees of at least 8" DBH and of a species
approved by the Tree Warden, or newly planted trees of a species approved by the Tree
Warden, no less that 2.5 inch caliper at time of installation, and nursery grown. No more
than 35% of any one species shall be newly planted throughout the subdivision.
(b) If a street tree would be unable to survive under normal conditions due to soil,
slope, or other natural conditions, alternate planting arrangements can be made with the
agreement of the Tree Warden. The alternate planting arrangements include:
1) Planting in line with an existing row of street trees;
2) Elsewhere on the property;
3) Payment into a tree mitigation fund of an amount equal to the cost of the
tree(s), material, and labor needed to meet the requirements of this section. Such
amount shall be set by the Planning Board.
25
SECTION IV
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IN AN APPROVED SUBDIVISION
A. GENERAL
1. All improvements hereinafter specified shall be constructed or installed, or
caused to be constructed or installed, by the applicant, in conformity with the
approved Definitive Plan and with:
a. These rules and regulations: and
b. Whenever applicable (sections referring to payment are never
applicable) with specifications of the Massachusetts Highway
Department), as outlined in the current edition of Standard Specifications
for Highways, Bridges, and Water Ways. hereinafter referred to as
Standard Specifications, as amended, and in the 1966 edition of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works Construction Manual,
Construction Standards, Part 3.
(1) Whenever, in said Standard Specifications, reference is
made to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts it shall mean the
· Town of Ludlow. The District Engineer or Engineer shall mean
the Town Engineer acting through the Planning Board.
c. The latest revision of the Standard Details of the Engineering
Department of the Town of Ludlow, which are made a part of these
regulations, as appropriated and as amended.
2. Sectional installation of utilities and construction of roadway is permitted,
PROVIDED that each section shall be for not less than five hundred (500) lineal
feet of roadway.
3. Wetland Protection Act -The provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act,
Chapter 131, S. 40, M.G.L., shall be complied with, if applicable, before any
construction commences on an approved subdivision plan.
4. Effluent Discharge Permit - No person shall discharge pollutants into the
waters of the Commonwealth, nor make a new outlet for such discharge or any
treatment works without obtaining a permit pursuant to Chapter 21, S. 43, M.G.L.
5. Street Opening Permit
No opening or obstruction shall be made in nor, except as provided in
Section 12 of the Chapter, shall any material be placed on a public way or a way
26
under control of the Town of Ludlow, either by a department of the Town or a
private individual or corporation, unless a permit therefore shall first be obtained
from the Superintendent of Public Works and the Board of Public Works. Before
such a permit is granted, an applicant, other than a town department may be
required to file a bond in a sum satisfactory to the Board of Public Works
conditioned upon the faithful discharge and performance of every duty and
requirement imposed by statute, bylaw of the Town or regulation of the Board of
Public Works applicable thereto, and upon the conformance to all directions to the
Superintendent of Public Works relating to the work to be done under such permit
and upon the payment of all expenses and damages incurred by the town or
recovered from it by reason of or in connection with such occupation, opening or
work. Each applicant for a permit to open a street shall deposit with the Town
Treasurer an amount prescribed by the Town Engineer as a condition to the
issuing of the permit to cover the cost of resurfacing after the opening has been
closed, provided however, than an applicant may be excused from making such
payment in advance when a satisfactory guarantee is given.
6. Development Within Flood Plain Districts
a. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If any part of a subdivision proposal or other new development is
located within the Flood Plain District established under the Zoning Bylaw, it
shall be reviewed to assure that:
(1) the proposal is designed consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage, and
(2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
and
(3) adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards, and
( 4) base flood elevation (the level of the 100 year flood) data shall be
provided for proposals greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever if the lesser, for
that portion within the Flood Plain District.
Special permit is also required in accordance with Section 5.0 of the Zoning
Bylaw.
b. All mobile homes within the Flood Plain District shall provide that:
(1) stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the
lowest flood of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level, and
27
(2) adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided, and
(3) in the instance of elevation on pilings, lots are large enough to permit steps,
piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than 10 feet apart, and
reinforcement is provided for piers more than six feet above ground level.
B. INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION
1. All inspections shall be completed by the Town Engineer or his designee.
C. PREPARATION OF ROADWAY
1. The entire area within the exterior lines of all streets in the subdivision shall be
cleared, excavated or filled as necessary, and graded in accordance with the then current
Standard Specifications, Division II, Sections 101 and 405 inclusive.
a. The minimum depth of the gravel base course, after rolling, shall be
twelve (12") inches. It shall be greater if so directed by the Planning Board of its
Engineer.
D. UTILITIES
1. Storm water systems shall be constructed in accordance with:
a. The then current Standard Specifications Division II, Section 200, as
applicable and/or the Standard Details of the Town of Ludlow as applicable.
2. Sanitary sewer systems to serve each lot within the subdivision shall be
constructed, where possible, in accordance with the specifications of the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Ludlow as outlined in these Rules and Regulations.
3. Septic tank systems shall be constructed in accordance with the current
specifications of the Board of Health of the Town of Ludlow.
4. The applicant shall cause, where possible, water mains and their related
accessories to serve each lot within the subdivision to be installed as shown on the
approved Definitive Plan, and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board
of Water Commissioners of the City of Springfield.
5. Individual potable water supply (wells) systems shall be constructed in
accordance with the current specifications of the Board of Health of the Town of Ludlow.
6. The applicant shall cause primary and secondary lines and/or wires used for the
transmission of electricity and/or intelligence, and their related accessories to serve each
lot within the subdivision.
28
E. CURB CONSTRUCTION
1. All ways shall have their entire gutter lines curbed with bituminous concrete
berm, (Cape Cod berm), as per Standard Specifications of the Department of Public
Works of the Town of Ludlow. (Amended 4/30/09)
F. STANDARD BOTTOM AND TOP COURSES OF PAVEMENT
1. The base course shall be primed with an acceptable asphaltic oil, at a rate of up to
one-half (112) gallon per square yard of roadway surface, or by any other treatment
acceptable to the Planning Board or its Engineer.
2. A bottom and top course of bituminous concrete at the depths to be determined by
chart called for in the Standard Details Sheet, Roadways & Pavement, Sheet #1of3 shall
be laid in accordance with the then current specifications for Type I-1 Bituminous
Concrete Pavement, as described in Standard Specifications, Division II, Section 420 and
460. All ways shall be brought up to the finish grade, as shown on the approved Street
Plot and Profile Plan of the Definitive Plan.
G. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
The Standards to be used shall be the current Standard Specification, Division II, Section
701.
H. DRIVEWAY APRON CONSTRUCTION
The standards to be used shall be the then current Standard Specifications, Division II,
Section 701.
I. STREETS AND TRAFFIC SIGN
Street name signs, standards, and other appropriate traffic direction signs of a design,
materials, or number required by the Safety Committee of the Town of Ludlow shall be
secured, furnished and installed, or caused to be installed by the applicant.
J. GRASSED AREAS
All unpaved areas, between an exterior right-of-way line and a curb line, and within that
area contained by a paved tum-around circle, shall be graded, loamed with at least four
( 4") inches of loam after compacting, and seeded with a suitable cover of seed. All work
and material standards shall be the then current Standard Specifications, Division II,
Sections 751 and 765.
29
K. MONUMENTS
1. Monuments, or bounds, as required under Section III, Subsection H, shall be as
set forth herein.
2. Reinforced Concrete Monuments: 3 ' - O" in length, 4" square at top, 5" square at
bottom as shown on Town of Ludlow Standard Specifications on sheet #1of3,
Roadways and Pavements , shall be used.
3. Iron Pins: Minimum of l" diameter, Minimum of 2' - O" length.
L. CLEARING UP OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
All rights-of-way within the subdivision shall be cleared of any and all materials, tools, or
structures used in the development work but not intended to be a permanent part thereof,
prior to the request for release of Performance Guarantee, Security, or Covenant.
M. SUPPLEMENTAL WATER SUPPLY (added 6/29/04 & amended 4/30/09)
All plans submitted to the Planning Board of the Town of Ludlow for consideration as
Definitive Subdivision plans, by any individual, partnership, or corporation (hereinafter,
the developer) which propose to build three or more residential structure, or commercial
or industrial structures of three thousand square feet (3000 S.F.) or larger, shall meet the
following criteria for fire control supplemental water supply.
1. Acceptable Fire Control Systems
A. Municipal Water Supply Extension
1. Where any part of the proposed subdivision lies within a distance
of one thousand five-hundred (1,500) feet from an existing
municipal water supply which can provide the minimum
acceptable fire flow, the developer shall include plans to extend the
existing municipal water supply so that a hydrant served by the
municipal water supply shall be no more than five hundred (500)
feet from the nearest point of the farthest structure to be built as
part of the proposed subdivision.
2. Such municipal water supply extension shall be constructed along
the route that fire apparatus would be expected to travel, and shall
be reviewed and approved by the Fire chief or his designated Fire
Prevention Officer (hereinafter, the Fire Chief).
3. Developer shall provide a "will serve" letter from the appropriate
· Municipal water authority.
30
4. The following minimum fire flows must be achieved from the
extended municipal water system:
• Residential- Five hundred (500) gallons per minute for twenty (20)
minutes.
• Commercial, Industrial- One thousand (1,000) gallons per minute
for twenty (20) minutes.
B. Dry Hydrant or Cistern Systems
1. In cases where a sufficient municipal water supply is not available
within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet or the required minimum
fire flows cannot be achieved, a Dry Hydrant or Cistern system shall be
provided. Certain specifications of these systems are given below.
2. The dry hydrant or cistern shall be located no more than two
thousand (2,000) feet from the nearest point of the farthest structure to be
built as part of the proposed subdivision.
3. Such system shall be for the exclusive use of fire and maintenance
personnel.
4. The capacity of the Dry Hydrant or Cistern system shall be in
compliance with NFPA 1142, Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban
and Rural Firefighting, and shall be based upon the required fire flow for
the number and size of structures being proposed. The minimum
capacities shall be twenty thousand (20,000) gallons for residential
subdivisions and thirty thousand (30,000) gallons for commercial or
industrial projects.
5. Cisterns are to be designed in accordance with NFPA 1142. The
tank(s) are to be constructed of reinforced concrete lined with an
approved plastic liner or rubber membrane or constructed of other
approved materials designed in accordance with good engineering
practice and consistent with the requirements of NFPA 1142. The design
of a cistern should be trouble-free and last a lifetime.
6. The plans detailing the design and location of the cistern along with
a permit application as required by Massachusetts Fire Prevention
Regulations 527 CMR 1.04 & 10.03 (15), shall be submitted to the fire
chief or his designee for approval prior to construction. All plans shall be
signed by a licensed/registered professional engineer.
7. Suction piping to be constructed of schedule 40 steel. Suction
piping to be painted red. Suction piping shall terminate with a six (6) inch
National Standard Thread (NST) female coupling with a matching male
31
cap twenty (20) inches to twenty four (24) inches above finished grade,
within ten (10) feet of a maintained vehicle access. Suction piping to be
attached to a twenty four (24) inch by twenty four (24) inch by one quarter
(1/4) inch anti vortex plate installed six (6) inches off bottom of tank.
8. Fill pipe to be constructed of schedule 40 steel and shall terminate
with a four (4) inch Stortz connection at a 30 degree down angle with
protective cap.
9. ·Vent pipe to be of sufficient size constructed of ASTM schedule 40
PVC with protective bug screen.
10. Each tank shall have a minimum thirty (30) inch inspection
manhole.
11. Each installation shall have a gauge to read the available water
level.
12. Fire department suction and fill connections shall be protected
from vehicular damage.
13. A sign which has a minimum of one (1) inch white reflective
letters on a red reflective background shall be attached to each cistern
suction connection or dry hydrant. Signage shall state:
"Fire Department Cistern" "Fire Department Dry Hydrant"
------Capacity or --------Capacity
ID# ID#
C. Dry Hydrants
1. Dry hydrants shall be designed in accordance with NFPA 1142.
2. Suction piping to be constructed of schedule 40 steel or PVC.
Suction piping to be painted red. Suction piping shall terminate with a six
(6) inch National Standard Thread (NST) female coupling with a
matching male cap twenty (20) inches to twenty four (24) inches above
finished grade, within ten (10) feet of a maintained vehicle access.
32
D. Fire Protection Sprinkler System
1. Sprinkler systems may be installed in accordance with NFPA 13,
13D, 13R, 231, and 231C in place of extending the municipal water
supply, dry hydrants or cisterns, at the developer's option, provided that
all structures within the development are so equipped, and that adequate
water supply can be demonstrated.
2. Review and Approval of Fire Control Plans
Prior to approval of a Definitive Subdivision plan, all fire control and
water supply plans shall be reviewed, signed, and sealed by a Certified
Fire Protection Engineer, and shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
3. Testing and Verification
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a third residential structure
in a subdivision, or an occupancy permit for commercial or industrial
structure(s), the developer shall submit "as-built' drawings of the fire
control and water supply installation to the Fire Chief and to the
Department of Public Works, and all fire control systems shall undergo
acceptance testing by the Fire Chief to verify that they are fully
operational.
4. Access
Land upon which any supplementary water supply installation sits, and
access thereto from a public way, shall be either deeded to the Town of
Ludlow in fee by the owner, or an easement granted to allow access by
Town maintenance and fire personnel.
5. . Performance and Maintenance
The developer shall provide a five-year performance bond in an amount
to be determined by the Fire Chief, to be used in case of major failure of
the fire control system.
The developer shall ensure that the Fire Department has all necessary
equipment to connect to the fire control system and to reach target
structures. Any new equipment that is required shall be provided by the
developer at his expense.
The developer shall provide funds necessary for the anticipated
maintenance of the fire control system for a period of five years after
33
acceptance of the Subdivision by the Town. Unexpended funds shall be
refunded to the developer at the conclusion of the fire-year period.
6. Definitions:
Acceptance Testing: A test conducted by the Ludlow Fire Department
utilizing the system for a predetermined period of time. The purpose of
this test is to ensure proper operation and recharge.
Cistern: See NFPA 1142, B. 3. 1 through B. 3. 4.
Developer: Shall include applicant, owner, or his agent or
representative, or his assigns.
Dry Hydrant System-See NFPA 1142
Fire Chief: The Fire Chief or his designated Fire Prevention Officer
NFP A: National Fire Protection Association
NFPA 13: The current edition of Installation of Sprinkler Systems.
NFPA 13D: The current edition of Sprinkler Systems in One and TwoFamily
Dwellings and Mobile Homes.
NFP A 13R: The current edition of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to and including Four Stories in Height.
NFPA 1142: The current edition of Water Supplies for Suburban and
Rural Fire Fighting.
34
A. VARIATION
SECTIONV
ADMINISTRATION
Strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations may be
waived when, in the judgement of the Planning Board, such action is in the best
interest of the Town and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
B. REFERENCE
For matters not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made to
Sections 81-K to 81-GG inclusive of Chapter 41 of the General Laws.
C. VALIDITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision thereof.
D. RESUBDIVISION
A subdivision plan that has been approved by the Planning Board and duly
recorded in the Registry of Deeds, may not be changed in any line or grade until
the petitioner has followed the same procedure as that required for a new
subdivision. In addition, the Planning Board shall consider what developments
have taken place in the said plan, by individuals, in their reliance on its official
records in the Registry of Deeds and whether the granting of the requested change
or changes would affect any individual right required thereunder. The Planning
Board shall require the petitioner to secure releases to himself from all abutters
who may be affected within the tract, relieving him of all damages which may be
caused by any action taken under the proposed change. The new subdivision plan
shall contain a clear and distinct reference to the former subdivision plan and to
the book and page on which it is recorded in the Registry of Deeds and shall show
revisions or departures from the original in red ink.
E. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS
The developer shall cause to be executed and submit to the Planning Board all
legal instruments necessary for the approval of the subdivision. These
instruments shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town Counsel. Sample forms
for these Instruments have been included at the end of these regulations.
35
F. AS BUILT DRAWINGS
The subdivider shall, at the completion of the sanitary sewer installation, submit
to the Department of Public Works one (1) set of prints of the definitive
subdivision plans clearly showing the sanitary house lateral locations with tie
distances and depths at the capped ends of the installed laterals.
The developer shall also submit to the Planning Board, after the final inspection
of the subdivision has been made and approved by the Town Engineer or his
representative, one (1) set of Mylar reproducible As-Built plans showing the
following items:
1. Clearly showing the sanitary house lateral locations with distances and
depths at the capped ends of the installed laterals.
2. Actual locations, frames and cover elevations, final street elevations, and
inverts of all sanitary sewer and storm water structures and underground piping
that differ significantly from the approved definitive subdivision plans.
3. Actual water piping locations.
4. All lines and/or wires used for the transmission of electricity and/or
intelligence.
5. Location of street light poles.
6. All main or distribution pipe lines used for the transmission of gas or
liquid fuels.
7. Changes in the location of sidewalks.
8. Location of any installed fencing used for retention or detention ponds.
36
FORM A
DESIGNER'S CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the accompanying Plan entitled ____________ _
dated ________ _,_ 20 _ , is correct; that it is a subdivision of (part of or all
o~thelandsconveyedby ________________________ ~
to _________________________________ _
by deed dated ______ , 20 __ , and recorded in ___________ _
County Registry Book , Page , and that Parcel monuments are set as
indicated on the Plan.
I further certify that (none, some, or all) of the Parcel is within the Aircraft Flight Overlay
District.
Date ---------
Designer
Date ---------
Subdivider
37
FORMB
DEDICATION OF PUBLIC AREA
The undersigned owner of the land described herein does adopt the Definitive Plan entitled
and does hereby dedicate the streets, ways, parks, and reserved areas as shown thereon to public
use. And the undersigned hereby for themselves and their heirs, representatives, successors, and
assigns, release the Town of Ludlow of and from all claims for damages in case said reserved
areas are ever so taken for municipal use and agree upon request of said Town of Ludlow to
execute and deliver any document necessary to establish said reserved areas as public lands.
There are no claims against said property upon which any suits have been brought, leases, liens,
contract claims, encumbrances or trusts known to the undersigned affecting said property shown
in said Plan, (except as follows:)
This instrument is intended to be a sealed instrument. Any persons known to the undersigned as
interested in said property, other than the undersigned, have indicated their assent to said Plan of
Subdivision and this dedication.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereto set our hand(s) and seal(s); or if a corporation, a
corporation duly organized under the laws of the of
________ has caused its corporate seal to be hereto affixed and these presents to be
signed, acknowledged and delivered in its name and behalf by ____________ _
its hereto duly authorized ____________ _
__ __,_this day of , 20 __ .
If individual owner:
If corporate owner: By
(Corporate Seal)
Title of Officer Signing
The undersigned assent to the Plan of Subdivision above referred to.
38
Hampden, ss
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Date: --------
On this day of , 20_, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared , proved to me through satisfactory evidence of
identification, which were to be the person whose name is signed
on the preceding or attached, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it voluntarily for its
stated purpose.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ______ _
39
FORMC
EASEMENTS
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we, ____________ _
-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~_,of_~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
GRANT to the Town of Ludlow, a municipal corporation of Hampden County, Massachusetts,
with quit claim covenants, the Sanitary Sewer and Stormwater Drain Easements in a Subdivision
entitled , located in said Town of Ludlow.
All as shown on the Definitive Plan for said Subdivision, said Plans now on file in the office of
the Town of Ludlow Planning Board. Together with the right to enter upon said easements to
lay, maintain and repair pipes and their appurtenant structures, to pass sewerage or stormwater
runoff through said pipes, and to discharge storm water runoff on land of the Grantor.
SAID EASEMENTS being more particularly described as follows:
EXECUTED as a sealed instrument this ----- day of -------, 20 ~~-
Witness
Witness
Hampden, ss
by
by
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Date: --------
On this day of , 20_, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared , proved to me through satisfactory evidence of
identification, which were to be the person whose name is signed
on the preceding or attached, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it voluntarily for its
stated purpose.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ______ _
40
FORMD
QUIT CLAIM DEED
Sanitary Sewers and Stormwater Drains
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we, _____________ _
----------------~.,of _________________ _
GRANT to the Town of Ludlow, a municipal corporation of Hampden County, Massachusetts,
with quit claim covenants, the sanitary sewer and stormwater drains in a Subdivision entitled
and located in said Town of Ludlow. All as shown
----------------~ on the Definitive Plan for said Subdivision, said Plans now on file in the office of the Town of
Ludlow Planning Board. Together with the right to enter upon the ways of said subdivision to
install, maintain and repair pipes and their appurtenant structures, to pass sewerage or storm
water runoff through said pipes, and to make connections to said pipes from the lots adjacent to
the ways of said subdivision.
THIS INSTRUMENT shall take effect upon completion of all work called for in the
Development Agreement or Covenant entered into by and
the Town of Ludlow Planning Board dated , 20 ---
EXECUTED as a sealed instrument this ____ day of _____ , 20 __ _
Witness
Witness
Hampden, ss
by
by
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Date: --------
On this day of , 20_, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared , proved to me through satisfactory evidence of
identification, which were to be the person whose name is signed
on the preceding or attached, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it voluntarily for its
stated purpose.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: -------
41
FORM E
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT made as of this ___ day of _______ , 20 __ ,
Name of Developer Address
(hereafter the "Developer") and the TOWN OF LUDLOW, a Massachusetts municipal
corporation acting by and through its Planning Board with a place of business at 488 Chapin
Street, Ludlow, Massachusetts (hereafter the "Planning Board").
The Developer has petitioned the Planning Board for approval of a definitive plan
(hereafter the "Plan") and profile of a subdivision entitled ----------- Name of Subdivision
(hereafter the "Subdivision"). The Planning Board is willing to approve the Plan provided that
the Developer agrees to develop the Subdivision in accordance with the Plan and in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board which incorporate by reference the
standard specifications for highways and bridges issued by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Works which are incorporated in this Development Agreement by reference. The
Planning Board is also willing to approve the Plan on the condition that the Developer agrees to
complete the improvements shown in the Plan within 30 months from the date of the
Development Agreement. The parties therefore agree as follows:
1. The Developer agrees to construct the ways and installation of municipal services
as shown on the Plan for the Subdivision as approved by the Planning Board on
---------· The construction and installation shall be completed in
Date of Approval
accordance with the Plan and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning
Board and in accordance with current requirements of the standard specifications for highways
and bridges of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works in effect at the time of the
construction and installation.
2. The Developer agrees to complete the construction of ways and installation of
services as set forth in Paragraph 1 by the date which is 30 months from the date of approval of
the Plan by the Planning Board.
3. The Planning Board shall have the right to seek enforcement of this Development
Agreement in any court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The
Developer agrees that, in the event the Planning Board seeks enforcement of this Development
Agreement, it will pay the reasonable attorneys fees and expenses incurred by the Planning
Board in seeking such enforcement.
42
4. In addition to the enforcement actions set forth in Paragraph 3, the Developer agrees that
in the event it fails to perform its obligations pursuant to this Development Agreement, the
Planning Board, in its sole discretion, shall have the right to determine that the cost of the
construction of ways and installation of services shall constitute a "municipal charge" pursuant
to the Town of Ludlow General Bylaws, Part I, Chapter II, §36 which, among other things,
permits the Town of Ludlow to deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit issued to the
Developer for failure to pay the municipal charge evidenced by the Developer's obligations
pursuant to this Development Agreement. The Developer further agrees that its failure to
perform its obligations pursuant to this Development Agreement shall constitute a basis, in the
sole discretion of the Planning Board, to withhold approval of any subdivision plan or any other
request for approval, certification, or other action by the Planning Board in the future.
5. The undersigned applicant(s) agree to unconditionally guaranty all of the Developer's
obligations to the "Planning Board" and further agree that the Planning Board in its discretion,
and after consultation with the Town Engineer and the Building Commissioner, may require
from time to time, substitute collateral in the form of a performance bond and/ or cash or both to
secure the completion of the subdivision.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Development agreement
as of the date first above written.
TOWN OF LUDLOW
Witness
Witness
Witness A majority of the members of its Planning Board
Name of Developer
Witness
Amended 3/10/11
43
FORM F
EXTENSION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
The undersigned are parties to a Development Agreement (the "Development
Agreement") dated as of-------' with respect to a subdivision known as
-------------------------------~
, in Ludlow,
Massachusetts.
The undersigned parties hereby ratify the extension of the Development Agreement from
the initial date of its Expiration to -------, and the undersigned developer hereby
agrees to complete the development of the subdivision described in the Development Agreement
by ____ _
The parties agree that in all respects the Development Agreement has been in effect from
-----------to the date of Extension and that the term of the Development
Agreement shall remain in full force and effect until ----------, except as
amended by this Extension.
Executed as a sealed instrument as of
DEVELOPER
----------
TOWN OF LUDLOW
PLANNING BOARD
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Hampden, ss Date: ______ _
On this __ day of , 20_, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared
---------, proved to me through satisfactory evidence of identification, which were
----------to be the person whose name is signed on the preceding or attached, and
acknowledged to me that he/she signed it voluntarily for its stated purpose.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:-------
44
FORMG
PERFORMANCE BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we-------------
----------------of ------------------
(hereinafter called "Principal") as Principal, and -----------------
------------------' a corporation organized and existing under the
laws of the State of and authorized to transact business in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (hereinafter called "Surety"), as Surety are held and firmly
bound unto the Town of Ludlow Planning Board (hereinafter called "Obligee") in the penal sum
of DOLLARS, we bind ourselves, our heirs,
administrators, executors, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS, the above abounded Principal has entered into a certain Development Agreement
with the above named Obligee, dated the day of , 20 _, covering ___ _
which contract is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as fully and to the same extent as if
copies at length herein,
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE OBLIGATION IS THAT,
whenever the Principal shall be in default under the Contract, having been so declared by the
Obligee, the Surety shall promptly remedy the default. This obligation shall remain in full force
and effect until released in writing by a majority of the Town of Ludlow Planning Board.
EXECUTED as a sealed instrument this ____ day of _____ , 20 _.
Witnesses: Signed:
Principal
Surety
By ________ _
45
FORMH
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION
Street __________ _
Phase: ___________ Planning Board Approval Date: _________ _
Developer's Name: ______________ Phone: __________ _
General Contractor's Name: ___________ Phone: __________ _
NOTE: 72-Hour written notice required on all inspection stages. Notice shall be submitted
to the Planning Board and Engineering Department.
Stage 1:
Stage 2:
Stage 2A:
Stage 3:
Stage 4:
Stage 5:
Stage 6:
Stage 7:
Clearing of right-of-way and roadway embankment construction
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: Date _____ _
Installation of sanitary sewer system
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: _______ Date _____ _
Testing of sanitary sewer system
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: _______ Date _____ _
Installation of stormwater drainage construction
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: _______ Date _____ _
Roadway sub-grade construction
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: _______ Date _____ _
Roadway base (gravel) and fine grading inspection - Certification of gravel
required
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: Date _____ _
Roadway pavement base course (binder- bituminous concrete) construction
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: Date _____ _
Roadway pavement top course (bituminous concrete) construction (after one (1)
full winter season)
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: Date ____ _
46
Form L - Page 2
Stage 8:
Stage 9:
Final inspection (berm, loaming and seeding of tree belt, sanitary and storm water
structures, sidewalks (including gravel sub base), stone bounds, etc. and any other
inspection deemed necessary by the Town Engineer or his representative to
ensure conformity with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: Date ____ _
Installation of street lights.
Date Insp. Requested Insp. by: _______ Date ____ _
DEVELOPER NOTICE: The developer shall reimburse the Town of Ludlow for the cost of
the inspector.
NOTE: AS BUILT DRAWINGS
Upon acceptance of the work as complete, the developer shall revise the original
plans to show the subdivision as built. The As Built Drawings, on Mylar, shall be
on file with the Planning Board before the Performance Guarantee is released.
I, , Town Engineer (or representative of the Town of Ludlow), do
certify that the above-listed stages of road construction have been inspected and were found to
have been properly executed and in accordance with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Representative of Town of Ludlow
Date
47
DEFINITIVE PLAN CHECKLIST FORM
All definitive plan submittals must be stamped by the Town Clerk and brought to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board will distribute the plans to the following departments for comments:
Assessor's Department, Building Department, Department of Public Works, Board of Health,
Fire Department, Safety Committee, and Conservation Commission. Two sets of plans will be
needed for the Planning Board.
All submissions must include:
• Filing Fee
• Copy of the deed
• 9 sets of prints
• A locus plan
• A plan showing overall development showing all easements and the purpose of each
• Abutters as listed by the Assessors
• Storm drainage study calculations
• A copy of the sanitary discharge application, where applicable
• An estimated cost of the subdivision
• Traffic study if sixteen (16) lots or more
• A written request for any waivers from the standard rules and regulations
• A signed and dated copy of this form
• A completed Definitive Plan Application (Added 5/24/12)
STATEMENT OF COMPLETENESS
I have personally verified the completeness and accuracy of my application. I personally attest
to its completeness with regard to the above-listed items as well as any other requirements of the
Town of Ludlow. I understand that compliance with this checklist alone does not guarantee the
completeness of my application. Further, I understand that the Planning Board is required,
within ninety (90) days with a preliminary or 135 days without preliminary, to take action on my
definitive plan and that an incomplete submission cannot be approved.
Developer Date
48
TOWN OF LUDLOW
RECOMMENDED TREE SPECIES
Mature Height of 15 ft. to 30 ft.
Amure Maple, Kousa Dogwood, Thornless Hawthorn, Crabapple Species, Japanese Tree
Lilac, Eastern Redbud.
Mature Height of 25 ft. to 40 ft.
Hedge Maple, Paperbark Maple, Imperial Honeylocust, Amur Corktree.
Mature Height of 40 ft. to 90 ft.
Red Maple, Sugar Maple, Ginkgo (male), Honeylocust, Blackgum (black tupelo), Oak
Species, Linden.
Trees prone to storm damage in New England: Norway Maple, Sycamore, Silver Maple,
London Plane Tree, and Willow.
49
SUBDIVISION FEE SCHEDULE
ANR Plans: $100.00- Initial Lot &
$50.00 - each additional lot
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: $1/linear foot of roadway & $50/lot
Definitive Subdivision Plan: $4/linear foot of roadway & $200/lot
Engineering Inspection: $.50/linear foot of roadway, $200 minimum
Performance Guarantee:
Reduction/ Release:
Type of Substitution (e.g. Covenant> Bond):
$100
$100
Lot Substitution $100
Extension of Development Agreement: $250.00 per lot for each six-month extension.
Condominiums: $50 per parking space
Resubmittal for Grading Change: The amount of affected linear footage to be regarded, divided
by the total linear footage, times the original filing fee.
Effective May 24, 2012
50