Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procedures for certain license and permit
fees — See Ch. 70, Art. I.
Planning Board fees for subdivision — See
schedule at end of Ch. 301.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Noncriminal Disposition
[Adopted 10-21-2002 ATM]
§ 1-1. Enforcement option.
Any bylaw of the Town of Lancaster, or rule or regulation of its officers,
boards or departments, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty,
may, in the discretion of the Town official who is the appropriate enforcing
person, be enforced in the method provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 1-2. Amount of noncriminal fine. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art.
13]
The noncriminal fine for each such violation, if not otherwise specified, shall
be $50 for the first offense, $150 for the second offense, and $300 for the
third and subsequent offenses.
§ 1-3. Enforcing persons.
"Enforcing person" as used in this bylaw, shall mean the Building Inspector
and his designees, the members of the Board of Health and its designees,
the Conservation Commission and its designees, the Sealer of Weights and
Measures and his designees, and such other officials as the Select Board
may from time to time designate, each with respect to violation of bylaws
and rules and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. If more than
one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an
enforcing person.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Fines
[Adopted 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 1-4. Schedule of fines.
Section Fine
Chapter 10, Animals
§ 10-11A Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
§ 10-11B Maximum fine per offense: $300
Chapter 23, Boats and Boating
§ 23-3 Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
Chapter 92, Hawkers and Peddlers
§ 92-10 Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
§ 92-19 Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
Chapter 163, Snow and Ice Removal
§ 163-4 Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
Chapter 170, Stormwater Control
Article I, Stormwater Management
§ 170-12C Maximum fine per offense: $300
§ 170-12D Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
Section Fine
Third and subsequent: $300
Article II, Illicit Discharge
§ 170-24C Maximum fine per offense: $300
§ 170-24D Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
Chapter 211, Water
§ 211-9B Noncriminal:
First offense: $50
Second offense: $150
Third and subsequent: $300
§ 211-9C Maximum fine per offense: $300
Chapter 220, Zoning
§ 220-33C Earth products removal violations:
$300 per day
§ 220-60D(3) Maximum: $300
§ 1-4 LANCASTER CODE § 1-4
1:6
ARTICLE III
Fees
[Adopted 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 1-5. Schedule of fees.
Section Type Fee
Chapter 92, Hawkers and Peddlers
§ 92-2 License for peddlers of
fruits, vegetables and fish
$100
§ 92-13 Peddlers of goods and
merchandise: per MGL c.
101
$25
Chapter 110, Junk and Secondhand Collectors and Dealers
§ 110-2 Collector or dealer of junk $200
§ 110-2 Buy and sell secondhand
motor vehicles, Class III
junk dealer
$300
Chapter 220, Zoning
§ 220-31B Annual inspection of signs $1 per square foot in
excess of 3 square feet
Chapter 301, Subdivision of Land
See Schedule of Fees and Deposits at the end of Chapter 301.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:7
Chapter 10
ANIMAL CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fines — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
§ 10-1. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw the following terms mean:
ABUSED ANIMAL — Any animal which:
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this bylaw, animal shall mean any type of
animal.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An officer appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and authorized to enforce Sections 136A to 174E, inclusive, of
Chapter 140 of the General Laws and this bylaw.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Facility designated or recognized by the Town of
Lancaster for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals.
AT LARGE — Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when off the
property of the owner and not under restraint.
DANGEROUS DOG — A dangerous dog shall be as defined by MGL c. 140,
§ 136A.
HEARING AUTHORITY — For purposes of this bylaw and Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 157, the Animal Control Commission
shall be the hearing authority.
HUMANE MANNER — Care of an animal to include, but not be limited to,
adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water,
consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's
size, species, and breed.
KENNEL — A kennel shall be as defined by MGL c. 140, § 136A.
KENNEL LICENSE — An annual license permitting a kennel to operate
within the Town which shall be issued to a kennel which has demonstrated
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 140 of the General Laws and
this bylaw.
A. Is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased, or
B. Is deprived of water or food or shelter, or
C. Is kept under unsanitary conditions, or
D. Is abandoned, or
E. Is trained for fighting other animals.
§ 1-5 LANCASTER CODE § 10-1
1:8
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town Clerk of the Town of Lancaster or any
designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance
and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this bylaw.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction.
NUISANCE DOG — A nuisance dog shall be as defined by MGL c. 140,
§ 136A.
OWNER — A person (or in the event of a minor, the legal guardian) having
the right of property or custody of an animal or who keeps or harbors an
animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public areas shall include, but not be limited to Town
beach, Town green, commons, parks, playing fields, school property,
greenways, Town buildings and grounds, cemeteries, public ways and
walks.
RESTRAINT — An animal shall be considered under restraint if it is within
the real property limits of its owner or keeper or on the premises of another
person with the knowledge and express permission of such person, or
secured by a leash, lead, or under the direct control of the owner.
§ 10-2. Licensing and rabies vaccination.
Except as provided in § 10-3, no person shall own, keep, or harbor any
dog six months of age or over within the Town of Lancaster unless
such dog is vaccinated, or exempt from said vaccination requirement
pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 145B, and licensed. Dogs between six and 12
months of age at the time of the initial vaccination must be revaccinated
12 months after the initial vaccination and every three years thereafter.
The provisions of this section do not apply to animals owned by a
licensed research facility or held in a veterinary medical facility or
government operated or licensed animal shelter.
A.
All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian, unless exempt from said vaccination requirement
pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 145B in accordance with the latest
"Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization" published by the National Association of State Public
Health Veterinarians, as well as Massachusetts state law.
B.
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal
vaccinated on a form recommended by the Compendium. Each owner
shall also obtain a durable vaccination tag indicating the year in which
it was issued.
C.
Application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining
a dog over six months of age, except that this requirement will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a dog within the Town of Lancaster
D.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:9
§ 10-3. Kennel regulations.
No person shall operate a kennel within the Town without first obtaining
a kennel license from the Animal Control Commission in accordance with
the provisions of this bylaw and all applicable state and local laws. The
following requirements shall at all times apply to a kennel:
for no longer than 60 days. The licensing period is the calendar year.
Application for a dog license shall be made to the Town Clerk and
shall include the name and address of the owner and the name, breed,
color, age, and sex of the dog. Applicants also shall pay the licensing
fee prescribed below in § 10-13 and provide proof of current rabies
vaccination.
The licensing period shall be for one calendar year. License renewal
may be applied for within 60 days prior to the expiration date and must
be completed by March 31 or within 30 days of establishing residence.
E.
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee. Persons who fail to
obtain a license as required within the time period specified in this
section will be subjected to a fine as set forth in Subsection G below.
F.
Whoever violates Sections 137, 137A, 137B, or 138 of Chapter 140 of
the General Laws and/or the provisions of this section shall be assessed
an initial penalty of $50 pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 141 and shall be
assessed an additional penalty of $10 per month thereafter if such
violation continues.
G.
License fees shall be waived for service animals as defined by the
Americans with Disabilities Act1 or regulations promulgated
thereunder, for government-owned dogs used for law enforcement, or
for a dog owned by a person aged 70 years or over. All other licensing
provisions shall apply.
H.
Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Town Clerk
shall issue a durable license tag including an identifying number, year
of issuance, town, and state. Both rabies and license tags must be
attached to the collar of the dog. Tags must be worn at all times
and are not transferable. The Town Clerk shall maintain a record of
all licenses issued, and such records shall be available to the Animal
Control Officer.
I.
The location and operation of the kennel shall be appropriate for
housing the number of animals allowable under this bylaw and will not
be detrimental to the health and safety of the animals or persons;
A.
B. The kennel shall be operated in a safe, sanitary and humane manner;
The kennel shall not keep more than 25 animals on the premises at
any time (animals which are on the premises for grooming but not for
C.
1. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 10-2 LANCASTER CODE § 10-3
1:10
§ 10-4. Issuance and revocation of kennel licenses.
overnight boarding, for medical or surgical treatment or observation,
or for boarding for recovery from medical or surgical treatment or
observation shall not be counted in this number);
The kennel shall not contract with security dog firms or other
businesses to board on the premises protection or security dogs or
protection or security dogs in training, other than a security dog kept
on the premises for the kennel’s own security purposes;
D.
Under the provisions of this bylaw, no permit fee shall be required of
any animal shelter holding federal nonprofit status. All other provisions
shall apply. Any change in the category under which a permit is issued
shall be reported to the Town Clerk within 60 days, whereupon
reclassification and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee shall be
made.
E.
The kennel shall at all times keep and maintain on its premises accurate
records of the identities of all animals kept on the premises and the
number of animals on the premises on each day.
F.
Application. The Town Clerk shall provide a kennel license application,
in a form prescribed by the Town Clerk, which shall be completed by
any person seeking a kennel license or renewal thereof. The application
shall include a statement that the applicant acknowledges receipt of a
copy of this bylaw and agrees to comply with all applicable provisions.
A.
License renewal application. Any application for a renewal of a kennel
license must be submitted to the Town Clerk not later than November
1 of each year.
B.
Inspection and report. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
Town Clerk shall so notify the Animal Control Officer who shall
forthwith conduct an inspection of the applicant’s kennel. Upon receipt
of the kennel inspector’s report, the Town Clerk shall submit the
completed application and such report to the Animal Control
Commission for its consideration and review.
C.
Review by Animal Control Commission. Upon its review of the kennel
application and inspection report, the Animal Control Commission shall
determine whether the kennel is in compliance with the requirements
of this bylaw, and if so, shall authorize the Town Clerk to issue a
kennel license to the applicant; or, if the kennel is found to not be in
compliance with the requirements of this bylaw, the Commission shall
deny the application and state the reasons therefor.
D.
Inspections. Kennels shall be subject to periodic inspections by the
Animal Control Officer and/or at the request of the Animal Control
Commission. If, in the judgment of the Commission, the kennel is
not in compliance with all applicable requirements of this bylaw, the
Commission may by order revoke or suspend the kennel license.
E.
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4
1:11
§ 10-5. Owner's responsibilities.
Reinspection. In the event a kennel license application or renewal
application is denied, the applicant may request a reinspection to
demonstrate to the Animal Control Officer that it has brought the
kennel into compliance with the requirements of this bylaw. The Animal
Control Officer shall then, as soon as is practicable, reinspect the
kennel and report his/her findings to the Animal Control Commission
which shall, within a reasonable time, review the application. The
applicant will be assessed a reinspection fee.
F.
Kennel license review hearings. In accordance with MGL c.140, § 137C,
any group of 25 citizens of the Town may file a complaint with the
Animal Control Commission setting forth that they are aggrieved, or
annoyed to an unreasonable extent, by one or more animals at a kennel
maintained in the Town, because one or more animals is a nuisance or
dangerous animal as defined in MGL c.140, § 136A, or because of other
conditions connected with such kennel constituting a public nuisance.
Within seven days after the filing of a resident’s complaint, the Animal
Control Commission shall give notice to all parties in interest of a
public hearing to be held within 14 days after the date of such notice.
Within seven business days after the public hearing, the Animal Control
Commission shall make an order either dismissing the petition,
revoking or suspending the kennel license, or otherwise regulating the
kennel.
G.
Inspection and review after suspension. In the event a kennel license
is suspended, upon the expiration of such suspension period and after
the license holder has reasonably demonstrated to the Animal Control
Officer that it has brought the kennel into compliance with the
requirements of this bylaw or otherwise acted in accordance with an
order of the Animal Control Commission, the Animal Control Officer
shall then, as soon as is practicable, reinspect the kennel and report
his/her findings to the Animal Control Commission which shall, within a
reasonable time, review the application. The applicant will be assessed
a reinspection fee.
H.
Appeal to district court. Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 140,
§ 137C, the kennel license holder may, within 10 days after the entry of
such order, bring a petition in the local district court praying that such
any order issued above be reviewed by the court.
I.
Fees. Fees for kennel license applications and annual renewal
applications are as set forth in § 10-13 below.
J.
Severability. The invalidity of any part or parts of this bylaw shall not
affect the validity of the remaining parts.
K.
It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal, or anyone having an
animal in their possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and
to take all necessary steps and precautions to prevent any animal from
A.
§ 10-4 LANCASTER CODE § 10-5
1:12
§ 10-6. Impoundment.
being a nuisance and to protect people, property, and animals from
injuries or damage which might result from their animal’s behavior,
regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness,
playfulness, or ferocity. In the event that the owner or keeper of any
animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be
responsible to ensure that all provisions of this bylaw are complied
with.
While on owner’s property. It shall be the duty of every owner of any
animal, or anyone having any animal in his possession or custody, to
ensure that the animal is kept under restraint and that reasonable
care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving,
while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or
custodian, or the real property limits of another person with the
knowledge and express permission of the owner of such property.
Suggested methods to restrain an animal include the following: it is
securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen,
or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise
escape on its own volition, and such enclosure be securely locked at
any time the animal is left unattended; it is securely and humanely
restrained by chain, cable and trolley or other tether of sufficient
strength to prevent escape in accordance with MGL c.140, § 174E; or
it is on a leash and under control of a competent person, or is off leash
and is obedient to that person’s commands and that person is present
with the animal any time it is not on a leash.
B.
While off owner’s property or at large. It shall be the duty of every
owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in their possession
to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the
animal is off the real property limits of the owners, possessors or
custodian. For the purpose of this section, an animal is deemed under
control when it is securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in
motion; it is properly confined within a secure enclosure with
permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located;
it is securely restrained by a leash or other device held by a competent
person. The animal owner, possessor, or custodian is required to
immediately remove any solid waste left by their animal(s) on public or
private property beyond their real property limits.
C.
Abandonment or abuse of animals. It shall be a violation of this bylaw
for anyone to knowingly abandon or abuse any domesticated animal.
Each person who does abandon or abuse knowingly, or willingly permits
this abandonment or abuse or aids in the abandonment or abuse of any
domesticated animal shall be reported to the proper authority.
D.
Penalties for violation and repeat offenders. Any person violating the
terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto shall be subject to fines as described in § 10-11.
E.
§ 10-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:13
§ 10-7. Redemption.
§ 10-8. Animal Control Commission.2
Any animal found in violation of § 10-5 shall be impounded by the
Animal Control Officer in an animal shelter and confined in a humane
manner. Immediately upon impounding an animal, the Animal Control
Officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner and
inform such owner of the conditions whereby custody of the animal may
be regained. Animals not claimed by their owners within a period of
seven days shall be disposed of in accordance with Chapter 140 of the
General Laws.
A.
When an animal is found in violation of § 10-5 and the Animal Control
Officer verifies its ownership, the appropriate Officer may exercise
the option of serving the owner with a notice of violation in lieu of
impounding the animal.
B.
In the event that the Animal Control Officer finds dogs or cats to be
suffering, he/she shall have the right forthwith to remove or cause to
have removed any such animals to a safe place for care at the owner’s
expense or to euthanize them when deemed necessary by a licensed
veterinarian, to prevent further suffering. Return to the owner may be
withheld until the owner shall have made full payment for all expenses
so incurred.
C.
Disposal of an animal by any method specified herein does not relieve
the owner of liability for violations and any accrued charges.
D.
Any animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner thereof within
seven days upon payment of an impoundment fee. Payment of
impoundment fees is not considered to be in lieu of any fine, penalty or
license fees.
A.
Any animal confined for rabies quarantine involving a bite to a human
may be redeemed by the owner upon release by the Animal Control
Officer. Any animal confined for rabies quarantine (for reason other
than a human bite), evidence, or other purpose may be redeemed by
the owner upon release by the Animal Control Officer.
B.
No animal required to be licensed or vaccinated under this bylaw may
be redeemed until provisions for such licensing have been fulfilled.
C.
A. An Animal Control Commission ("Commission") is hereby established.
This Commission shall be charged with evaluating animal control
problems by collecting necessary data, hearing expert opinion, holding
public hearings, and other activities in order to make recommendations
to resolve such problems. The Commission will provide support in the
B.
2. Editor's Note: For provisions regarding other boards, committees and commissions, see
Ch. 17.
§ 10-6 LANCASTER CODE § 10-8
1:14
§ 10-9. Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this bylaw is, for any reason,
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of these sections.
§ 10-10. Findings; purpose.
The Town of Lancaster hereby finds, determines and declares that this
bylaw is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare of the Town of Lancaster and the inhabitants thereof.
§ 10-11. Violations and penalties.
recruitment, hiring, and training of the Animal Control Officer. The
Commission may also promulgate appropriate rules and regulations for
the care and control of animals and facilities covered by the bylaw,
and prepare budgets for animal control activities. The Commission shall
also review, approve or deny kennel license applications.
If matters brought before the Commission are not satisfactorily
resolved, the Commission may recommend the issue be brought to the
Select Board for further review and action.
C.
The Commission shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven
members who shall be appointed by the Select Board. Membership
should include a cross section of the community and include individuals
with professional knowledge pertinent to the member’s responsibilities,
(i.e., an attorney, veterinarian, police officer, humane society
representative, etc.).
D.
When the Commission is first established, the terms of the members
shall be for such length, not exceeding three years, and so arranged
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years
each.
E.
Any member of the Commission may be removed for cause after a
public hearing.
F.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
G.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D and/
or MGL c. 140, § 173A, and as enforced by the Animal Control Officers
and assigned agents. If noncriminal disposition is elected, then any
person who violates any provision of this bylaw shall be subject to
fines under Article I, Noncriminal Disposition, of Chapter 1, General
Provisions, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, in the amounts set
forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Fines. Each day or portion thereof shall
A.
§ 10-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:15
§ 10-12. Nuisance and/or dangerous dogs.
Any person may file a written complaint with the Animal Control
Commission that any dog owned or kept in the Town of Lancaster is a
nuisance or dangerous dog as those terms are defined by MGL c. 140,
§ 136A. The Animal Control Commission shall investigate or cause to be
investigated such complaint, including an examination under oath of the
complainant at a public hearing in the municipality to determine whether
the dog is a nuisance dog or a dangerous dog, and shall make such order
concerning the restraint or disposal of such dog as provided in MGL c.140,
§ 157. Violations of such orders shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of MGL c. 140, §§ 157 and 157A, which, upon conviction, may
include: for a first offense, a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment
for not more than 60 days in a jail or house of correction, or both, and
for a second or subsequent offense by a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days in a jail or house of correction.
§ 10-13. Fees.
The licensing fees for dogs and kennels shall be as follows:
Chapter 17
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal Control Commission — See Ch. 10.
Personnel Bylaw — See Ch. 140.
Town officers — See Ch. 186.
constitute a separate offense. If more than one violation of this bylaw
exists, each such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by
indictment or on complaint brought in the District Court. Except as may
be otherwise provided by law and as the District Court may see fit to
impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense shall be as
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Fines. Each day
or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more than one,
each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
In the alternative or in addition to the above, the Town may employ any
other means available at law or in equity to enforce this bylaw.
C.
A. Dogs: intact $20; spayed/neutered $10.
B. Kennels: per dog as set forth above.
§ 10-11 LANCASTER CODE § 10-13
1:16
ARTICLE I
Finance Committee
[Adopted 3-20-1922 ATM by Art. 14; amended 7-29-1948 STM by
Art. 21; 5-5-1980 ATM by Art. 8; 5-2-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
§ 17-1. Membership; terms; vacancies.
There shall be a standing Finance Committee consisting of five members
elected at large, none of whom shall hold public office concurrently with
his service on the Committee. The members of the Finance Committee shall
be elected for alternating three-year terms. Any vacancies in the Finance
Committee shall be filled in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 11.
§ 17-2. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to investigate and report to
the Town its recommendations on all pertinent facts relating to any articles
in a Warrant the subject matter of which pertains to the appropriation or
expenditure of money, the creation of a debt, or the disposition of Town
property. For this purpose the Committee shall have access to all books,
vouchers, and other documents and papers belonging to the Town.
§ 17-3. Conferring with other officers and employees.
The Committee shall confer or consult with such departments, officers,
employees, or committees as may have information concerning subject
matter under consideration, and it shall be the duty of all departments,
officers, employees, or committees to communicate to said Finance
Committee such information as they may possess relating to same.
§ 17-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:17

ARTICLE II
Town Forest Committee
[Adopted 2-9-1942 ATM by Art. 11]
§ 17-4. Membership.
The Select Board shall appoint a Special Town Forest Committee as
provided for by MGL c. 45, § 21, comprised of a committee of three
members to serve without compensation.
§ 17-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-4
1:19

ARTICLE III
Library Trustees
[Adopted 2-12-1945 ATM by Art. 71]
§ 17-5. Membership.
The Board of Library Trustees shall be comprised of six members to be
elected.
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-5
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Planning Board
[Adopted 2-10-1947 ATM by Art. 27; amended 2-14-1949 ATM by
Art. 29; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 17-6. Establishment.
A Planning Board of five members is established pursuant to MGL c. 41,
§§ 81A through 81J.
§ 17-7. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall have the powers and duties as set forth in MGL c.
41, § 81A et seq.
§ 17-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-7
1:23

ARTICLE V
Conservation Commission
[Adopted 3-13-1961 ATM by Art. 39]
§ 17-8. Membership.
The Select Board shall appoint a Conservation Commission comprised of
seven members, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8C.
§ 17-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-8
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Historical Commission
[Adopted 3-2-1964 ATM by Art. 41]
§ 17-9. Establishment
The Historical Commission shall be established pursuant to the provisions
of MGL c. 40, § 8D.3
3. Editor's Note: The Town Meeting accepted § 8D of Chapter 697 of the Acts of 1963 at
3-2-1964 ATM, Art. 41. See Ch. A400 of the Town Code.
§ 17-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-9
1:27

ARTICLE VII
Recreation Committee
[Adopted 6-12-1995 ATM by Art. 22]
§ 17-10. Membership; terms. [Amended 10-5-2009 STM by Art. 7;
5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 21]
The Recreation Committee shall be comprised of seven members appointed
by the Select Board as follows: two members to be appointed for one year,
two for two years, and three for three years. Thereafter, each member shall
be appointed to a three-year term, as each term expires.
§ 17-11. Powers and duties.
The Recreation Committee shall have the powers and duties vested in
recreation commissions pursuant to MGL c. 45, § 14. The Recreation
Committee shall also be responsible for administering playground
recreation in the Town. This shall include, but not be limited to:
Employing a part-time Recreation Director to direct playground
programs and activities; [Amended 5-4-2015 ATM, Art. 14]
A.
Employing qualified lifeguards at Spectacle Pond Bathing Beach during
the summer season;
B.
C. Purchasing recreational supplies and equipment;
Overseeing the development and administering the recreational
activities in the Town;
D.
Administering the expenditure of funds appropriated by Town Meeting
for recreational purposes; and
E.
Any other tasks delegated by the Town or Select Board from time to
time.
F.
§ 17-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-11
1:29

ARTICLE VIII
Property Disposal Committee
[Adopted 5-24-1999 ATM by Art. 26]
§ 17-12. Purpose.
The Committee shall oversee the disposal of Town-owned property and
assets including vehicles, equipment, furniture, fixtures, supplies,
architectural elements, and printed materials older than 25 years including
correspondence, working papers, maps, drawings and photographs.
§ 17-13. Property disposal evaluation form.
If any department, board, commission or committee desires to dispose of
an asset whose known value exceeds $50 or is of indeterminate historical
or educational value, said department, board, commission or committee
shall submit a property disposal evaluation form to the Property Disposal
Committee for review. The Committee shall, within a reasonable period of
time, make a recommendation to the appropriate authority as to whether
the asset should in fact be disposed of. If funds are available, the Committee
may utilize the services of a professional consultant to assist in determining
value or utility.
§ 17-14. Property inventory.
The Committee shall also be charged with establishing a comprehensive
property inventory of all Town-owned property, including buildings,
equipment, furniture, Town records, working papers, correspondence, maps
and photographs.
§ 17-15. Records and reports.
The Committee shall keep records of its meetings and actions and shall file
an annual report which shall be printed in the Annual Town Report.
§ 17-16. Membership; terms.
Said Committee shall consist of one member from each of the following
boards, which member shall be nominated by said board and approved
by the Select Board: Select Board or designee, Finance Committee and
Historical Commission. Each member of said Committee shall serve for one
year from the date of approval by the Select Board.
§ 17-17. Compliance with statute.
The disposal of Town-owned property shall comply with the provisions of
MGL c. 30B ("Uniform Procurement Act") and MGL c. 268A ("Conflict of
Interest").
§ 17-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-17
1:31

ARTICLE IX
Council on Aging
[Adopted 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 204]
§ 17-18. Coordination of programs.
The Council on Aging shall coordinate or carry out programs designed
to meet the problems of aging in coordination with programs of the
Department of Elder Affairs.
§ 17-19. Records and reports.
The Council on Aging shall keep records of its meetings and actions and
shall file an annual report which shall be printed in the Annual Town Report
and a copy shall be submitted to the Department of Elder Affairs. The
Council shall conduct at least 10 meetings annually. The COA and each
of its Board members must abide by the following Massachusetts General
Laws: Open Meeting Laws, Chapter 30A, Sections 18-25; Public Records
Law, Chapter 4, Section 7, and Chapter 66, Section 10; Conflict of Interest
Laws, Chapter 268A.
§ 17-20. Membership; terms; removal; vacancies; Chairperson.
Said Council shall consist of nine citizens appointed at-large by the Select
Board. The terms of the first members of the Council shall be for one, two
or three years, and so arranged that the term of not more than three of
the members expires each year, and their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years each. Any member of said Council may, after a
public hearing, be removed for cause by the Select Board. Any member
missing more than three meetings without cause, or without notification
to the Chairperson of the need for the absence, shall be considered cause
for removal. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. The Chairperson and other officers shall be chosen by a
majority vote of said Council members. No officer shall serve more than
three one-year terms in succession. No salary or compensation shall be paid
to any member of the Council on Aging for services rendered.
§ 17-21. Private nature of certain information.
The names, addresses, telephone numbers, or other identifying information
about elderly persons in the possession of the Council shall not be public
records, but the use of these records shall comply with MGL c. 19A, § 14 et
seq., as a condition of receiving a government contract, program grant or
other benefit, or as otherwise required by law.
4. Editor's Note: This bylaw also repealed former Art. IX, Council on Aging, adopted
5-24-1999 ATM by Art. 27, as amended.
§ 17-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-21
1:33
Chapter 23
BOATS AND BOATING
§ 23-1. Operation regulations.
No person shall operate a motor boat on any pond or inland lake lying within
the Town at a speed in excess of seven miles per hour or negligently in a
manner which endangers the safety of the public or constitutes a nuisance
injurious to the neighborhood and the inhabitants thereof.
§ 23-2. Evidence of violation.
It shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of the bylaw if the boat is
operated at such a speed or in such a manner as to endanger the lives and
safety of others or injurious to the neighborhood and to the value of the
property therein.
§ 23-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art.
13]
Any person violating any provision of this bylaw shall be subject to fines
under Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Noncriminal Disposition, of
the Code of the Town of Lancaster, in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, Fines.
Chapter 30
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 30-1. Street number required.
Street numbers shall be attached to each residential dwelling, business,
industry, and all other buildings in the Town of Lancaster.
§ 30-2. Materials, size and color of numbers.
The number shall be made of permanent, weatherproof materials, shall be
not less than three inches and not more than six inches in height and in
contrasting color to the building surface, and shall be clearly visible from
the street or roadway upon which the structure fronts.
§ 30-3. Alternative posting.
Any structure that is not visible from the street or roadway shall have the
assigned number posted on a suitable support at the primary entrance to
the driveway that services such structure.
§ 17-21 LANCASTER CODE § 30-4
1:34
§ 30-4. Assignment of numbers. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art.
13; 10-5-2009 STM by Art. 5]
The Fire Chief is directed to assign a number to the structure at the time
the building permit is issued and is further authorized to correct and verify
address numbers.
§ 30-5. Responsibility to obtain numbers. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM
by Art. 13]
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain, display, and
maintain the assigned street number within 90 days of notice to comply with
this bylaw.
Chapter 44
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance Committee — See Ch. 17, Art. I.
§ 44-1. Development of program.
The Finance Committee and the Select Board, or its designee, shall develop
annually a Capital Improvement Program ("CIP") for the Town. An Article
setting forth the CIP shall be included annually in the Annual Town Meeting
Warrant for adoption by the Town. The CIP set forth in the Warrant shall
propose capital expenditures in an amount equal to or greater than $10,000
for the fiscal year. For the purposes of this bylaw, capital projects shall
include any projects relating to the purchase of equipment and or
machinery or the construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a
public building or public work as those terms are defined by applicable
general law, and the acquisition of real property.
§ 44-2. Criteria for qualification for program.
To qualify for the CIP, capital projects and acquisitions must meet all of the
following criteria:
§ 44-3. Deadline for project requests and acquisitions.
Not later than January 30 of each year, officers, boards, commissions and
committees shall transmit to the Finance Committee written request for
A. Purchased or undertaken at intervals of not less than three years.
B. Have a useful life of at least three years, and
C. Have an estimated cost of $10,000 or more.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-3
1:35
capital projects and acquisitions anticipated for the ensuing five-year
period. The Finance Committee shall consider the relative need, timing,
cost and other impacts of the requested expenditures, including the effect
each will have on the financial position of the Town. The Finance Committee
shall consider no appropriation for a capital project or acquisition unless it
is included in the CIP.
§ 44-4. Authorized projects.
Departmental operating budget expenditures for architectural,
engineering, planning and other professional services associated with a
capital project or acquisition shall be recognized and authorized in the CIP.
Further, except as authorized by vote of Town Meeting or to comply with
any General or Special Law or grant in aid requirement, no expenditure
shall be made for capital projects or acquisitions which are not included in
the program nor for preliminary planning for capital projects or acquisitions
planned to be commenced at a time more than the five years following.
§ 44-5. Annual report.
The Finance Committee shall publish an annual report detailing its
recommendations relative to the Capital Improvement Program and
transmit a copy to the Town Clerk.
Chapter 50
CONTRACTS
§ 50-1. Authority of boards and officers to enter contracts.
Unless otherwise provided by a vote of Town Meeting, each board or officer
having responsibility for a particular appropriation is hereby authorized to
enter into any contract for the expenditure of such appropriation, on such
terms and conditions, including the length of contracts, which such board
or officer deems appropriate.
§ 50-2. Authority of Select Board.
The Select Board is hereby authorized to enter into contracts for all matters
not specifically under the jurisdiction or responsibility of any other board or
officer.
§ 50-3. Consistency with statute required.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no board or officer of the Town shall
contract for any purpose, on any terms, or under any conditions inconsistent
with any applicable provision of any General or Special Law.
Chapter 55
§ 44-3 LANCASTER CODE § 50-3
1:36
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 17, Art. IV.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 301.
§ 55-1. Establishment of Department; Director.
There shall be established in the Town of Lancaster a Community
Development and Planning Department to be administered by a Director
who shall be appointed by the Select Board for a term of three years. Said
Director shall hold office until his/her successor is appointed. Said Director
may be removed from office in the manner prescribed in Chapter 140,
Personnel, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
§ 55-2. Powers and duties of Planning Director.
The Planning Director shall be responsible for coordinating all planning
activities in the Town and serves as staff support to the Planning Board.
A.
The duties of the Director shall include the following:
To direct long-range planning and the updating of the Town's
Master Plan.
(1)
To establish planning goals and priorities and develop, recommend
and implement policies and procedures in conjunction with the
Planning Board.
(2)
To conduct planning studies regarding future development in the
Town.
(3)
To review existing planning and zoning guidelines and bylaws and
make recommendations for revisions.
(4)
(5) To review development plans for compliance.
To provide technical advice to citizens and support to the Planning
Board.
(6)
(7) To solicit grants to support planning-related activities.
(8) To coordinate Planning Board meetings and related task forces.
(9) To develop the Department's operating and capital budget.
To serve as staff liaison between the Planning Board and other
Town departments and agencies.
(10)
B.
§ 50-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:37
§ 55-3. Changes to Director's powers and duties.
The duties, powers and responsibilities of the Director may be broadened
or diminished at any time by amendment to this bylaw, except to the extent
that such duties, powers and responsibilities are defined by an employment
contract.
§ 55-4. Salaries.
The salaries of the Director and other employees of the Community
Development and Planning Department shall be established in accordance
with the Classification and Compensation Plan or pursuant to any other
General or Special Law, except to the extent that such salaries are defined
by an employment contract.
Chapter 63
ENERGY CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220. Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
301.
To employ and supervise such full-time or part-time assistance as
may be required to accomplish the above duties subject, to proper
appropriations being made therefor.
(11)
(12)To assess performance of Department personnel.
To perform other planning and administrative functions and duties
as appropriate.
(13)
§ 55-2 LANCASTER CODE § 55-4
1:38
ARTICLE I
Stretch Energy Code
[Adopted 5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 12]
§ 63-1. Definitions.
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) 2009 — The
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building code created
by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many
state and municipal governments in the United States for the establishment
of minimum design and construction requirements for energy efficiency.
Commencing July 1, 2010, the baseline energy conservation requirements
of the MA State Building Code will default to IECC 2009 and MA
amendments.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of Building Regulations
and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, the Stretch Energy Code is
the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 with amendments
contained herein.
§ 63-2. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR 120.AA is to provide a more energy efficient
alternative to the base energy code applicable to the relevant sections of
the building code for both new construction and existing buildings.
§ 63-3. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as
applicable.
§ 63-4. Authority.
§ 63-5. Incorporation of Stretch Code by reference; enforcement.
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries
is designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780
CMR may mandate adherence to this appendix.
A.
780 CMR 120 AA may be adopted or rescinded by any municipality in
the commonwealth in the manner prescribed by law.
B.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, including any amendments
or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the Town of
Lancaster General Bylaws.
A.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the Building Inspector/municipal
code official.
B.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:39
Chapter 66
FARM PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220. Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
301.
§ 66-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 66-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of the this general bylaw is to state with
emphasis the right to farm accorded to all citizens of the
commonwealth under Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state
statutes and regulations hereunder, including but not limited to MGL c.
40A, § 3, Paragraph 1; MGL c. 90, § 9; MGL c. 111, § 125A; and MGL
c. 128 § 1A. We the citizens of Lancaster restate and republish these
rights pursuant to the Town's authority conferred by Article 89 of the
Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule
Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Lancaster by allowing agricultural uses and related
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town
agencies. This chapter shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of
land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereof.
A.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or
horticultural commodities;
(3)
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and
any other forestry and lumbering operations;
(4)
(5) Raising of livestock, including horses;
B.
§ 63-5 LANCASTER CODE § 66-2
1:40
§ 66-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Lancaster.
The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays,
weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant
incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is recognized that agricultural practices may
impact others; however, the benefits of farming to the neighboring
community and society more than offsets such impact. The benefits and
protections of this bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to those
commercial agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in
accordance with generally accepted good agricultural practices. Moreover,
nothing in this Right to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any
interest in land or imposing any land use regulation, which is properly the
subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
(6) Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and alpacas),
and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
(7)
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
(1)
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds,
predators and disease organisms of plants and animals;
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers, and pesticides;
(4) Composting for sale or use, as part of an agricultural activity;
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agritourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
(5)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, including
signage thereto;
(6)
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management,
or sale of the agricultural products; and
(7)
On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming
operations.
(8)
C.
§ 66-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-4
1:41
§ 66-4. Disclosure notification.
A copy of this disclosure notification shall be posted by the Town to
residents and property owners via the official Town website and available at
the Town Hall:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage
the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production
of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and
ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or
occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within
a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include,
but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Buyers or
occupants are also informed that the buyers' property within the Town may
be impacted by commercial agricultural operations, including the ability to
access water services for such property under certain circumstances, as
per the Water Management Act."
§ 66-5. Precedence.
In the event of conflict between this bylaw and federal or state law, federal
or state law shall take precedence respectively.
§ 66-6. Resolution of disputes.
§ 66-7. Severability clause.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of the bylaw. The Town
of Lancaster hereby declares the provisions of the bylaw to be severable.
Chapter 70
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Select Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or Board of
Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of
the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any
other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Select Board may forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreedupon
time frame.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and, where feasible and
appropriate, facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendation to the Board of Health within an agreed-upon time
frame.
B.
§ 66-4 LANCASTER CODE § 66-7
1:42
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 66-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-7
1:43

ARTICLE I
License and Permit Fees
[Adopted 5-19-1997 ATM by Art. 25]
§ 70-1. Approval of Select Board required for certain fees fixed by
other boards.
All fees fixed by boards or officers under the Select Board pursuant to MGL
c. 40, § 22F, shall take effect upon the approval of the Select Board.5
5. Editor's Note: The provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22F, were accepted 5-19-1997. See Ch. A400
of the Town Code.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1
1:45
Chapter 92
HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 110.
§ 70-1 LANCASTER CODE § 70-1
1:46
ARTICLE I
Fruits, Vegetables and Fish
[Adopted 6-12-1918; amended 3-17-1919]
§ 92-1. License required.
No person shall go from place to place in this Town selling or bartering, or
carrying or exposing for sale or barter, any fruits, vegetables or fish in or
from any cart, wagon or other vehicle, or in any other manner, without a
license therefor from the Select Board; provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to any person who sells only fruits or vegetables raised or
produced by himself or his family, or fish which is obtained by his own labor
or the labor of his family.
§ 92-2. Authority to grant license; fee. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by
Art. 13]
The Select Board shall have authority to grant such license to any person of
good repute for morals and integrity. Said license, unless sooner revoked by
the Select Board, shall expire one year after the granting thereof, and each
person so licensed shall pay therefor a fee as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Fees, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
§ 92-3. Registering with Town Clerk required. [Amended 5-5-2008
ATM by Art. 13]
No hawker or peddler shall sell or offer or expose for sale any articles
until he has recorded his name and residence with the Town Clerk. Every
person licensed under the provisions of the preceding section as a hawker
or peddler of fruits and vegetables and fish shall record his name and
residence in like manner with the Town Clerk.
§ 92-4. Crying of wares; vehicle standards.
No person hawking, peddling or carrying or exposing any articles for sale
shall cry his wares to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the
inhabitants of the Town, nor shall he carry or convey such articles otherwise
than in vehicles or receptacles which are neat and clean and do not leak.
§ 92-5. Assignment of number and badge.
Every hawker and peddler licensed by the Select Board shall be assigned
a number and shall be provided with a badge which shall be conspicuously
worn by him; and every other such hawker or peddler as described in § 92-3
shall provide himself with a badge, of such type and design as may be
approved by the Select Board, which he shall wear in like manner. Whoever
neglects to wear such badge, or wears such badge without authority, shall
be punished by the penalty provided in § 92-10 of this bylaw.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:47
§ 92-6. Vehicle identification plate.
Every vehicle or other receptacle used by a licensee as a conveyance for
articles offered or exposed for sale by him shall have attached thereto on
each side a number plate, to be furnished by the Town with his license,
bearing the number and date of expiration of such license.
§ 92-7. Certificate from Sealer of Weights and Measures.
No person shall be registered or assigned a badge or number plate under
the provisions of §§ 92-3 and 92-5 of these bylaws until he presents a
certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that all
weighing and measuring devices intended to be used by such person have
been duly inspected and sealed as required by law. The use of, or possession
by such person with intent to use, any false or unsealed weighing or
measuring devices shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of his license,
or the cancellation of his registration.
§ 92-8. Conflict with licenses issued by commonwealth.
Nothing in these bylaws shall be construed as conflicting with any license
issued under the authority of the commonwealth.
§ 92-9. Revocation of license.
Any license that is granted under these bylaws or any bylaws amendatory
or additional thereto might be revoked by the Select Board.
§ 92-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art.
13]
Whoever violates any provisions of these bylaws shall be subject to fines
under Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Noncriminal Disposition, of
the Code of the Town of Lancaster, in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, Fines.6
6. Editor's Note: Original Section 11 regarding repeal of inconsistent bylaws, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13.
§ 92-6 LANCASTER CODE § 92-10
1:48
ARTICLE II
Goods and Merchandise
[Adopted 5-1-2000 ATM by Art. 17]
§ 92-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the definitions of hawkers, peddlers, and
transient vendors shall be the same definitions as those contained in MGL
c. 101.
§ 92-12. License required; fee; exception. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM
by Art. 13]
No person shall hawk, peddle, or barter any goods or merchandise within
the limits of the Town of Lancaster, except as authorized by law, without
first obtaining a license to do so from the Select Board, upon payment of a
license fee as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Fees, of
the Code of the Town of Lancaster. This requirement shall not apply to any
hawking or peddling of newspapers, religious publications, ice, flowering
plants, and wild fruits, nuts and berries.
§ 92-13. Prohibited sales.
The sale by hawkers and peddlers of jewelry, furs, wines, or spiritous
liquors, small artificial flowers or miniature flags is prohibited.
§ 92-14. Display of license.
Any person licensed under this regulation shall keep said license in his/
her possession which shall be readily available for display. The license shall
indicate the license number, and shall include the licensee's signature and
date of the license expiration. The licensee shall display such license when
requested to do so by any officer of the Police Department or the Health
Agent.
§ 92-15. Interference with foot or vehicular traffic prohibited.
No person licensed under this bylaw shall conduct business in such a
manner as would impede foot or vehicular traffic along or to a public way or
public street or public sidewalk or access road or driveway.
§ 92-16. Trash control.
All hawkers and peddlers shall have adequate trash control.
§ 92-17. Vehicles used for selling frozen desserts or confections.
Vehicles utilized for the selling of frozen desserts or confections must have
installed on said vehicle an amber flashing light visible from the front and
rear of the vehicle and such light must be flashing when the vehicle is
stopped for the purpose of transacting business.
§ 92-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-18
1:49
§ 92-18. Restrictions on transient vendors.
People doing business as transient vendors may conduct their trade only
on property that is business zoned. Prior to commencing business, the
transient vendor shall submit to the licensing authority a signed and
notarized statement from the property owner granting permission to the
vendor to use the property.
§ 92-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art.
13]
Failure to comply with this regulation may result in suspension or
revocation of licenses and/or permits granted hereunder. In addition, each
offense shall be subject to fines under Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, in the
amounts set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, Fines.
§ 92-18 LANCASTER CODE § 92-19
1:50
Chapter 98
HEALTH ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 302.
§ 98-1. Membership.
The Town shall be a member of the Nashoba Associated Boards of Health.
Chapter 104
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 104-1. Organization.
The Lancaster Housing Authority is organized pursuant to the provisions of
MGL c. 121, § 26K, and acts in amendment thereof and in addition thereto.
Chapter 110
JUNK AND SECONDHAND COLLECTORS AND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers and peddlers — See Ch. 92.
§ 110-1. Licensing by Select Board.
The Select Board may license suitable persons as junk collectors, to collect,
by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals, and secondhand articles and
may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the
purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles.
§ 110-2. Fees.
Persons so licensed shall pay fees as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Fees, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
§ 92-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-2
1:51
Chapter 128
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Temporary moratorium on recreational
marijuana retailers — See Ch. 220, Art. XVIII.
§ 128-1. Marijuana retailers prohibited.
Consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), “marijuana retailers,” as defined
in MGL c. 94G, § 1, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be
prohibited within the Town of Lancaster.
Chapter 140
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town officers — See Ch. 186.
§ 110-2 LANCASTER CODE § 128-1
1:52
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 140-1. Equal employment opportunity policy; lie detector tests.
In compliance with federal and state equal employment laws, equal
opportunity will be afforded to all applicants regardless of race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
marital status, ex-offender status, prior psychiatric treatment or military
status. It is unlawful in Massachusetts to require or administer a lie detector
test as a condition of employment or continued employment. An employer
who violates this law shall be subject to criminal penalties and civil liability.
§ 140-2. Authorization; amendment.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Article LXXXIX of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth and MGL c. 41, §§ 108A and 108C,
the Town of Lancaster establishes plans, which may be amended from
time to time by vote of the Town at a Town Meeting:
Authorizing a Classification Plan classifying positions in the service
of the Town other than those filled by popular election, those
under the jurisdiction of the School Committee, those covered
by collective bargaining agreements with the Town, and those in
which the incumbent tenders contractual services which are not
provided during regularly established working hours, into groups
and classes doing substantially similar work or having substantially
equal responsibilities;
(1)
Authorizing a Compensation Plan for positions in the Classification
Plan;
(2)
Providing for the administration of said Classification and
Compensation Plans; and
(3)
Establishing certain working conditions and recommend fringe
benefits for employees occupying positions in the Classification
Plan.
(4)
A.
The Classification Plan and/or Compensation Plan and/or other
provisions of this bylaw may be amended by vote of the Town at either
an Annual or Special Town Meeting. No amendment shall be considered
or voted on by Town Meeting unless the Personnel Board has first
considered the proposed amendment.
B.
The Personnel Board, of its own motion, may propose an amendment
to the plans or other provisions of this bylaw based on its findings
resulting from its investigations.
C.
The Personnel Board shall report its recommendations on any proposed
amendment to the Select Board. The Personnel Board shall make its
D.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:53
§ 140-3. Personnel Board.
recommendations with regard to any amendment at the Town Meeting
at which such amendment is considered.
Membership.
This Personnel Bylaw shall be administered by a Personnel Board,
consisting of three voting members appointed by the Select Board.
Said Select Board shall have the power to fill all vacancies.
Members are appointed for three-year, staggered terms. The
Committee shall select a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
membership who shall preside over meetings. The Board shall
select a Clerk from its membership who shall be responsible for
recording minutes of all committee meetings, in accordance with
the Open Meeting Law.7
(1)
Like all Town employees and board/committee members, the
Personnel Board is subject to and shall abide by the provisions of
the Conflict of Interest Law, MGL c. 268A.
(2)
At any meeting of the Personnel Board, action by a majority of the
Board members present shall be binding. At least two members of
the Board shall be present in order to constitute a quorum.
(3)
All members of said Board shall be residents of the Town and
shall serve without compensation. Each member of the Personnel
Board shall serve for a term of three years. Reappointments or new
appointments to full terms will be made to take effect on July 1 of
the year of their expiration.
(4)
Members of the Personnel Board serving upon the effective date of
this bylaw shall serve until the expiration of their respective terms.
Upon the expiration of such terms, the Select Board shall appoint
or reappoint members for successive three-year terms.
(5)
If a member resigns or his/her office becomes vacant by his/her
removal from the Town, or any other cause, the Select Board shall
appoint his/her successor for the balance of the unexpired term of
such member.
(6)
A.
Organization. The Personnel Board shall, organize annually, as soon as
possible after July 1 of each year, at the call of the then Chairman, or
lacking a Chairman, the Vice Chairman, and shall elect a Chairman and
appoint a Secretary from among its members. The Chairman shall hold
office until his/her successor has been elected. In the event a vacancy
occurs in the office of the Chairman, the Personnel Board shall elect a
successor Chairman from among its members, such successor to serve
until the next organizational meeting of the Personnel Board and until
his/her successor has been elected.
B.
7. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23A et seq.
§ 140-2 LANCASTER CODE § 140-3
1:54
Administration.
The Personnel Board shall administer the Personnel Bylaw,
Classification Plan, and the Compensation Plan and shall establish
such procedures as it deems necessary for the proper
administration thereof.
(1)
The Personnel Board shall be responsible for establishing and
maintaining personnel records for all employees as may be
required by law, and as necessary for effective personnel
management. All employees, appointing authorities, and
department heads shall comply with and assist in furnishing
records, reports and information as may be requested by the
Personnel Board or the person or persons assigned responsibility
for personnel administration.
(2)
The Personnel Board shall maintain or cause to be maintained an
individual personnel file for each employee which may include,
but not be limited to, the following: the employment application
or resume; a copy of any documented reference checks and
background investigation reports; a copy of any physical
examination reports and health reports; a report of all personnel
actions reflecting the original appointment, promotion, demotion,
reassignment, transfer, separation, or layoff; history of employment
and correspondence directly related to the employee's past
employment record, reclassification or change in the employee's
rate of pay or position title, commendations, records of disciplinary
action, training records, performance evaluation, and other records
that may be pertinent to the employee's employment record.
(3)
Personnel records shall be considered confidential and access to
records shall be limited to the Personnel Board, persons authorized
by the Personnel Board to administer the personnel system,
appointing authorities, and department heads. Any employee may,
upon request to the employee's appointing authority, have access
to review his/her personnel file. The employee's review of his/her
employment record shall be in the presence of the employee's
department head or appointing authority. Unless written
authorization is received from an employee, except to verify
employment, no information concerning an employee shall be
released.
(4)
Each department shall maintain records required to be maintained
under this bylaw until such time as a Personnel Board vote
determines that centralization of all records is necessary and
appropriate.
(5)
The Board shall provide sufficient copies of the Personnel Bylaw
or a summarization thereof in the form of an employee handbook
to each department for distribution to each employee. Each
department head will provide each new employee with a copy and
(6)
C.
§ 140-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-3
1:55
§ 140-4. Applicability.
This bylaw shall apply to all Town departments and to all positions of all
employees in the service of the Town, whether full- or part-time, temporary,
seasonal, special, casual or any other type of employment, other than those
positions which are filled by popular election, those under the jurisdiction
of the School Committee, or collective bargaining, except that all provisions
of this bylaw shall be applicable insofar as any collective bargaining
agreement may refer to this bylaw and to the extent applicable by statute
or in the absence of any other provisions.
§ 140-5. Definitions.
As used in the bylaw, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
ABSENCE — Any time an employee is not at work during a scheduled work
period.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The elected or appointed official or
board having jurisdiction over a function or activity.
have one available for reference at all times. Personnel records of
the Town are to be maintained by staff position as designated by
the Personnel Board.
Authority.
The Personnel Board shall have the authority to review, from time
to time or at least annually, the work of all positions subject to
the provisions of this bylaw. The Personnel Board shall recommend
changes in said positions as well as adjustments to salaries as it
deems advisable, subject to appropriation of funds. Such reviews
shall be made at such intervals as the Board deems necessary and,
to the extent that the Board considers practicable, shall include all
occupational groups in the Classification Plan.
(1)
The Board, after meeting with the appropriate department head/
supervisor, shall have the authority to adjust individual employee
classifications and wages within the context of the bylaw whenever
inequities exist.
(2)
On or before January 15 of each year, the Personnel Board shall
meet with the Select Board to discuss a change in the
Compensation Plan for the forthcoming year.
(3)
In addition, the Personnel Board shall make an annual report in
writing to the Select Board on or before the second Wednesday in
February of each year, including recommendations on any matters
related to the Classification or Compensation Plans, which said
Board deems appropriate to be considered by the Town.
(4)
The Board may employ assistance and incur expenses, as it deems
necessary, subject to the appropriation of funds therefor.
(5)
D.
§ 140-3 LANCASTER CODE § 140-5
1:56
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — Any person(s), board, committee, commission,
or other agency who has the right to hire or discharge employees.
CASUAL PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — Any employee hired for irregular or
occasional employment for an hourly rate or a fee. Personnel service
rendered by an employee in a position calling for part-time employment
which service, although constituting continuous employment, is not
rendered during prescribed working hours, daily, weekly or annually, but is
rendered according to the demands for such service.
CLASS — A group of positions in the Town service sufficiently similar in
respect to duties and responsibilities so that the same descriptive title may
be used to designate each position allocated to the class, that the same
qualifications shall be required of the incumbents, that the same tests of
fitness may be used to choose qualified employees and that the same scale
of compensation can be made to apply with equity.
CLASSIFICATION PLAN — Class specifications and titles approved by the
Personnel Board and appearing as Schedule A8 to these bylaws.
COMPENSATION GRADE — A range of salary or wage rates appearing in
the Compensation Plan.
COMPENSATION PLAN — Specified rates of pay for each job classification
included in the Classification Plan, appearing as Schedule B9 to these
bylaws.
CONTINUOUS SERVICE — Length of employment with the Town of
Lancaster of a regular full-time or regular part-time employee,
uninterrupted except for authorized military leave, vacation leave, sick
leave, court leave, disability, maternal/paternal leave, or any other
authorized leave of absence, if applicable and covered in the terms of this
bylaw.
DEPARTMENT — Any board, committee, commission, other agency or
functional unit (or subunit) of the Town.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is paid by the Town for services rendered to
the Town, excluding elected officials, independent contractors, and persons
under the direction of the School Committee.
FUNCTIONAL UNITS OF MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT — A grouping of
occupational groups or classes by type of municipal services rendered, i.e.,
General Government: executive and administrative duties; Public Safety:
protection of life and property; Public Utilities: development, operation
and maintenance of public property and facilities; Education: instruction
and related support and administrative functions; Human Services: health,
youths, elders, veterans, etc., functions; Culture and Recreation: library,
parks and recreational facilities and functions.
8. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Town offices.
9. Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:57
GROUP or OCCUPATIONAL GROUP — A group of classes designated by
occupation within one of the major functional units of municipal
government.
JOB CLASSIFICATION — A particular job title within the Classification Plan.
MAXIMUM RATE — The highest rate in a compensation grade, which
normally is entitled to attain.
MINIMUM RATE — The lowest rate in compensation grade; normally the
hiring rate of a new employee.
POSITION — An office or post of employment in Town service with duties
and responsibilities calling for full-time, part-time, special, temporary or
seasonal employment of one person in the performance and exercise
thereof.
RANGE — The dollar difference between minimum and maximum rates for
a particular compensation grade.
RATE — A sum of money designated as compensation for personal services
on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other basis.
REDUCED-HOURS EMPLOYEE — Any employee who is employed less than
19 hours for each of the 52 weeks per year for the department or position
in which that person is employed.
REGULAR FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — Any employee who is employed 40
hours per week, 52 weeks per year for the department or position in which
that person is employed.
REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — Any employee who works at least 20
hours but not more than 39 hours each week for 52 weeks per year, for the
department or position in which that person is employed.
SINGLE RATE — A rate for a special, temporary or seasonal position for
which there is no range.
SPECIAL, TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL EMPLOYEE — Any employee whose
duration of employment with the Town is of a seasonal or emergency nature,
or specified limited amount of time (not to exceed six continuous months).
STEP RATE — A rate in a range of a compensation grade.
TEMPORARY POSITION; SEASONAL POSITION — Any position in Town
service which requires or is likely to require the service of one incumbent
for a period not exceeding six calendar months; either on a full-time or parttime
basis.
TOWN — The Town of Lancaster, Massachusetts.
§ 140-5 LANCASTER CODE § 140-5
1:58
ARTICLE II
Classification Plan
§ 140-6. Mandatory classification.
No person shall be appointed, employed or paid as a Town employee in any
position under the Classification Plan and Compensation Plan under any
title other than that of the class of which position is allocated.
§ 140-7. Employee categories.
§ 140-8. Allocation and new positions.
All positions subject to the provisions of the Personnel Bylaw of the
Town shall fall into one of the following categories:
(1) Regular full-time.
(2) Regular part-time.
(3) Reduced-hours part-time.
(4) Casual part-time.
(5) Special, temporary or seasonal.
A.
These categories will determine an employee's eligibility for benefits as
specified by this bylaw.
B.
The Personnel Board may allocate each position subject to the
provisions of the Classification and Compensation Plans to its
appropriate class and pay grade.
A.
Whenever a new position is established, appointing authorities
proposing the creation of new positions shall provide the Personnel
Board with a description of the duties, skills, knowledge, abilities,
and other work performance requirements of the proposed position in
sufficient detail to enable the Personnel Board to appropriately classify
the position.
B.
When the duties of an existing position are so changed that, in effect,
a new position of a different class is substituted for the old position,
and whenever such action appears warranted by reason of error in the
allocation then in effect, or as a result of additional duties and changes
in the job content of the class, the Personnel Board may allocate such
position to an appropriate class and pay grade.
C.
Positions may not be reclassified without a review and approval of the
Personnel Board.
D.
The Personnel Board shall afford reasonable opportunity to be heard to
any employee or any department head affected by such a new position
or change in classification.
E.
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-9
1:59
§ 140-9. Hiring and reclassification.
The following procedure shall be used when hiring employees in filling
regular full-time and regular part-time positions covered by this bylaw.
A job description agreed to by both the hiring department head or
Board Chairman and the Personnel Board must be completed prior
to the announcement of the job opening.
(1)
The hiring rate and pay rate for the job must be in accord with the
Classification and Compensation Plans or be developed with and
agreed to by the Personnel Board prior to the announcement of the
job opening.
(2)
The job opening must be advertised in appropriate publications for
at least two days and must be posted on the Town Hall Bulletin
Board at least 10 days prior to the job being filled. The
announcement will include:
(a) Job title.
(b) Pay rate.
(c) Summary statement of duties.
(d) Direction on where and how applications may be filed.
Deadline for filing the application which must be at least 10
days after the notice of job opening appears.
(e)
(3)
Job applicants will not be discriminated against on the basis of
race, veteran, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, ex-offender
status, physical and/or mental handicap, prior psychiatric
treatment or military status.
(4)
The Personnel Board must retain records of all job applicants in
accordance with the Public Records Law.10 The application of the
person hired will be filed in his/her personnel file.
(5)
A payroll hiring authorization must be submitted to the Personnel
Board along with copies of the employment application, resume,
and proposed letter of employment offer prior to offering the
position to the employee. Upon approval from the Personnel Board,
the letter of employment offer will be given to the applicant.
[Amended 5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 16]
(6)
All persons selected for employment shall be notified in writing
that the offer is conditional pending a physical certification by
the Town's physician. The applicant shall undergo a medical
examination and drug test prior to setting a start date or a date
(7)
A.
10.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 66, § 10 et seq.
§ 140-9 LANCASTER CODE § 140-9
1:60
§ 140-10. Probationary period.
can be set but the start date cannot be prior to the results of
the physical. The examination shall be at the expense of the Town
and by a physician or medical institution selected by the Personnel
Board. The examining physician shall advise as to whether or not,
in the opinion of the physician, the applicant can perform the
essential functions of the job. If deemed unfit to perform the duties
of the position for which application has been made, the appointing
authority shall withdraw the offer of employment. [Amended
5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 16]
A payroll hiring authorization with the required approvals will be
submitted to the Town Accountant by the Personnel Board prior to
his/her issuance of a voucher for a new employee. Copies of the
approval will also be placed in the employee's personnel file by the
Personnel Board. [Added 5-3-2010 ATM by Art. 1611]
(8)
An applicant who accepts an appointment and fails to report to
work on the date set by the appointing authority, shall, unless
excused by the appointing authority, be deemed to have declined
the appointment, and the offer of employment shall be withdrawn.
(9)
No employee may be reclassified to a position in another group, either
higher or lower, until the Personnel Board determines that such a
reclassification will be consistent with the provisions of the
Compensation Plan. The following procedure shall be used when
reclassifying an employee to either a higher or lower position or a
transfer from one position to another:
A payroll change form shall be submitted to the Personnel Board
requesting the change prior to the change taking place.
(1)
The Personnel Board shall send approval to the department as well
as the Town Accountant that this is consistent with the provisions
of the Compensation Plan.
(2)
Copies of the payroll change will be placed in the employee's
personnel file by the Personnel Board.
(3)
B.
Performance of all new employees must meet acceptable work
standards. The probationary period shall be utilized to help new and
promoted employees achieve effective performance levels. To insure
that new employees are aware of their duties and responsibilities,
appointing authorities shall inform new employees of their rights,
responsibilities, duties and obligations. The appointing authority will
provide the employee with a copy of the Personnel Bylaw. The employee
will sign the form acknowledging that he/she has reviewed a copy of the
A.
11.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsection A(8) as Subsection A(9).
§ 140-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-10
1:61
§ 140-11. Job descriptions and interpretations.
Personnel Bylaw and understands his/her rights, responsibilities, duties
and obligations.
Department heads or boards will provide on-site training and
orientations regarding specific rules, regulations, policies and
procedures of the employee's assigned department, including the safety
policies and procedures.
B.
All newly appointed and promoted employees will be required to
successfully complete a probationary period. The probationary period
begins immediately upon the employee's starting date or promotion
date and continues for a six-month period. The appointing authority and
department head shall observe and evaluate the employee's attitude,
conduct and work habits during the probationary period. A job
performance review and evaluation form must be completed at 90
days by the department head and reviewed with the employee. Upon
completion of the probationary period, the appointing authority will
complete a one-hundred-eighty-day job performance review and
evaluation form. The appointing authority will notify the employee in
writing that the employee's performance meets satisfactory standards
and the individual will be considered a regular employee in the position;
or that the employee's performance, due to extenuating circumstances,
requires additional observation and that the probationary period will be
extended an additional period of time not to exceed three months; or
that the employee's performance, attitude, conduct was unsatisfactory
and the termination will occur.
C.
At any time during the probationary period the employee may be
terminated by an appointing authority if it is revealed that the employee
intentionally falsified information relating to application for
employment, was unable or unwilling to perform the required duties,
or displayed conduct, habits or dependability which did not merit
continuing the employee in the position. The employee may not appeal
the termination.
D.
The Personnel Board shall maintain written descriptions of the jobs or
positions in the Classification Plan. These descriptions shall be written
by the department's board, department head, or department supervisor
and approved by the Personnel Board. The descriptions shall include
definitions describing the essential nature of the work, distinguishing
features of the work and such illustrative examples of duties as may be
deemed appropriate. The Personnel Board may, upon the request of a
department or on its own initiative, along with the department's input,
amend such job descriptions.
A.
The heads of departments shall be required to retain copies of the
current job descriptions. They shall be responsible for drafting any
revisions and submitting them to the Personnel Board for approval.
B.
§ 140-10 LANCASTER CODE § 140-11
1:62
§ 140-12. Class title.
The title of each class, as established by the Classification Plan, shall be the
official title of every position allocation to the class and the official title of
each incumbent of a position so allocated, and shall be used to the exclusion
of all others on payrolls, budget estimates and other official records and
reports pertaining to the position. No administrative authority shall fix the
salary of any employee in a position in the Classification Plan except in
accordance with the Compensation Plan.
§ 140-13. Workweek.
§ 140-14. Confidential information.
§ 140-15. Dress code policy.
It is the policy of the Town of Lancaster that each employee's dress,
grooming and personal hygiene be appropriate to the work situation and
follow the dress code of the Town or department.
The description of any position shall be construed solely as a means
of identification. It shall not limit the duties and responsibilities of any
position or modify, or in any way affect, the power of any administrative
authority as otherwise existing to assign duties to, or to direct and
control the work of, any employee under the jurisdiction of such
authority. The administrative authority, however, must be reasonable
and cannot assign tasks that are completely out of the job classification.
C.
A. The normal week for a regular full-time employee shall be 40 hours.
The normal workweek for a regular part-time employee shall be at least
20 hours but less than 39 hours. A reduced-hours part-time employee
shall be regularly scheduled hours that are less than 19 hours per
week. The department head, with the approval of the board, committee
or commission responsible for the department, will establish and post
permanently on the department bulletin board the regular working
hours for all employees of that department. The normal lunch period
will not be a paid period.
B.
When performing their assigned duties, Town employees may come into
contact with confidential information.
A.
Confidential information must be retained in a manner that allows it to
remain confidential at all times. It is expected that all Town employees
respect the information they are privy to.
B.
C. Confidential information is as defined by MGL c. 4, § 7.
§ 140-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-15
1:63

ARTICLE III
Compensation Plan
§ 140-16. Appropriated funds.
The compensation provided for in this article shall be subject to the
availability of appropriated funds.
§ 140-17. Pay and salary schedule.
The Compensation Schedule12 set forth in this bylaw shall consist of hourly
rates as well as salaries, which are on a grade and step schedule. The
weekly pay period begins at 12:01 a.m. on Sunday and ends at 12:00
midnight on the following Saturday.
§ 140-18. Pay rate and benefits for new personnel.
§ 140-19. Promotions and transfers of employees.
§ 140-20. Personal rates above maximum.
Any salary rate which is above the maximum rate for a job, as established
by this plan, shall be deemed to be a personal rate. Should an employee's
position be reclassified to a lower grade or rate, that employee will be
grandfathered in at his/her current rate. This personal rate will not apply to
the employee's successor in the position.
The hiring rate shall be Step 1 of the rate range for the job for which
the new employee is hired. Hiring an employee at a rate above Step
1 requires the advanced approval of the Personnel Board. Should a
potential employee's experience warrant the hiring above Step 1,
approval will be required by the Personnel Board prior to the hiring.
The Board may investigate any request for a higher salary step and
confer with the immediate supervisor or department head relative to
such employment.
A.
The appointing authority may negotiate benefits to permit competitive
hiring, subject to appropriation and the prior approval of the Personnel
Board.
B.
An employee who receives a promotion shall be compensated at the
rate of pay that is closest to but greater than the employee's current
rate of pay or at a step rate that the appointing authority, subject to
approval of the Personnel Board, believes the employee's qualifications
and performance warrants.
A.
If an employee is transferred to a lower rate job, he/she shall enter it at
his/her own rate.
B.
12.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the Town offices.
§ 140-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-21
1:65
§ 140-21. Working from home.
Employees who have assigned office space are not permitted to work from
home. Our goal is to have Town offices open to the public whenever
possible. The Select Board must grant permission for any exceptions to this
policy.
§ 140-22. Straight-time hourly pay.
The compensation paid an employee per the Compensation Plan for each
hour worked during the normal workweek shall be his/her regular straighttime
hourly pay. In those instances in which the hourly earnings are not
specified in the Compensation Plan, the straight-time hourly pay is
calculated by dividing the weekly rate by the normal workweek hours. For
a salaried position, straight-time hourly pay is calculated by dividing the
weekly compensation by the normal workweek hours of that area in which
the employee works.
§ 140-23. Overtime.
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Town is
establishing a seven-day work period commencing on Sunday at 12:01 a.m.
§ 140-24. Other special pay.
§ 140-25. Performance review; raises.
Any hours, or portions thereof, authorized by the department head and
worked by an employee in the service of the Town, except salaried
personnel, over and above 40 hours for the normal workweek shall be
considered overtime. For purposes of calculating overtime, holiday pay
and vacation pay shall not be considered as hours worked.
A.
Overtime shall be compensated to all employees at 1 1/2 times straight
hourly earnings with the exception of salaried personnel.
B.
Where an employee in a single workweek works at two or more
different types of work for which different straight-time rates have been
established, the regular rate for that week is the weighted average of
such rates. That is, the earnings from all such rates are added together
and this total is then divided by the total number of hours worked at all
jobs (FLSA).
C.
When all Town employees (i.e., Town Hall, library, nonunion DPW,
nonunion police, nonunion dispatchers) except salaried employees are
requested to return to work after completing their normal day's work,
they shall be compensated for no less than two hours.
A.
When firefighters and EMTs report to duty during the hours of 11:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m., they shall be paid a minimum of two hours.
B.
§ 140-21 LANCASTER CODE § 140-25
1:66
Merit/step raises. Raises will be awarded on an annual basis, providing
the employee has completed at least one year of employment and only
after a satisfactory performance review is received by the Personnel
Board, as required in the Performance Review and Evaluation
Procedure Manual.
A.
In order for all merit/step raises to be approved, the Personnel Board
must receive the annual reviews by June 30 of each year and mid-year
reviews by December 30. Failure to submit by the appropriate date
may result in a withholding of the said merit/step raises until reviews
are received and approved by the Personnel Board. Department heads'
failure to comply will result in oral and/or written reprimand.
B.
Cost-of-living raises will be voted at the Annual Town Meeting.
Recommendations shall be made by Select Board and Personnel Board.
C.
§ 140-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-25
1:67

ARTICLE IV
Disciplinary Action
§ 140-26. Disciplinary procedure.
The Town recognizes that all of its employees have high standards.
However, there are times when it may be necessary to discipline
individual employees. The Town believes that discipline should be used
when necessary. Disciplinary action may be initiated for failure of an
employee to fulfill responsibilities as an employee. Cause for
disciplinary action shall include, but is not intended to be limited to the
following:
(1) Incompetence or inefficiency in performing assigned duties.
Refusal to perform a reasonable amount of work or violation of
any reasonable official order, or failure to carry out any lawful and
reasonable directions made by a proper supervisor.
(2)
(3) Habitual tardiness or absence from duty.
(4) Violation of safety rules, practices and policies.
(5) Release of confidential information, cognizant or intentional.
(6) Engaging in sexual harassment.
(7) Insubordination.
(8) Fighting on the job; verbal abuse.
(9) Punching in or out in an irregular fashion. (See policy.13)
A.
Therefore, the following disciplinary action procedures shall be
followed:
First warning. The supervisor will give the employee an oral
warning that will be recorded in the personnel records.
(1)
Second warning. The supervisor will issue a written warning to
the employee. The warning shall include reasons for the warning
and an offer of assistance on the part of the department head in
correcting the unsatisfactory situation and carry a specified period
in which the behavior shall improve. A copy of the warning will be
placed in the personnel file.
(2)
Third warning. The department head, with sufficient cause, will
suspend an employee without pay for a period of at least three
days, not to exceed 20 working days in any twelve-month period.
Within 24 hours of the effective date of the suspension the
employee shall be provided with a written notice stating the
reasons for the suspension and the length of the suspension.
(3)
B.
13.Editor's Note: See § 140-27B.
§ 140-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-26
1:69
§ 140-27. Termination for cause.
The progressive disciplinary procedure will be bypassed and the employee
will be subject to immediate termination for, but not limited to, the
following:
Fourth warning: will result in the employee being terminated. The
department head will provide the employee with a written notice
stating the reason or reasons for the discharge and the effective
date of the discharge.
(4)
After one year following each disciplinary action, if there has been no
further disciplinary action, the warning will not be considered current
in an employee's record.
C.
At any step in the disciplinary procedure, an employee may, at his/her
discretion, appeal to the Personnel Board.
D.
A. Theft of Town or another employee's property.
B. Falsification of time records or punching another employee's time card.
C. Use of illegal substance or alcohol on the job.
D. Fighting while on the job - physical.
E. Disclosure of confidential matters - intentional.
F. Misuse or unauthorized use of Town property.
G. Fraud in securing appointment.
H. Conviction of a felony.
Violation of safety rules, practices and policies, after appropriate
training.
I.
J. Engaging in sexual harassment, as substantiated by policy.
K. Unauthorized absences during working hours.
L. Falsification of Town records.
§ 140-26 LANCASTER CODE § 140-27
1:70
ARTICLE V
Grievances and Appeals
§ 140-28. Step 1.
Any employee who believes that he/she has received inequitable treatment
because of some condition of his/her employment may appeal for relief from
that condition. An employee must discuss the grievance initially with his/
her direct supervisor. Then, if the matter is not settled, the employee should
submit said grievance in writing to the department head. The department
head shall respond in writing, within 14 calendar days. If the employee's
department head is also the immediate supervisor, he/she should proceed to
Step 2.
§ 140-29. Step 2.
If the employee feels that his/her grievance is still unresolved, he/she may
appeal to the Personnel Board within 14 calendar days after receiving
the decision of the department head. The Personnel Board may require a
written statement from the aggrieved employee in such form and containing
such information as it may require. The Personnel Board shall hear the
grievance at its next regularly scheduled meeting and shall render a
decision within 14 calendar days of the hearing. Any decision of the
Personnel Board shall be transmitted to the department head/appointing
authority and placed in the employee's personnel file.
§ 140-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-29
1:71

ARTICLE VI
Reduction in Force (RIF)
§ 140-30. Considerations.
§ 140-31. Reemployment.
§ 140-32. Employees with identical employment dates.
An employee whose employment date with the Town is the same as another
employee shall be terminated upon the department head's evaluation of
each employee's overall work performance.
In the event that, for reasons of economy, it becomes necessary to
reduce the number of employees under the Personnel Bylaw, the Town
of Lancaster, in determining which of its employees are to be
terminated, will take into consideration the qualifications of such
employees, the quality of their past performance and their seniority as
employees of the Town in their respective departments.
A.
Where, in the opinion of the appointing authority, the qualifications and
quality of performance of employees are substantially equal, employees
will be terminated in the order of reverse seniority as employees of the
department.
B.
The Town will consider employees whose employment is so terminated
for reemployment in the reverse order of their termination during
a period of one year from the effective date of their termination, if
they inform the appointing authority in writing of their desire to be
considered.
A.
An employee who is reemployed by the Town within said one-year
period after termination under the provision of this section shall have
restored the unused sick leave accumulated at the time of termination,
and shall have restored all previous benefits that he/she would have
been entitled to at the time of reduction in force.
B.
An employee who is reemployed by the Town after said one-year period
after termination will be hired as a new employee.
C.
§ 140-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-32
1:73

ARTICLE VII
Benefits
§ 140-33. Form of indirect pay.
Employee benefits provided by the Town are an item of cost to the Town
and a form of indirect pay for the employee. Therefore, the policies and
procedures for the establishment and maintenance of these benefits are
included in this Personnel Bylaw.
§ 140-34. Applicability of benefits.
§ 140-35. Compensated absence.
Regular full-time employees. All of the below-listed employee benefits
apply to full-time employees.
A.
Regular part-time employees: eligible for all employee benefits, in
proportion to the ratio that their average weekly hours of work in the
preceding 12 months bears to the normal workweek for their job.
B.
Casual, special, temporary or seasonal employees: not eligible for
employee benefits.
C.
Reduced-hours part-time employees: eligible for vacation and sick-time
benefits, in proportion to the ratio that their average weekly hours of
work in the preceding 12 months bears to the normal workweek for
their job; not eligible for health insurance or other benefits.
D.
Holidays.
Pay.
Each regular full-time employee will be entitled to one day's
pay at regular straight-time rates for 11 paid holidays per year.
If the holiday falls on a Saturday, it will be observed on Friday,
and if it falls on Sunday, it will be observed on Monday.
(a)
Regular part-time employees shall receive holiday pay only if
the holiday falls on their regularly scheduled day to work.
(b)
Reduced-hours employees shall receive holiday pay only if the
holiday falls on the regularly scheduled day to work. Pay will
be prorated for hours normally worked.
(c)
(1)
The designated holidays are:
(a) New Year's Day.
(b) Martin Luther King Day.
(c) Presidents' Day.
(d) Patriots' Day.
(2)
A.
§ 140-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-35
1:75
(e) Memorial Day.
(f) Independence Day.
(g) Labor Day.
(h) Columbus Day.
(i) Veterans Day.
(j) Thanksgiving Day.
(k) Christmas Day.
To be eligible for holiday pay:
The employee shall have worked on the employee's last
scheduled working day prior to and the next regularly
scheduled working day following such holiday, or was in fullpay
status on such preceding and following days in accordance
with other provisions of these regulations, or was
appropriately excused.
(a)
When any of the holidays listed in Subsection A(2) above fall
within a sick-leave period, it shall be granted as a holiday and
no charge made to the employee's sick-leave credits.
(b)
When any of the holidays listed in Subsection A(2) above falls
within a vacation period, it shall be granted as a holiday and an
additional day of vacation leave will be granted.
(c)
(3)
Vacation pay.
The vacation year is from July 1 through June 30. Regular full-time,
regular part-time employees and reduced-hours part-time only, are
eligible for vacation as follows:
Vacation accrual is based on the employee's anniversary date
and is prorated based on the fiscal year.
(a)
After six months of continuous service and up to one year, an
employee is eligible for five days' vacation.
(b)
After 12 months of continuous service and up to a maximum of
five years of service, an employee is eligible for two weeks' (10
days') vacation.
(c)
After five years and up to 10 years of service, an employee is
eligible for three weeks' (15 days') vacation.
(d)
After 10 years and up to 20 years of service, an employee is
eligible for four weeks' (20 days') vacation.
(e)
After 20 years service, the employee is eligible for five weeks'
(25 days') vacation.
(f)
(1)
B.
§ 140-35 LANCASTER CODE § 140-35
1:76
The vacation pay of a regular part-time employee shall be the
average of his/her weekly pay for the 52 weeks worked immediately
preceding the vacation.
(2)
Employees are required to take vacation on a regular basis to allow
for the proper rest from the rigors of work. Vacation time may not
be accrued from year to year.
(3)
Should a paid holiday occur during the employee's regularly
scheduled workweek while the employee is on an authorized paid
vacation, an additional day of vacation shall be allowed.
(4)
In case of retirement or termination of employment, the employee
shall be paid for all accrued, vacation time earned up to the
termination date.
(5)
The choice of vacations shall be on the basis of seniority in the
department and approved by the department head. Department
heads shall post the vacation grants annually.
(6)
Sick leave.
Each regular full-time, regular part-time and reduced-hour parttime
employee shall earn sick-leave credit with pay at the rate
of one normal workday's pay for each month of continuous
employment in the Town, to a maximum of 13 such days' credit per
fiscal year.
(1)
This time shall be saved for use when an employee cannot report
for work due to sickness, injury or exposure to contagious disease.
Use of such accumulated sick-leave credit is allowed only after
the employee has completed his/her probationary period. The
maximum number of such days of sick-leave credit that may be
accumulated is 240. Employees hired after July 1, 2009 shall
accumulate a maximum of 120 days. The employee's department
head must authorize application of sick-leave credit.
(2)
An employee may use up to 10 days of accumulated sick leave
per year for serious family illness. An employee out sick three
continuous days shall be put on family medical leave.
(3)
Employees returning from a sick leave or disability leave may
be required to have a physical examination to determine their
capability to perform satisfactorily their regular work without
endangering themselves or their fellow employees.
(4)
The department head, Town Administrator or the Personnel Board
may, of its own motion, require a medical examination of any
employee who reports his/her inability to report for duty because
of illness. This examination shall be at the expense of the Town by
a physician appointed by the Personnel Board.
(5)
C.
§ 140-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-35
1:77
Payments made under the provisions of this section shall be limited
in the case of an employee who is receiving workers' compensation
payments to the difference between the amount paid in workers'
compensation and the employee's regular pay. In the event of such
payments, the department head or Personnel Board may debit the
employee's sick leave accrual by such amounts as it determines to
be equitable in relation to such payments.
(6)
Nothing in this section will be construed to conflict with MGL c. 41,
§ 100.
(7)
Bereavement leave. Regular full-time, regular part-time and reducedhours
part-time employees shall be given up to three consecutive
working days' leave with a normal day's pay for the purpose of making
arrangements and attending the funeral of a member of his/her
immediate family, which is defined as mother, father, spouse, motherin-
law, father-in-law, sister, brother, child, grandchild, grandparent or
domestic partner of the employee or any live-in family member. Regular
full-time, regular part-time and reduced-hours part-time employees
shall be given one day leave with pay for the purposes of attending the
funeral of the employee's aunt, uncle, niece, nephew.
D.
Jury duty leave. A regular full-time and regular part-time employee
called for jury duty shall be paid by the Town an amount equal to the
difference between the compensation paid the employee for a normal
working period and the amount paid by the court, excluding any
allowance for travel and lodging, upon presentation of an affidavit of
jury pay granted.
E.
Military leave. Regular full-time employees who are in the Armed
Services Reserves or National Guard and are called to temporary
military duty not exceeding two weeks in any twelve-month period
shall receive the difference in pay between their regular Town pay
and their military pay. Such employee may use his/her normal vacation
time for his/her military duty if he/she desires. This provision does
not include payments to members of the National Guard who may be
mobilized during an emergency in the commonwealth. Proof of service
shall be submitted to the employee's department head and a copy to the
Personnel Board.
F.
Other leave.
Absence for personal reasons up to three days per year may be
granted to full-time employees. These personal days may be taken
at any time of the year upon the employee's request with the
approval of the department head. Any days not used during the
fiscal year in which they are granted shall be forfeited.
(1)
Personal leave may be granted in increments of not less than 1/2 of
a workday.
(2)
G.
§ 140-35 LANCASTER CODE § 140-35
1:78
§ 140-36. Noncompensated absence.
§ 140-37. Unauthorized leave of absence.
Any employee absent without authorization for three consecutive working
days shall be terminated from the payroll as abandonment of his/her
position.
§ 140-38. Educational assistance.
When possible, the employee must request from the employee's
immediate supervisor the personal day leave at least 48 hours in
advance. A supervisor may not question the reason for personal
leave nor may he/she deny such a request except for scheduling
problems.
(3)
Only employees who have completed their probationary period may
be compensated for absence for personal reasons under provisions
of this subsection.
(4)
Disability and parental leave. A leave of absence without pay may be
granted an employee with at least six months of continuous service
whose illness or disability continues beyond sick leave that has been
accrued. Such disability leave shall be for sickness or injury resulting
in temporary disability of the employee or a member of his or her
immediate family, or for the birth of a child to (or adopted by) the
employee and/or the employee's spouse. Duration of the leave shall be
for the period a physician says the employee is unable to perform the
regular duties of his or her position.
A.
Leave of absence. A leave of absence may be granted by the department
head and the Personnel Board but shall be without compensation. A
leave of absence of over one month duration except military leave,
shall be considered a break in employment and on return to work the
employee shall have the status of a new employee unless an extension
of leave beyond one month has been authorized by the Personnel Board
in advance.
B.
Full- and part-time employees working at least 20 hours per week
who have worked for the Town for at least one year are eligible for a
reimbursement of tuition, registration fees, and books for work-related
courses from state colleges, state universities or other preapproved
institutions of higher learning which serve to improve their knowledge
and skills and increase their performance with the Town.
A.
Approval for the particular course must be requested prior to
enrollment in order to be eligible for the reimbursement, and in order
to qualify must have the recommendations of the department head and
approval of the Personnel Board.
B.
§ 140-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-38
1:79
§ 140-39. Mileage reimbursement.
§ 140-40. Insurance coverage.
Reimbursement is subject to a separate and distinct appropriation of
municipal funds.
C.
Reimbursement will be made upon successful completion of the course
or program. "Successful completion" of a course shall mean a minimum
of B or equivalent.
D.
The Town may require the employee to sign an agreement to remain
with the Town for a period of up to two years after completion of the
course, or else be responsible to the Town for reimbursement of the
funds.
E.
When employees have prior approval from their supervisor to use their
personal vehicle for Town business, they are reimbursed for business
travel at the approved per mile rate, as established by the Internal
Revenue Service. Local travel expenses between the employee's home
and assigned work location are not reimbursable. However, if
employees are required by business necessity to travel from home
directly to a site other than their assigned work location, the Town will
reimburse them for the difference between the mileages in their normal
commute to their assigned work location and the total miles driven on
business.
A.
When using a private vehicle for Town business purposes, the employee
assumes liability for the vehicle. All employees who use their personal
vehicles for Town business must have a current driver's license and
vehicle liability insurance in the minimum amounts required by state
law. Otherwise, the vehicle is not authorized for Town business use.
B.
Workers' compensation. All paid full-time and each regular part-time
employee will be covered by the Town's workers' compensation policy
under Massachusetts Workers' Compensation Law.14
A.
Group insurance. Each regular full-time and regular part-time
employee covered by the bylaw shall be entitled to the Group Insurance
Plan (Health and Life Insurance) which has been accepted by the Town
in accordance with MGL c. 32B. The Town's contribution thereto may
be changed from time to time by amendment of this Personnel Bylaw.
B.
Reduced-hours part-time employees, although not eligible for health
insurance through the Town, shall be eligible to enroll in health
insurance offered through the Commonwealth Health Connector.
C.
14.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 152, § 1 et seq.
§ 140-38 LANCASTER CODE § 140-41
1:80
§ 140-41. Retirement benefits.
The Town shall contribute funds as required for each employee in
accordance with the procedures formula established by the Worcester
Regional Retirement Board and the bylaws of the Town of Lancaster.
§ 140-42. Civil service law.
Nothing in this bylaw or in the Classification or Compensation Plans shall
be construed to conflict with MGL c. 31.
§ 140-43. Severability.
In the event that any provision of this bylaw, or application thereof, shall
be held to be invalid by the proper authorities, this shall not be construed
to affect the validity of any other provision, or application thereof, of this
bylaw.
§ 140-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-43
1:81

ARTICLE VIII
Sexual Harassment Policy
§ 140-44. Purpose.
§ 140-45. Definitions; retaliation for complaints.
It is the goal of the Town of Lancaster to promote a workplace that is
free of sexual harassment. Sexual harassment of employees occurring
in the workplace or in other settings in which employees may find
themselves in connection with their employment is unlawful and will
not be tolerated by this organization.
A.
Further, any retaliation against an individual who has complained about
sexual harassment or retaliation against individuals for cooperating
with an investigation of a sexual harassment complaint is similarly
unlawful and will not be tolerated. To achieve our goal of providing
a workplace free from sexual harassment, the inappropriate conduct
that is described in this policy will not be tolerated and we have
provided a procedure by which inappropriate conduct will be dealt
with, if encountered by employees.
B.
Because the Town of Lancaster takes allegations of sexual harassment
seriously, we will respond promptly to complaints of sexual harassment
and, where it is determined that such inappropriate conduct has
occurred, we will act promptly to eliminate the conduct and impose
such corrective action as is necessary, including disciplinary action
where appropriate.
C.
Please note that while this policy sets forth our goals of promoting a
workplace that is free of sexual harassment, the policy is not designed
or intended to limit our authority to discipline or take remedial action
for workplace conduct which we deem unacceptable, regardless of
whether that conduct satisfies the definition of sexual harassment.
D.
In Massachusetts, the legal definition for sexual harassment is this:
"sexual harassment" means sexual advances, requests for sexual favors,
and verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests or conduct
is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of
employment or a basis for employment decision; or
(1)
Such advances, requests or conduct have the purpose or effect of
unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance by
creating an intimidating, hostile, humiliating or sexually offensive
work environment.
(2)
A.
Under these definitions, direct or implied requests by a supervisor for
sexual favors in exchange for actual or promised job benefits such as
favorable reviews, salary increases, promotion, increased benefits, or
continued employment constitutes sexual harassment.
B.
§ 140-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-45
1:83
§ 140-46. Filing of complaints.
If any of our employees believes that he/she has been subject to sexual
harassment, the employee has the right to file a complaint with our
organization. This may be done in writing or orally to the Town
Administrator.
The legal definition of sexual harassment is broad and, in addition to the
above examples, other sexually oriented conduct, whether it is intended
or not, that is unwelcome and has the effect of creating a workplace
environment that is hostile, offensive, intimidating, or humiliating to
male or female workers may also constitute sexual harassment.
C.
Prohibited conduct also extends to any function or activity that is
officially sponsored by the Town of Lancaster.
D.
While it is not possible to list all those additional circumstances that
may constitute sexual harassment, the following are some examples
of conduct that, if unwelcome, may constitute sexual harassment
depending upon the totality of the circumstances including the severity
of the conduct and its pervasiveness:
Unwelcome sexual advances, whether they involve physical
touching or not.
(1)
Sexual epithets, jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct,
gossip regarding one's sexual activity, deficiencies or prowess.
(2)
(3) Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, and cartoons.
Unwelcome leering, whistling, brushing against the body, sexual
gestures, suggestive or insulting comments.
(4)
Requests for sexual favors in exchange for actual or promised job
benefits such as favorable reviews, salary increases, promotions,
increased benefits, or continued employment.
(5)
(6) Assault or coerced sexual acts.
(7) Inquiries into one's sexual experience.
(8) Discussion of one's sexual activities.
Comments regarding gender stereotypes, which demean,
embarrass or humiliate employees.
(9)
E.
All employees should take special note that, as stated above, retaliation
against an individual who has complained about sexual harassment,
and retaliation against individuals for cooperating with an investigation
of a sexual harassment complaint is unlawful and will not be tolerated
by the Town.
F.
§ 140-45 LANCASTER CODE § 140-47
1:84
§ 140-47. Private counseling option.
If you believe you are the victim of sexual harassment, in addition to
the right to file a complaint, you may also seek advice from the Town
Administrator. He/she is available to discuss any concerns you may have
and to provide information to you about our policy on sexual harassment
and our complaint process. If you desire, he/she will work with you to find a
way of resolving your concerns in an informal manner acceptable to you and
in a manner which would offer you as much privacy and confidentiality as
is possible. If this option does not resolve the complaint, you may proceed
through our complaint procedure set forth in § 140-48 below.
§ 140-48. Investigation of complaints.
§ 140-49. Disciplinary action.
If sexual harassment has been committed by one of our employees, we will
take such action as is appropriate under the circumstances. Such actions
may include counseling, informal or formal reprimands, written or verbal
warnings, suspension, reduction in pay, reduction in duties, transfers, and
other formal sanctions including termination from employment.
§ 140-50. State and federal remedies.
When the Town Administrator receives the complaint, he will then
investigate the allegation in a fair and expeditious manner. The
investigation would include a private interview with the person filing
the complaint and with witnesses. He/she will also interview the person
alleged to have committed sexual harassment. The Town Administrator
may, if necessary, request written statements in addition to the private
interviews. If the Town Administrator is unable to resolve the
complaint, he will report the investigative findings to the appointing
authority for disposition.
A.
If the investigation reveals that sexual harassment did occur, the Town
would act promptly to eliminate the offending conduct, and, where it
is appropriate, will also impose disciplinary action, which could include
termination from employment. In addition, when the investigation is
completed through formal or informal procedures, we will inform the
person filing the complaint and the alleged harasser of the results
of that investigation, including allegations that have not been
substantiated.
B.
If you would like to file a complaint, you may do so by contacting the
Town Administrator.
C.
In addition to the above, if you believe you have been subjected to
sexual harassment, you may file a formal complaint with either or both
of the government agencies set forth below.
A.
§ 140-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-50
1:85
The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
("EEOC").
John F. Kennedy Federal Building, 475 Government Center,
Boston, MA 02203 (800)-669-4000
(1)
The Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD").
Boston Office
One Ashburton Place
Sixth Floor, Room 601
Boston, MA 02108
Phone: 617-994-6000
TTY: 617-994-6196
(a)
Springfield Office
436 Dwight Street
Second Floor, Room 220
Springfield, MA 01103
(413) 739-2145
(b)
Worcester Office
Worcester City Hall
455 Main Street, Room 100
Worcester, MA 01608
(508) 799-8010
(508) 799-8490 – FAX
(c)
New Bedford Office
800 Purchase St., Rm 501
New Bedford, MA 02740
(508) 990-2390
(508) 990-4260 – FAX
(d)
(2)
Using our complaint process does not prohibit you from filing a
complaint with these agencies. Each of the agencies has a short time
period for filing a claim (EEOC: 300 days; MCAD: 300 days).
B.
§ 140-50 LANCASTER CODE § 140-50
1:86
Chapter 146
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Constables — See Ch. 186, Art. VII.
§ 146-1. Establishment and administration.
The Town of Lancaster Police Department shall be established and
administered pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 41, § 97A.
Chapter 150
REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 150-1. Establishment.
There are hereby established in the Town of Lancaster pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, the following revolving funds, from
which the specified department head, board, committee, or officer may
incur liabilities against and spend monies from without appropriation in
accordance with the limitations set forth in this bylaw.
§ 150-2. Payment of fringe benefits.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
§ 150-3. Excess liability prohibited.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
§ 150-4. Amount spent not to exceed amount authorized.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Annual Town Meeting or any increase therein as may later
be authorized by the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee in
accordance with MGL c. 44 § 53E 1/2.
§ 150-5. Interest earned.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
bylaw shall be credited to the General Fund.
§ 140-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-6
1:87
§ 150-6. Authorized revolving funds.
Revolving Fund Program
or Purpose
Department
Receipts To Be
Credited to Fund
Representative or
Board Entity
Authorized To
Spend
Stormwater managementengineering
fees
Fees Planning Board
Library charges - books,
materials, photocopy
equipment and supplies
Late book, materials,
photocopy, lost item
fees/charges
Library Trustees
Recreation Committee -
program expenses and
supplies
Fees and charges Recreation
Committee
Duval Road Sewer - use and
maintenance charges
Fees and charges Board of Selectmen
Community Center - program
expenses
Fees and charges Board of Selectmen
M.A.R.T - wages/expenses
senior van
Reimbursement -
M.A.R.T Bus fees
Council on Aging
Planning Board - planningrelated
services/expenses
Fees Planning Board
Publications - reprinting
expenses
Publication fees Town Clerk
Recycling - operating
expenses
Donations-Fees-Sale
of Products
Recycling Committee
Community Development -
legal ad publication and
reprinting
Receipts for
Advertising
Community
Development &
Planning
Agricultural Commission -
farmer's market/other fees
Fee and charges Agricultural
Commission
Police Department - operating
expenses
Fees Board of Selectmen
§ 150-7. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 and this bylaw, all applicable
state and local laws and regulations that govern the receipt, custody,
expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of revolving
funds established and authorized by this bylaw.
Chapter 156
ROADSIDE MEMORIALS
§ 150-6 LANCASTER CODE § 156-1
1:88
§ 156-1. Time limit.
In cases where a death is caused by a fatal accident or occurrence in
or along a public street, sidewalk or walkway, a temporary "roadside
memorial" may be left for a period of not more than 60 days from the date
of accident or occurrence.
§ 156-2. Location restrictions.
The temporary memorial shall be within the boundary of the Town's
property abutting the street, sidewalk or walkway, and not obstruct or
hinder persons or vehicles traveling on the roadway, sidewalk, or walkway.
Chapter 159
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-2
1:89

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 10-28-2013 STM by Art. 9]
§ 159-1. Determinations and intent.
§ 159-2. Definitions.
DAY-CARE CENTER — An establishment, whether public or private, which
provides care for children and is registered with and licensed pursuant to
the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by the Office of Child Care
Services.
ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITY — A building or buildings on the same
lot containing four or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by
households having one or more members 55 years of age or older.
ESTABLISHING A RESIDENCE — To set up or bring into being a dwelling
place or an abode where a person sleeps, which may include more than
one location, and may be mobile or transitory, or by means of purchasing
real property or entering into a lease or rental agreement for real property
It is the intent of this bylaw to protect the Town’s interest to promote
and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Lancaster by creating areas around locales where children
and the elderly regularly congregate and wherein certain sex offenders
are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
A.
It is determined that this bylaw is the most narrowly crafted means of
restricting to the fullest extent possible the opportunity for registered
sex offenders to approach or interact with children and the elderly
where they routinely and naturally congregate and that the protections
of the health and safety of our children is a compelling public and
governmental interest.
B.
This bylaw is intended to create a civil nonpunitive regulatory scheme
in order to protect children and the elderly to the greatest extent
possible under the circumstances of public welfare protections and not
as a punitive measure of any kind.
C.
Registered sex offenders pose a clear threat to children and the elderly
as vulnerable groups residing in or visiting the Town. Because
registered sex offenders are more likely than any other type of offender
to re-offend for another sexual offense, the Town desires to impose
safety precautions in furthering the public purpose of protecting these
groups. The purpose of this bylaw is to mitigate the potential risk
of harm to children and the elderly of the Lancaster community by
deterring the ability for registered sex offenders to be in contact with
unsuspecting individuals in locations that are primarily utilized by such
groups. The Town desires to add location restrictions on such offenders
where state law is silent.
D.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-2
1:91
(including a renewal or extension of a prior agreement whether through
written execution or automatic renewal).
PARK — Public land designated for active or passive recreational or athletic
use by the Town of Lancaster, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or other
governmental subdivision, and located within the Town of Lancaster.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for five or more consecutive days or 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A structure used for religious worship or religious
education purposes on land owned by, or held in trust for the use of, any
religious organization.
SCHOOL — Any public or private educational facility that provides services
to children in grades Kindergarten – 12.
SEX OFFENDER — A person who resides, works or attends an institution
of higher learning in the commonwealth and who has been convicted of
a sex offense or who has been adjudicated as a youthful offender or as
a delinquent juvenile by reason of a sex offense or a person released
from incarceration or parole or probation supervision or custody with the
Department of Youth Services for such a conviction or adjudication or
a person who has been adjudicated a sexually dangerous person under
MGL c. 123A, § 14, as in force at the time of adjudication, or a person
released from civil commitment pursuant to Section 9 of said Chapter 123A,
whichever last occurs, on or after August 1, 1981.
SEX OFFENDER REGISTRY — The collected information and data that is
received by the criminal history systems board pursuant to Sections 178C to
178P, inclusive, as such information and data is modified or amended by the
sex offender registry board or a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to
said Sections 178C to 178P, inclusive.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for a period of less than five consecutive days or 14 days in the
aggregate during any calendar year, which is not the person's permanent
address or place where the person routinely lives, abides, lodges, or resides
and which is not the person's permanent residence.
§ 159-3. Sexual offender residence prohibition; penalties;
exceptions.
It is unlawful for any sex offender who is finally classified as a Level 2
or 3 offender pursuant to the guidelines of the Sex Offender Registry
Board to establish a permanent residence within 2,000 feet of any
school, day-care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of
worship, if, after notice and a hearing before the Police Chief and/or his
designee, the Police Chief and/or his designee determines that the sex
offender poses a risk to the public and, therefore, residency should be
limited in accordance with this section.
A.
§ 159-2 LANCASTER CODE § 159-3
1:92
For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the permanent residence to the nearest outer
property line of a school, day-care center or park, elderly housing
facility or place of worship.
B.
Notice to move. Any registered Level 2 or Level 3 sex offender who
establishes a permanent residence within 2,000 feet of any school, daycare
center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship shall be in
violation of this section and shall, within 30 days of receipt of written
notice of the sex offender's noncompliance with this chapter, move from
said location to a new location, but said location may not be within
2,000 feet of any school, day-care center, park, elderly housing facility
or place of worship. It shall constitute a separate violation for each
day beyond the 30 days the sex offender continues to reside within
2,000 feet of any school, day-care center, park, elderly housing facility
or place of worship. Furthermore, it shall be a separate violation each
day that a sex offender shall move from one location in the Town of
Lancaster to another that is within 2,000 feet of any school, day-care
center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship.
C.
Penalties. Violation of this bylaw, or of any regulations adopted
hereunder, may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in
equity by the Board of Selectmen, the Town Administrator, or their
duly authorized agents, or any police officer of the Town of Lancaster,
including, but not limited to, enforcement by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation. The penalties shall be as follows:
First offense: notification to offender that he/she has 30 days to
move, if, after notice and a hearing before the Police Chief and/or
his designee, the Police Chief and/or his designee determines that
the sex offender poses a risk to the public and, therefore, residency
should be limited in accordance with this bylaw.
(1)
Subsequent offense: This shall apply to any offender served or
supplied with a notification of a first offense and a hearing that
has failed to comply with all requirements of the notification within
the thirty-day period. Noncriminal fine pursuant to Article XXV
of the General Bylaws and notification to the offender’s landlord,
parole officer and/or probation officer and the Commonwealth’s
Sex Offender Registry Board that the person has violated a
municipal ordinance.
(2)
D.
Exceptions. A person residing within 2,000 feet of any school, day-care
center, park, playground, elderly housing facility or place of worship
does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
The person established the permanent residence and reported and
registered the residence prior to the effective date of this bylaw.
(1)
E.
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-3
1:93
The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and
was not convicted as an adult.
(2)
(3) The person is a minor.
The school, day-care center, park, elderly housing facility or place
of worship within 2,000 feet of the personal permanent residence
was established after the person established the permanent
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
the Sex Offender Registry Law.
(4)
The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
(5)
The person is admitted to and/or subject to an order of commitment
at a public or private facility for the care and treatment of mentally
ill persons pursuant to MGL c. 123.
(6)
The person is a mentally ill person subject to guardianship
pursuant to MGL c. 201, § 6 or a mentally retarded person subject
to guardianship pursuant to MGL c. 201, § 6A, residing with his
or her guardian or residing within a group residence that is
professionally staffed and supervised 24 hours a day.
(7)
§ 159-3 LANCASTER CODE § 159-3
1:94
Chapter 163
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 163-1. Obstruction of public ways and fire hydrants prohibited.
No person other than an employee in the service of the Town of Lancaster
or an employee in the service of an independent contractor acting for the
Town of Lancaster shall pile, push, plow, or blow snow or ice onto or across
a public way which is plowed and/or sanded by the Town or deposit snow in
such a way as to obstruct the operation of any fire hydrant.
§ 163-2. Removal or treatment of snow and ice required.
The owner of any real estate abutting any Town way where there is a
sidewalk shall, within 24 hours after the ceasing to fall or form or the
accumulation from any other cause of any snow, ice or sleet upon said
sidewalk, cause the same to be removed therefrom, and if the same cannot
be wholly removed shall sprinkle thereon sand or other substance so that
such sidewalks shall be safe for travel.
§ 163-3. Removal of vehicles impeding operations.
The Board of Public Works, for the purpose of insuring the free flow of
traffic or for the purpose of snow and ice control operations on a public
way, may, by its own employees or with such other assistance as it may
require, and at the owner's expense, remove or cause to be removed to the
nearest convenient place, any vehicle interfering with such traffic or such
operation. Said Department shall keep records of the registration number
of each vehicle so removed and of the place to which it was removed. The
Board of Public Works may impose liability for the cost of such removal, and
of the storage charges, if any, resulting therefrom, upon the owner of such
vehicle.
§ 163-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw shall be punished by fines
under Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Noncriminal Disposition, of
the Code of the Town of Lancaster, in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1,
Article II, Fines.
§ 159-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-4
1:95
Chapter 170
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor water use — See Ch. 211, Art. I.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 301.
Stormwater management rules and
regulations — See Ch. 305.
Wetlands protection rules and
regulations — See Ch. 306.
§ 163-4 LANCASTER CODE § 163-4
1:96
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management
[Adopted 10-15-2007 STM by Art. 5]
§ 170-1. Introduction; findings.
The Town of Lancaster hereby determines that:
Land development projects and other land use conversions, and
their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the
hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, which in turn have led to increased
flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and
deposition, and decreased groundwater recharge.
(1)
As the area of house and building roofs, parking lots and road
surfaces increase, the rate of stormwater runoff from these
surfaces increases, along with the preponderance of greater
flooding. Unregulated stormwater runoff from historic
development has led to the flooding we see today.
(2)
Land development projects and other land use conversions also
contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation
of receiving waters.
(3)
The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and
quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private
property, drinking water supplies, groundwater resources,
recreation, aquatic habitats, fish and other aquatic life, property
values and other uses of lands and waters.
(4)
These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through
the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new
development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural and
nonstructural best management practices.
(5)
Localities in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts are required to
comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations
and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of
post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source
pollution.
(6)
The United States Environmental Protection Agency has
determined that it is in the public interest to regulate postdevelopment
stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with
post-development stormwater runoff.
(7)
A.
Therefore, the Town of Lancaster has established this Stormwater
Management Bylaw to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation
B.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:97
§ 170-2. Purpose.
of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. This bylaw regulates the postconstruction
stormwater controls for both new and redevelopment
projects.
The purpose of the bylaw is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing
minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of
increased post-development stormwater runoff, flooding and nonpoint
source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment
and to comply with Phase II NPDES stormwater requirements. It has
been determined that proper management of post-development
stormwater runoff will minimize flood damage to the public and private
property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare of the public, protect water and
aquatic resources, and promote groundwater recharge to protect
surface and groundwater drinking supplies.
A.
The objectives of this bylaw are:
Establish decisionmaking processes surrounding land development
activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve
the health of water resources;
(1)
Require that new development, redevelopment and all land
conversion activities result in after-development runoff
characteristics that are equal to or less than the predevelopment
runoff characteristics in order to reduce flooding, stream bank
erosion, siltation, nonpoint source pollution, property damage, and
to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats;
(2)
Establish minimum post-development stormwater management
standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of
stormwater runoff quantity and quality; establish minimum design
criteria for the protection of properties and aquatic resources
downstream from land development and land conversion activities
from damages due to increases in volume, velocity, frequency,
duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff; and establish
minimum design criteria for measures to minimize nonpoint source
pollution from stormwater runoff which would otherwise degrade
water quality;
(3)
Establish design and application criteria for the construction and
use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used
to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management
standards;
(4)
Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management
measures and better site design practices or "low-impact
(5)
B.
§ 170-1 LANCASTER CODE § 170-2
1:98
§ 170-3. Definitions.
The definitions contained herein apply to issuance of a stormwater
management permit (SMP) established by the Town of Lancaster
Stormwater Management Bylaw. Terms not defined in this section shall
be construed according to their customary and usual meaning unless the
context indicates a special or technical meaning.
ALTERATION — Any activity which will measurably change the ability of
a ground surface area to absorb water or will change existing surface
drainage patterns. Alteration may be similarly represented as "alteration
of drainage characteristics" and "conducting land disturbance activities."
Such changes include change from distributed runoff to confined, discrete
discharge; change in the volume of runoff from the area; change in the peak
rate of runoff from the area; and change in the recharge to groundwater on
the area.
development practices," such as reducing impervious cover and
the preservation of green space and other natural areas, to the
maximum extent practicable; and coordinate site design plans,
including green space, with the Town of Lancaster's design
guidelines;
Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and
nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that
they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and post no
threat to public safety;
(6)
Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding
mechanism, including financial security or surety, for the proper
review, inspection and long-term maintenance of stormwater
facilities implemented under this bylaw;
(7)
Establish administrative procedures and fees for the submission,
review, approval or disapproval of stormwater management plans,
the inspection of approved active development projects, and for
long-term follow-up inspection to ensure ongoing care of approved
facilities.
(8)
Establish the Town of Lancaster's legal authority to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this bylaw through inspection,
monitoring and enforcement.
(9)
Nothing in the bylaw is intended to replace the requirements of
Chapter 215, Wetlands Protection, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster
or any other bylaw or regulations that may be adopted by the Town of
Lancaster, or any state or federal requirement, law, regulation or policy.
Any activity subject to the provisions of this bylaw must comply with
the requirements of all other applicable laws and regulations.
C.
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:99
APPLICANT — "Applicant" shall refer to a property owner or agent of a
property owner who has filed a stormwater management plan.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Structural, nonstructural and
managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and
practical means to prevent and/or reduce increases in stormwater volumes
and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote
stormwater quality and protection of the environment. "Structural" BMPs
are devices that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary
storage and treatment of stormwater runoff. "Nonstructural" BMPs are
natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require extensive
construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the
pollutant source.
BUILDING — A building shall refer to any structure, either temporary or
permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person,
animal or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and as it is amended from time to time.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
Clearing activities generally include grubbing activity as defined below.
DETENTION — The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater
management facility, with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
DEVELOPMENT — The modification of land to accommodate a new use or
expansion of use, usually involving construction.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the storm drain or into waters of
the United States or commonwealth from any source.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND — Any action, including clearing and grubbing,
that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand,
rock, gravel or similar earth material.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the
site.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by natural or artificial
forces such as wind, water, ice, gravity or vehicle traffic and the subsequent
detachment and transportation of soil particles.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A document
containing narrative, drawings and details developed by a qualified
professional engineer (PE) or a certified professional in erosion and
sedimentation control (CPESC), which includes best management practices
or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff, erosion and
§ 170-3 LANCASTER CODE § 170-3
1:100
sedimentation during pre-construction and construction related land
disturbance activities.
EROSION CONTROL — A measure that prevents erosion.
GRADING — Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
GRUBBING — The act of clearing land surface by digging up roots and
stumps.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltration to the underlying soil. "Impervious
surface" includes, without limitation, roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
rooftops, compacted soils, hard-packed gravel driveways and similar
surfaces.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity which changes the volume
or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall from the land surface. This may
include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil,
placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of
vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion
or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
property rights in the land.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to environmentally
friendly land use planning. It includes a suite of landscaping and design
techniques designed to maintain the natural, predeveloped ability of a site
to manage rainfall. LID techniques capture water on site, filter it through
vegetation, and allow seeping into the ground rather than being lost as
surface runoff so that the local water table can recharge. An important LID
principle embodies the concept that rainwater is a resource and not merely
a superfluous waste product.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY — The policy
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, as amended, that
coordinates the requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated
under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL
c. 131, § 40, and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, MGL c. 21, §§ 23 to
56. The policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of
performance standards to reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water
bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM
SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:101
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Lancaster.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from many diffuse sources
caused by rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through the ground. As
the runoff moves, it picks up and carries away natural and human-made
pollutants, finally depositing them into water resource areas.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the storm drain not
comprised entirely of stormwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan describing the
functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing
operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure
that it continues to function as designed.
OUTFALL — The point at which stormwater flows out from a discernible,
confined point source or discrete conveyance into waters of the
commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, rust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and
any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or may be
discharged.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes and solvents;
B. Oil, antifreeze and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
§ 170-3 LANCASTER CODE § 170-3
1:102
POST-DEVELOPMENT — Conditions that reasonably may be expected or
anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a
specific site or tract of land. "Post-development" refers to conditions after
culmination of a new development or redevelopment project and does not
depict conditions during the construction phases of a project.
PREDEVELOPMENT — The conditions that exist at the time that plans for
the land development of a tract of land are submitted to the Stormwater
Authority. Where phased development or phased plan approval occurs
(preliminary grading, roads, utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the
time prior to the first plan submission shall establish predevelopment
conditions.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition
or phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the
impervious area on previously developed sites.
RESOURCE AREA — Any area protected under the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act,15 the Massachusetts Rivers Act, or Chapter 215, Wetlands
Protection, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind
or water from its origin to another location; the product of erosion
processes.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site or entering off-site drainage structures.
SITE — A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading
work is performed as a single unified operation.
STABILIZATION — The use, singly or in combination, of mechanical,
structural or vegetative methods to prevent or retard erosion.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including but not limited to, land preparation such
as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issues which requires that all construction
activity on a site will be stopped.
STORMWATER AUTHORITY — The Stormwater Authority for Town of
Lancaster shall be the Planning Board or its authorized agent(s). The
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
15.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:103
Stormwater Authority is responsible for coordinating the review, approval
and permit process as defined in this bylaw. Boards and/or departments may
participate in the review process as defined in this bylaw or the Stormwater
Regulations adopted by the Planning Board of the Town of Lancaster. The
Conservation Agent and the Building Commissioner are authorized to act as
agents of the Planning Board in enforcing this bylaw.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Stormwater Authority, after review of an application, plans, calculations
and other supporting documents, that is designed to protect the Town from
deleterious effects of uncontrolled or untreated stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document containing narrative,
drawings and details prepared by a qualified professional engineer (PE),
a professional public land surveyor (PLS), or a certified professional in
erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC), that includes structural and
nonstructural best management practices (BMPs) to manage and treat
stormwater runoff generated from regulated development activity. A
stormwater management plan also includes an operation and maintenance
plan describing maintenance requirements for structural BMPs.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water, including but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, rivers and streams.
§ 170-4. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rules statutes,
and pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found at 40
CFR 122.34, and as authorized by the residents of the Town of Lancaster at
Town Meeting, dated October 15, 2007.
§ 170-5. Jurisdiction.
No person shall undertake a regulated construction activity, as described
below, without a stormwater management permit from the Planning Board.
Regulated activities shall include any of the following:
Land disturbance of greater than one acre (43,560 square feet),
associated with construction or reconstruction of structures.
(1)
Development or redevelopment involving multiple, separate
activities in discontinuous locations or on different schedules if the
activities are part of a larger common plan of development that
together disturbs one acre or more.
(2)
A.
§ 170-3 LANCASTER CODE § 170-5
1:104
§ 170-6. Administration.
The Lancaster Planning Board shall administer, implement and enforce
this bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Planning
Board may be delegated in writing by the Planning Board to its employees
Paving or other change in surface material over an area of one acre
or more causing a significant reduction of permeability or increase
in runoff.
(3)
Construction of a new drainage system or alteration of an existing
drainage system or conveyance serving a drainage area of more
than one acre.
(4)
Any other activity altering the surface of an area exceeding one
acre that will, or may, result in increased stormwater runoff flowing
from the property into a public way, the municipal storm drain
system, or to a watercourse or wetland. An exception is the removal
of tree cover when the stumps are left in place.
(5)
Exempt activities:
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural or
forestry use as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection
Act16 and its regulations.
(1)
Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn
areas associated with a single-family dwelling, provided such
maintenance does not include the addition of more than 30 cubic
yards of soil material, construction of walls, alteration of existing
grades by more than one foot in elevation, or alteration of drainage
patterns.
(2)
The construction of fencing, irrespective of materials used, that will
not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns.
(3)
Construction, maintenance and operation of utilities (gas, water,
sewer, electric, telephone, etc.) other than drainage that will not
alter terrain or drainage patterns.
(4)
Those activities that are subject to the jurisdiction under the
Wetlands Protection Act and demonstrate compliance with the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy as reflected in an
order of conditions issued by the Lancaster Conservation
Commission, are exempt from compliance of this bylaw.
(5)
Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture and viticulture exempted
from prohibition by MGL c. 40A, § 3, on parcels of property of five
acres in size and larger.
(6)
B.
16.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:105
or agents (who may include the Conservation Agent and the Building
Commissioner).
§ 170-7. Regulations.
§ 170-8. Permits and procedures.
Permit procedures and requirements shall be defined and included as part
of any rules and regulations promulgated as permitted under § 170-7 of this
bylaw.
§ 170-9. Inspections.
§ 170-10. Fees.
The Lancaster Planning Board may adopt and periodically amend
stormwater rules and regulations relating to receipt and content of
stormwater management applications, review time periods, permit
terms, conditions, additional definitions, enforcement, fees (including
application, inspection, and/or consultant fees), procedures,
administration and enforcement of this bylaw subsequent to a majority
vote of a meeting of the Planning Board and after conducting a public
hearing to receive comments on the proposed regulations and/or any
proposed revisions. Such hearing dates shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general local circulation at least seven calendar days
before a hearing date.
A.
Failure by the Planning Board to promulgate such rules and regulations
shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this bylaw.
B.
Filing an application for a stormwater management permit grants the
Planning Board, or its agent, permission to enter the site of the landdisturbing
activity, as permitted by law, to verify the information in the
application and to inspect for compliance with permit conditions.
A.
The Planning Board, in its discretion, may conduct an inspection at
any stage of land-disturbing activity to ensure compliance with the
terms of this bylaw and any permit. The Planning Board also may
require the applicant to submit self-inspection reports at any stage
of development or post-development. The Planning Board may inspect
sites before construction, weekly during construction, and within 24
hours of a rainstorm of two inches or greater.
B.
The Planning Board by regulation shall promulgate an application fee
schedule for stormwater management permit applications and
completion certificates. The fee schedule shall be reasonably related
to the costs of processing, reviewing and acting upon the application,
including review of the application by a professional engineer or other
consultant retained by the Board to advise it on technical, legal,
economic, or other aspects of the proposed work. The fee specified in
such a fee schedule shall be made payable to the Town of Lancaster
A.
§ 170-6 LANCASTER CODE § 170-10
1:106
§ 170-11. Waivers.
§ 170-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Planning Board, or an authorized agent of the Planning Board, shall
enforce this bylaw, its regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such
violations.
and shall accompany the permit application or request for certificate
of completion. The Planning Board may require an additional fee for
review of any change in or alteration from an approved permit.
Said fee shall be paid into a revolving account set up by the Town
Treasurer and may be expended by the Planning Board for the purpose
allocated without further appropriation in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
B.
The Planning Board may waive strict compliance with any requirement
of this bylaw or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder,
where such action:
(1) Is allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations;
(2) Is in the public interest;
(3) Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this bylaw.
A.
Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a
waiver. Such a waiver request shall be accompanied by an explanation
or documentation supporting the waiver request and demonstrating
that strict application of this bylaw does not further the purposes or
objectives of this bylaw.
B.
All waiver requests shall be discussed by the Planning Board and a
decision will be made by the Planning Board within 30 days of receiving
the waiver request.
C.
If, in the Planning Board's opinion, additional time or information is
required for review of a waiver request, the Planning Board may
continue consideration of the waiver request to a date certain
announced at the meeting. In the event the applicant objects to a
continuance, or fails to provide the requested information, the waiver
request shall be denied.
D.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, regulations,
permit, notice or order issued thereunder, the Planning Board may
seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
A.
B. Orders.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:107
The Planning Board, or its authorized agent, may issue a written
order to enforce the provisions of this bylaw, or the regulations
thereof, which may include:
A requirement to cease and desist from the land-disturbing
activity until there is compliance with the bylaw or provisions
of the stormwater management permit;
(a)
Maintenance, installation or performance of additional erosion
and sediment control measures;
(b)
(c) Monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
Remediation of erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or
indirectly from the land-disturbing activity;
(d)
Compliance with the stormwater management plan and
permit;
(e)
Repair, maintenance or replacement of the stormwater
management system or portions thereof in accordance with the
operation and maintenance plan.
(f)
Remediation of adverse impact resulting directly or indirectly
from malfunction of the stormwater management system.
(g)
(1)
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of erosion and sedimentation is required, the order shall set forth
a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be
completed.
(2)
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than the amount set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster. Each
day or part thereunder that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
C.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, which has been adopted by
the Town in the Code of the Town of Lancaster Chapter 1, Article
I, Noncriminal Disposition, in which case the Planning Board or
authorized agent shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for each
violation shall be fines in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Town Code. Each day or part thereof
that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13]
D.
Appeals. The decision or orders of the Planning Board shall be final.
Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
E.
§ 170-12 LANCASTER CODE § 170-12
1:108
§ 170-13. Public education.
The Planning Board, within its available resources, shall provide education
programs on soil erosion, sediment control and stormwater management to
the general public and persons regulated by this bylaw. The Planning Board
shall provide guidelines and advice to ease the permit application process
and foster acceptance of good erosion control and stormwater management
practices.
§ 170-14. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this bylaw is held invalid
for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 170-15. When effective.
This bylaw shall take effect upon approval of the Attorney General, and after
the bylaw has been posted, in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 32.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local
law.
F.
§ 170-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-15
1:109

ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharges
[Adopted 10-15-2007 STM by Art. 6]
§ 170-16. Purpose.
§ 170-17. Definitions.
The definitions contained herein apply to the administration and
enforcement of this Illicit Discharge Bylaw. Terms not defined in this section
shall be construed according to their customary and usual meaning unless
the context indicates a special or technical meaning.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and as it is amended from time to time.
The purpose of this bylaw is to eliminate nonstormwater discharges to
the Town of Lancaster's municipal storm drain system. Nonstormwater
discharges contain contaminants and supply additional flows to the
Town's storm drain system. Nonstormwater discharges are major
causes of:
Impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams,
rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
(1)
(2) Contamination of drinking water supplies;
(3) Alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and
(4) Flooding.
A.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm
drain system is necessary for the protection of the Town's natural
resources, municipal facilities, general public health and safety, and the
environment.
B.
The objects of this bylaw are:
To prevent pollutants from entering the municipal storm drain
system;
(1)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
storm drain system;
(2)
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(4)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this bylaw through inspection, monitoring and
enforcement.
(5)
C.
§ 170-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-17
1:111
DETENTION — The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater
management facility, with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DEVELOPMENT — The modification of land to accommodate a new use or
expansion of use, usually involving construction.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into waters of the United States or commonwealth from any source.
GRADING — Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system,
including without limitation, sewage, process wastewater, or wash water
and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of
whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted or approved
before the effective date of this bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted in § 170-19 of this Lancaster Illicit Discharge Bylaw. The term
does not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES stormwater
discharge permit or resulting from fire fighting activities that are exempted.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM
SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Lancaster.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the storm drain not
comprised entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and
any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or may be
discharged.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes and solvents;
§ 170-17 LANCASTER CODE § 170-17
1:112
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
SITE — A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading
work is performed as a single unified operation.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water, including but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, rivers and streams.
§ 170-18. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and
pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR
122.34 and as authorized by the residents of the Town of Lancaster at Town
Meeting, dated October 15, 2007.
§ 170-19. Jurisdiction.
B. Oil, antifreeze and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Prohibited activities shall include, but not be limited to:
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge into the
municipal storm drain system, into a watercourse, or into waters of
the United States and/or commonwealth.
(1)
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain
or continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain
system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of
connection.
(2)
A.
§ 170-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-19
1:113
Obstruction of the municipal storm drain system. No person shall
obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out
of the municipal storm drain system without prior approval from
the Stormwater Authority.
(3)
Exempt activities. The following nonstormwater discharges or flows are
considered exempt from the prohibition of nonstormwater discharges,
provided that the source is not a significant contributor of pollution to
the municipal storm drain system:
(1) Waterline flushing;
(2) Flow from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flow;
(6) Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(7)
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or
air-conditioning condensation; also water from sump pumps and
other pumps that remove uncontaminated floodwaters from
basements (NOTE: Sump pumps that connect to the municipal
storm drain system must file an application with the Board of Public
Works);
(8)
(9) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(10)Water from individual residential car washing;
Water from individual residences used for washing walkways,
patios, house siding, windows, or similar house-related activities;
(11)
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine) provided the water is allowed to stand for one week
prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to
cause a nuisance;
(12)
Dye testing, providing verbal notification is given to the Board of
Public Works prior to the time of the test;
(13)
Nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided
that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations;
(14)
B.
§ 170-19 LANCASTER CODE § 170-19
1:114
§ 170-20. Administration.
The Lancaster Board of Public Works shall administer, implement and
enforce this bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board
of Public Works may be delegated in writing by the Board of Public Works
to its employees or agents.
§ 170-21. Regulations.
The Board of Public Works may adopt and periodically amend regulations
relating to additional definitions, enforcement, fees (including inspections,
costs of chemical and/or biological analyses, and/or consultant fees),
procedures, administration and enforcement of this bylaw subsequent to
a majority vote of a meeting of the Board of Public Works and after
conducting a public hearing to receive comments on the proposed
regulations and/or any proposed revisions. Such hearing dates shall be
advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation at least seven
calendar days before a hearing date. After public notice and hearing, the
Board of Public Works may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate
the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the Board of Public Works to
promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating this bylaw.
§ 170-22. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The Board of Public Works may suspend municipal storm drain access to
any person or property without prior written notice when such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that
presents imminent risk of harm to public health, safety, welfare or the
environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency
suspension order, the Authority may take all reasonable steps to prevent or
minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
§ 170-23. Notification of spills.
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the Stormwater Authority as necessary to protect public health,
safety, welfare and the environment;
(15)
(16)Discharge resulting from municipal street sweeping activities; and
Any other source of nonstormwater discharges or flows that has
applied for, and received, a written determination from the Board
of Public Works that the source is not likely to be a significant
contributor of pollution to the municipal storm drain system.
(17)
Special exemptions.
(1) Discharge or flow resulting from fire-fighting activities.
Discharge or flow resulting from municipal ice and snow control
operations.
(2)
C.
§ 170-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:115
§ 170-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Board of Public Works, or an authorized agent of the Board of Public
Works, shall enforce this bylaw, its regulations, orders, violation notices,
and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for
such violations.
Any spills or releases that require notification under local, state or
federal law will be the responsibility of the person responsible for a
facility or operation, or for an emergency response for a facility or
operation (i.e., construction). In the event of a spill or release which
may result in a discharge of pollutants or nonstormwater discharge to
the municipal storm drain system, waters of the United States and/
or waters of the commonwealth, the responsible parties, potentially
responsible parties or any person or persons managing a site or facility
shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and remediate
any municipal storm drains that have been impacted. However, if in
the opinion of the Board of Public Works there is an excessive amount
of pollutants in the storm drain system, the Authority can require
remediation by the responsible party, regardless of other state or
federal regulations.
A.
In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall
immediately notify the Municipal Fire and Police Departments and the
Department of Public Works. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
material, the reporting person shall notify the Board of Public Works no
later than the next business day. The reporting person shall provide the
Board of Public Works written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile
or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter. If the
discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial
facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on site
a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
B.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, regulations,
permit, notice or order issued thereunder, the Board of Public Works
may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
A.
Orders.
The Board of Public Works, or an authorized agent of the Board of
Public Works, may issue a written order to enforce the provisions
of this bylaw, which may include:
Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the storm
drain system;
(a)
(b) Performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(1)
B.
§ 170-23 LANCASTER CODE § 170-24
1:116
§ 170-25. Public education.
The Board of Public Works, within its available resources, shall provide
educational programs on illicit discharge to the municipal storm drain
system to the general public and persons regulated by this bylaw.
That unlawful discharges, practices or operations shall cease
and desist; and
(c)
(d) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of contaminations is required and is the responsibility of the
property owner, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such
abatement or remediation must be completed.
(2)
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than the amount set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster. Each
day or part thereunder that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
C.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, which has been adopted by
the Town in the Code of the Town of Lancaster Chapter 1, Article
I, Noncriminal Disposition, in which case the Board of Public Works
or authorized agent shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for
each violation shall be fines in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Town Code. Each day or
part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 13]
D.
Entry to perform duties under this bylaw. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the Board of Public Works, its agents, officers and employees
may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing
their duties and may make or cause to be made such examinations,
surveys or sampling as the Board of Public Works deems reasonably
necessary.
E.
Appeals. The decision or orders of the Board of Public Works shall be
final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local
law.
G.
§ 170-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26
1:117
§ 170-26. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this bylaw is held invalid
for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 170-27. Transitional provisions.
Residential property owners shall have 60 days from the effective date of
the bylaw to comply with its provisions provided good cause is shown for
the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period.
§ 170-28. When effective.
This bylaw shall take effect upon approval of the Attorney General, and after
the bylaw has been posted, in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 32.
§ 170-26 LANCASTER CODE § 170-28
1:118
Chapter 180
TOWN MEETINGS AND ELECTIONS
§ 170-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28
1:119

ARTICLE I
Dates; Hours; Notices; Voting
[Adoped 5-19-1997 ATM by Art. 26; amended 6-3-2002 ATM by Art.
12; 5-3-2004 ATM by Art. 16]
§ 180-1. Annual Town Meeting date.
The Annual Town Meeting for the transaction of business shall be held on
the evening of the first Monday in May and may commence no earlier than
7:00 p.m.
§ 180-2. Postponement of ATM.
The Annual Town Meeting may, by a two-thirds vote of the Select Board, be
postponed to a later date; however, the transaction of the Town's business
must be completed no later than June 30.
§ 180-3. Notice of meetings.
The Select Board shall give notice of all Town Meetings by posting attested
copies of the Warrant at the Town Hall, Fifth Meeting House, Center Post
Office and South Lancaster Post Office at least seven days before an Annual
Town Meeting and 14 days before a Special Town Meeting and by publishing
in a newspaper of local circulation a summary of each Warrant article.
§ 180-4. Annual election of officers; poll hours.
The Annual Election of Town Officers shall be held on the second Monday
in May. The polls may open no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and remain open until
8:00 p.m. and shall be so stated in the Warrant calling the Annual Town
Election.
§ 180-5. Public declaration of vote. [Added 10-16-2006 STM by Art.
11]
When a two-thirds vote of Town Meeting is required by statute, the
Moderator shall make a public declaration of the vote and a count need not
be taken. If a vote, so declared, is immediately questioned by seven or more
voters, the Moderator shall verify the vote by calling for a standing vote.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-5
1:121

ARTICLE II
Moderator
[Adopted 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 19]
§ 180-6. Terms.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 41, § 2, and MGL c. 39, § 14, there is
established a three-year term for the Moderator beginning with the 2017
Annual Town Election.
§ 180-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-6
1:123
Chapter 186
TOWN OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 140.
§ 180-6 LANCASTER CODE § 180-6
1:124
ARTICLE I
Town Counsel
[Adopted 1942 ATM]
§ 186-1. Authority to employ.
The Select Board is authorized to employ counsel to represent the Town
when necessary in any legal matters affecting the interests of the Town.
§ 186-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-1
1:125

ARTICLE II
Collection of Taxes
[Adopted 2-8-1943 ATM by Art. 11]
§ 186-2. Turnover of collection to Treasurer.
The Tax Collector shall collect under the title of Town Collector all accounts
due the Town and shall turn over all amounts so collected to the Town
Treasurer at least once in every week receiving the Treasurer's receipt for
the same.
§ 186-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-2
1:127

ARTICLE III
Inspector of Wires
[Adopted 2-3-1950 ATM by Art. 15; amended through 5-2-2005 ATM
by Art. 16]
§ 186-3. Appointment; term.
The Building Commissioner or Inspector of Buildings shall appoint the
Inspector of Wires for a period of not less than one year and not more
than three years, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 166, § 32, as may be
amended from time to time.
§ 186-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-3
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Town Accountant
[Adopted 3-2-1970 ATM by Art. 41]
§ 186-4. Appointment; term.
The Select Board shall appoint the Town Accountant pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 41, § 55, as amended. The Town Accountant shall
serve in accordance with provisions of MGL c. 41, §§ 56 to 61, inclusive.
The term of the Town Accountant shall commence on April 1 of the year of
appointment.
§ 186-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-4
1:131

ARTICLE V
Disposition of Fees Collected by Town Officers
[Adopted 3-6-1972 ATM by Art. 39]
§ 186-5. Retention in treasury.
All Town officers shall pay into the Town Treasury all fees collected and
received by virtue of their office. All fees shall be retained in the Treasury
to defray Town expenses and not to be returned to the officer as payment in
any form. This shall apply to fees collected for the Town and does not apply
to a fee collected by a Town officer acting for a state or county agency, as
authorized by MGL c. 40, § 21(13).
§ 186-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-5
1:133

ARTICLE VI
Collector-Treasurer17
§ 186-6. Appointment; term; duties.
The Collector-Treasurer shall be appointed by the Select Board for a term
not to exceed three years and shall perform all the duties hereinbefore
performed by the Collector and the Treasurer.
17.Editor's Note: Chapter 77 of the Acts of 1994 established the combined position of
Collector-Treasurer. The full text of the act is as follows: "AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE
POSITION OF COLLECTOR-TREASURER OF THE TOWN OF LANCASTER — § I. The
position of collector-treasurer shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term not
to exceed three years and shall perform all the duties hereinbefore performed by the
collector and the treasurer of said Town — § II. This act shall take effect upon acceptance
by the voters of the Town of Lancaster." Approved by the Governor on 8-4-1994 and
accepted by the voters at a Special Election on 9-20-1994.
§ 186-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-6
1:135

ARTICLE VII
Constables
[Adopted 6-10-1996 ATM by Art. 21]
§ 186-7. Appointment.
The Select Board shall appoint Constables pursuant to prevailing General
Laws.18
18.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41, § 91 et seq.
§ 186-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-7
1:137

ARTICLE VIII
Town Clerk19
§ 186-8. Appointment; term.
The Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Select Board of said Town for a
term of three years and upon such other terms and conditions as the Select
Board shall determine.
19.Editor's Note: Chapter 97 of the Acts of 1997, An Act Providing for the Appointment of the
Town Clerk in the Town of Lancaster, was approved by the Governor on 9-17-1997 and
approved by Town voters on 5-11-1998.
§ 186-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-8
1:139
Chapter 205
VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
§ 205-1. Requirement to maintain.
The School Committee shall establish and maintain state-aided vocational
education.
Chapter 211
WATER
§ 186-8 LANCASTER CODE § 205-1
1:140
ARTICLE I
Outdoor Water Use
[Adopted 5-1-2006 ATM by Art. 21]
§ 211-1. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted by the Town under its police powers to protect public
health and welfare and its powers under MGL c. 40, § 21 et seq., and
implements the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to MGL c.
41, § 69B. This bylaw also implements the Town's authority under MGL c.
40, § 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued
by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (the "DEP").
§ 211-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the DEP.
§ 211-3. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation trust, partnership or association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the Town pursuant to § 211-4 of this bylaw.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the DEP under MGL c. 21G, §§ 15 to 17.
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — All public and private users of
the Town's public water system, irrespective of any person's responsibility
for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility.
§ 211-4. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
The Town, through its Board of Water Commissioners, may declare a state
of water supply conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of
the Board that a shortage of water exists and conservation measures are
appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers.
Public notice of a state of water conservation shall be given under § 211-6
of this bylaw before it may be enforced.
§ 211-5. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one
or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting
the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable
§ 211-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-5
1:141
restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public
notice required under § 211-6.
§ 211-6. Public notification of state of water supply conservation;
notification of DEP.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed
by the Town as part of a state of water supply conservation shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by such
other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water
of the state of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed under
§ 211-5 shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification
of the state of water supply conservation shall also be simultaneously
provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 211-7. Termination of state of water supply conservation; notice.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by a majority vote
of the Board of Water Commissioners, upon a determination that the water
supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of
a state of water supply conservation shall be given in the same manner
required by § 211-6.
§ 211-8. State of water supply emergency; compliance with DEP
orders.
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of
any order approved or issued by the Department intended to bring about an
end to the state of emergency.
§ 211-9. Enforcement.
Day of week outdoor water use. Outdoor watering by water users is
restricted to particular days of the week as specified by the Board and
stated in the declaration of a state of water supply conservation and
public notice thereof.
A.
B. Outdoor water use ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor water use hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, to be specified by the Board and stated in
the declaration of a state of water supply conservation and public notice
thereof.
C.
D. Filling swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic irrigation sprinkler
systems is prohibited.
E.
§ 211-5 LANCASTER CODE § 211-9
1:142
§ 211-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
This bylaw may be enforced by the Board of Water Commissioners or
its agents.
A.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by the
noncriminal disposition process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. If
noncriminal disposition is elected, then any person who violates any
provision of this bylaw shall be subject to fines under Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of
the Town of Lancaster, in the amounts set forth in Chapter 1, Article II,
Fines. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
B.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw may be penalized by
indictment or on complaint brought in the District Court. Except as
may be otherwise provided by law and as the District Court may see fit
to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense shall be
$300. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
C.
§ 211-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 211-10
1:143
Chapter 212
WATER WITHDRAWAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 17, Art.
V.
Water — See Ch. 211.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
§ 212-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect the water quality and volume
of water in the surface water bodies within the Town of Lancaster by
prohibiting the withdrawal of water from surface water bodies for private
commercial use through pumping or other means. The bylaw is intended to
prevent changes in the quality and volume of water due to the withdrawal
itself or due to the introduction of nutrients, chemicals, and plant materials
caused by contact between the withdrawal devices and the surface water
body.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw:
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, or trust, and its legal
representatives, agents, and assigns; but not including the commonwealth
or a political subdivision thereof, administrative agency, public or quasipublic
corporation or body, or the Town of Lancaster.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Any lakes, reservoirs, and ponds of any size, and
any rivers, streams, brooks and creeks, whether perennial or intermittent,
as are subject to the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission under the
Lancaster Wetlands Protection Bylaw.20
WITHDRAWAL or WITHDRAWAL OF WATER — The removal or taking of
water from a surface water body.
§ 212-3. Withdrawal of water prohibited; exceptions.
Except as provided hereafter in Subsection B, no person shall withdraw
water from a surface water body in the Town by means of pumps, hoses,
pipes, or other devices or means.
A.
This bylaw shall not apply to withdrawals of water from a surface water
body in the Town for the following purposes and uses:
B.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Wetlands Protection.
§ 211-10 LANCASTER CODE § 212-3
1:144
§ 212-4. Administration.
§ 212-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Use in agriculture, as defined by MGL c. 128, § 1A, on property
adjacent to the surface water body from which the withdrawal
is made, including work performed for normal maintenance or
improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural use, as defined
by the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations found at 310 CMR
10.04, "Agriculture."
(1)
Firefighting, flood control, or any other use undertaken for public
safety purposes.
(2)
Water supply uses that are permitted and regulated by the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Water
Management Act, MGL c. 21G, and its regulations.
(3)
Use by the owner of property that is adjacent to the surface water
body from which the withdrawal is made.
(4)
The Lancaster Conservation Commission shall administer, implement
and enforce this bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon
the Conservation Commission may be delegated, in writing, by the
Conservation Commission to its employees or agents.
A.
After public notice and hearing, the Conservation Commission may
promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
bylaw. Failure by the Conservation Commission to promulgate such
rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or
invalidating this bylaw.
B.
The Conservation Commission, or an authorized agent of the
Conservation Commission, shall enforce this bylaw and any regulations,
and may for that purpose issue a written order to enforce the provisions
of this bylaw or pursue any available civil and criminal remedies.
A.
If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, regulations, notice
or order issued thereunder, the Conservation Commission may seek
injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations.
B.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, regulations, notice
or order issued thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $300. Each day or part thereunder that such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town may
elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL
c. 40, § 21D, which has been adopted by the Town in the Code of the
Town of Lancaster, Chapter 1, § 1-1, Enforcement option, in which case
the Conservation Commission, its authorized agent, or a police officer
D.
§ 212-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-5
1:145
§ 212-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
Chapter 215
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 17, Art.
V.
Boats and boating — See Ch. 23.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 301.
Wetlands protection rules and
regulations — See Ch. 306.
§ 215-1. Purpose.
shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for each violation shall be
$300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
The remedies listed are not exclusive of any other remedies available
under any applicable federal, state or Town law or regulation.
E.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect the wetlands, wildlife, water
resources, flood-prone areas, and adjoining upland areas in the Town
of Lancaster by controlling activities deemed by the Conservation
Commission likely to have a significant or cumulative effect on resource
area values, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Public or private water supply;
(2) Groundwater supply;
(3) Flood control;
(4) Erosion and sedimentation control;
(5) Storm damage prevention;
(6) Water quality;
(7) Prevention and control of pollution;
(8) Fisheries;
(9) Forests;
(10)Wildlife habitat;
A.
§ 212-5 LANCASTER CODE § 215-1
1:146
§ 215-2. Jurisdiction.
Rare or threatened species habitat, whether plant or animal
(according to the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species
Program);
(11)
(12)Vernal pools;
(13)Agriculture;
(14)Aquaculture; and
(15)Recreational values.
This bylaw is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of this
municipality so as to protect the resource areas under the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40; the "Act") to a greater degree, to
protect additional resource areas beyond the Act recognized by the
Town as significant, to protect all resource areas for their additional
values beyond those recognized in the Act, and to impose in local
regulations and permits additional standards and procedures stricter
than those of the Act and Regulations thereunder (310 CMR 10.00),
subject, however, to the rights and benefits accorded to agricultural
uses and structures of all kinds under the laws of the commonwealth
and other relevant bylaws of the Town of Lancaster.
B.
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission, no person shall
commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into,
or otherwise alter the following resource areas:
(1) Any wetlands;
(2) Marshes;
(3) Wet meadows;
(4) Bogs;
(5) Swamps;
(6) Vernal pools;
(7) Springs;
(8) Banks;
(9) Reservoirs;
(10)Lakes;
(11)Ponds of any size;
(12)Lands under water bodies;
A.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-2
1:147
§ 215-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw:
AGRICULTURE — Refers to the definition as provided by MGL c. 128, § 1A.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this
bylaw:
Lands adjoining these resources out to a distance of 100 feet,
known as the buffer zone;
(13)
(14)Rivers;
(15)Streams, brooks and creeks, whether perennial or intermittent;
Lands adjoining these resource areas out to a distance of 200 feet,
known as the riverfront area;
(16)
Lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface
water;
(17)
Floodplain Overlay District (as established in Chapter 220, Zoning,
of the Code of the Town of Lancaster); and
(18)
(19)Twenty-five-foot no-build or no-alteration zone.
The jurisdiction of this bylaw shall not extend to uses and structures of
agriculture that enjoy the rights and privileges of laws and regulations
of the commonwealth governing agriculture, including work performed
for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural or
aquacultural uses as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act
Regulations found at 310 CMR 10.04.
B.
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate
materials of any kind;
A.
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns or flood retention characteristics;
B.
C. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade
water quality;
D.
E. Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation;
Driving of piles and erection, expansion or repair of buildings or
structures of any kind;
F.
G. Placing of obstructions or objects in water;
§ 215-2 LANCASTER CODE § 215-3
1:148
BANK — Includes the land area which normally abuts and confines a water
body; the lower boundary being the mean annual low-flow level, and the
upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope or the mean
annual flood level, whichever is higher.
BUFFER ZONE — Includes twenty-five-foot no-build or no-alteration area
surrounding any type of wetland or vernal pool. It shall also include all lands
within 100 feet of a wetland or floodplain resource area, and within 200 feet
of a riverfront area, whether perennial or intermittent.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Includes a body of water, including brooks and
creeks, which moves in a definite channel due to a hydraulic gradient, and
which flows within, into or out of areas subject to protection under the
Wetlands Protection Act.21 An intermittent stream, or ephemeral stream,
does not flow year round. It may flow in all seasons except during the driest
summer months, or only after precipitation, or when groundwater levels
or water from snowmelt are high. An ephemeral stream may have a fish
population.
PERENNIAL STREAM — Includes a body of water, including brooks and
creeks, which moves in a definite channel due to a hydraulic gradient, and
which flows within, into or out of areas subject to protection under the
Wetlands Protection Act. A perennial stream flows all year, except during
periods of drought, or unless it is subject to withdrawals or controlled by
dams or other restricting structures.
PERSON — Include any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to
Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or
body, this municipality, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives,
agents, or assigns.
POND — Follow the definition of 310 CMR 10.04 except that the size
threshold of 5,000 square feet shall apply.
RARE SPECIES — Includes, without limitation, all vertebrate and
invertebrate animals and all plant species listed as endangered, threatened,
or of special concern by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
and the National Heritage Endangered Species Program (NHESP),
Destruction of plant life, including cutting or trimming of trees and
shrubs;
H.
Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical,
biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters;
I.
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to contribute
to pollution of any body of water or groundwater;
J.
Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative adverse
impact on the resource areas protected by this bylaw.
K.
21.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:149
regardless whether the site in which they occur has been previously
identified by the Division or Program.
VERNAL POOL — Includes, in addition to scientific definitions found in
the regulations under the Wetlands Protection Act, any confined basin or
depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, landscaped areas or
driveways which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of
two continuous months during the spring and/or summer, contains at least
200 cubic feet of water at some time during most years, is free of adult
predatory fish populations, and provides essential breeding and rearing
habitat functions for amphibian, reptile or other vernal pool community
species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of the
resource area for vernal pools shall be 100 feet outward from the mean
annual high-water line defining the depression, but shall not include
existing lawns, gardens, landscaped or developed areas.
§ 215-4. Presumptions.
§ 215-5. Exemptions and exceptions.
Buffer zones are presumed significant to the protection of wetland
resources and interests because activities undertaken in close
proximity to resource areas have a high likelihood of adverse impact
upon the wetland or other resources, either immediately, as a
consequence of construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily
operations or maintenance of such activities. Such adverse impacts
from construction and use include, without limitation, erosion, siltation,
loss of groundwater recharge, degradation of water quality and loss of
wildlife habitat.
A.
Vernal pools are presumed to provide essential breeding and rearing
habitat functions, which in the case of any seasonal wetland, may
not been certified as a vernal pool by the state. It may be that the
depression or area does not provide the habitat functions specified for
identification of noncertified vernal pools.
B.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
alteration of any residential, business or institutional building or
customary appurtenance thereto, such as lawns, gardens, landscaped
or other developed areas, where such structure or appurtenance
existed prior to the effective date of this bylaw, shall not be subject to
this bylaw but shall be regulated exclusively by the provisions of MGL
c. 131, § 40 (the Wetlands Protection Act).
A.
The applications and permits required by this bylaw shall not be
required for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement
of land in agricultural and aquacultural use as defined by the Wetlands
Protection Act Regulations at 310 CMR 10.04.
B.
§ 215-3 LANCASTER CODE § 215-5
1:150
§ 215-6. Permits and conditions.
The applications and permits required by this bylaw shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially
changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or
facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water,
telephone, telegraph, or other telecommunications services, provided
that written notice has been given to the Conservation Commission
prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms
to any performance standards and design specifications in regulations
adopted by the Commission.
C.
The applications and permits required by this bylaw shall not be
required for emergency projects necessary for the protection of the
health and safety of the public, provided that the work is to be
performed by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of
the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; provided that
advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission prior
to commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement;
provided that the Commission or its agent certifies the work as an
emergency project; provided that the work is performed only for the
time and place certified by the Commission for the limited purposes
necessary to abate the emergency; and provided that within 21 days of
commencement of an emergency project a permit application shall be
filed with the Commission for review as provided by this bylaw. Upon
failure to meet these and other requirements of the Commission, the
Commission may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify
an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation
measures.
D.
Other than stated in this bylaw, the exceptions provided in the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00)
shall not apply under this bylaw.
E.
If the Conservation Commission, after a public hearing, determines
that the activities which are subject to the permit application, or the
land and water uses which will result therefrom, are likely to have a
significant individual or cumulative effect on the resource area values
protected by this bylaw, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of
the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities requested.
The Commission shall take into account the extent to which the
applicant has avoided, minimized and mitigated any such effect. The
Commission also shall take into account any loss, degradation, isolation
and replacement or replication of such protected resource areas
elsewhere in the community and the watershed, resulting from past
activities, whether permitted, unpermitted or exempt, and foreseeable
future activities.
A.
If it issues a permit, the Commission may impose conditions which the
Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect said resource area
B.
§ 215-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:151
values, and all activities shall be conducted in accordance with those
conditions.
Where no conditions are adequate to protect said resource area values,
the Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this bylaw.
It may also deny a permit:
For failure to submit necessary information and plans
requested by the Commission;
(a)
For failure to comply with the procedures, design
specifications, performance standards, and other requirements
in regulations of the Commission; or
(b)
For failure to avoid, minimize or mitigate unacceptable
significant or cumulative effects upon the resource area values
protected by this bylaw.
(c)
(1)
Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship
on the applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public
hearing.
(2)
C.
The Commission may waive specifically identified and requested
procedures, design specifications, performance standards or other
requirements set forth in its regulations, provided that:
The Commission finds in writing after said public hearing that
there are no reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow
the proposed activity to proceed in compliance with said
regulations;
(1)
That avoidance, minimization and mitigation has been employed to
the maximum extent feasible; and
(2)
That the waiver is necessary to accommodate an overriding public
interest or to avoid a decision that so restricts the use of the
property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without
compensation.
(3)
D.
In reviewing activities within the one-hundred-foot buffer zone to a
wetland and the twenty-five-foot no-build or no-alteration zone, the
Commission shall presume these areas are important to the protection
of other resource areas because activities undertaken in close proximity
have a high likelihood of adverse impact, either immediately, as a
consequence of construction, or over time as a consequence of daily
operation or existence of the activities.
These adverse impacts from construction and use can include,
without limitation:
(a) Erosion;
(1)
E.
§ 215-6 LANCASTER CODE § 215-6
1:152
(b) Siltation;
(c) Contamination;
(d) Loss of groundwater recharge;
(e) Poor water quality; and
(f) Loss of wildlife habitat.
The Commission may establish in its regulations design
specifications, performance standards, other measures and
safeguards, and other work limits for protection of such lands,
including without limitation, strips of continuous, undisturbed
vegetative cover, unless the applicant convinces the Commission
that the area or part of it may be disturbed without harm to the
values protected by the bylaw.
(2)
In reviewing activities within the two-hundred-foot buffer zone to a
riverfront, the Commission shall presume the riverfront area is
important to all the resource area values unless demonstrated
otherwise, and no permit issued hereunder shall permit any activities
unless the applicant, in addition to meeting the otherwise applicable
requirements of this bylaw, has proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that 1) there is no practicable alternative to the proposed
project with less adverse effects, and that 2) such activities, including
proposed mitigation measures, will have no significant adverse impact
on the areas or values protected by this bylaw. The Commission shall
regard as practicable an alternative which is reasonably available and
capable of being done, after taking into consideration the proposed
property use, the overall project purpose (e.g., residential, institutional,
commercial, or industrial), logistics, existing technology, costs of the
alternatives and overall project costs.
F.
To prevent resource area loss, the Commission shall require applicants
to avoid alteration wherever feasible, to minimize alteration, and where
alteration is unavoidable and has been minimized to provide full
mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication of
wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans,
professional design, proper safeguards, adequate security, and
professional monitoring and reporting to assure success, because of the
poor performance of earlier replication technologies.
G.
The Commission may require a wildlife habitat study of the project
area, to be paid for by the applicant, whenever it deems appropriate,
regardless the type of resource area or the amount or type of alteration
proposed. The decision shall be based upon the Commission's
estimation of the importance of the habitat area considering, but not
limited to, such factors as proximity to other areas suitable for wildlife,
importance of wildlife corridors in the area, or actual or possible
presence of rare plant or animal species in the area. The work shall
be performed by an individual who at least meets the qualifications
H.
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:153
set out in the wildlife habitat section of the Wetlands Protection Act
Regulations (310 CMR 10.60).
The Commission shall presume that all areas meeting the definition of
vernal pools, including the adjacent wetland buffer zone and twentyfive-
foot no-build or no-alteration zones, perform essential habitat
functions. This presumption may be overcome only by the presentation
of credible evidence which, in the judgment of the Commission,
demonstrates that the basin or depression does not provide essential
habitat functions. Any formal evaluation should be performed by an
individual who at least meets the qualifications under the wildlife
habitat section of the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR
10.60). The Commission holds the right to assign its own consultant for
review.
I.
A permit, determination of applicability (DOA) or order of resource area
delineation (ORAD) shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission, in its discretion, may issue
a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for recurring
or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of
time and location of work is given to the Commission. Any permit
may be renewed once for an additional one-year period, provided that
a request for a renewal is received in writing by the Commission
prior to expiration. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may identify
requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of years,
indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place, and shall apply to
all present and future owners of the land.
J.
For good cause, the Commission may revoke any permit, DOA, ORAD
or any other order, determination or other decision issued under this
bylaw after notice to the holder, the public, abutters within 300 feet,
and Town boards (Select Board, Planning Board, Board of Appeals,
Board of Health, and Building Commissioner), and after a public
hearing. Amendments to any permits, DOA or ORAD shall be handled
in the manner set out in the Wetlands Protections Act Regulations and
policies thereunder.
K.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine the decision
issued under this bylaw with the order of conditions, determination
of applicability, order of resource area delineation or certificate of
compliance issued under the Wetlands Protection Act and Regulations.
L.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the
permit, DOA or ORAD issued by the Commission, with respect to such
work, has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected
is registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the
district wherein the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies
in writing to the Commission that the document has been recorded.
If the applicant fails to perform such recording, the Commission may
record the documents itself and require the applicant to furnish the
recording fee therefor, either at the time of recording or as a condition
M.
§ 215-6 LANCASTER CODE § 215-6
1:154
§ 215-7. Regulations.
§ 215-8. Relation to statute.
This bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of
the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and Regulations (310 CMR
10.00) thereunder. It is the intention of this bylaw that the purposes,
jurisdiction, authority, exemptions, regulations, specifications, standards
and other requirements shall be interpreted and administered as stricter
than those under the Wetlands Protection Act and Regulations.
§ 215-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit,
approval or determination which previously has been issued.
§ 215-10. Transitional provisions.
Applicants that have filed an application (notice of intent, request for
determination of applicability, or abbreviated notice of resource area
delineation) prior to the effective date of this bylaw shall not be subject
to this bylaw, but shall be regulated exclusively by the provisions of the
Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40).
§ 215-11. Effective date.
This bylaw shall take effect upon approval of the Attorney General, and after
the bylaw has been posted, in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 32.
precedent to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, or issue a
cease work order until evidence of such recording is received by the
Commission.
After public notice and public hearing, the Conservation Commission
shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of
this bylaw, effective when voted and filed with the Town Clerk. Failure
by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
A.
At a minimum the regulations shall reiterate the terms defined in this
bylaw, define additional terms not inconsistent with the bylaw, and
impose filing and consultant fees.
B.
§ 215-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-11
1:155
Chapter 220
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 17, Art. IV.
Community development and planning — See
Ch. 55.
Farm preservation — See Ch. 66.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
Subdivision rules and regulations — See Ch.
301.
Board of Appeals regulations — See Ch. 302.
Stormwater management rules and
regulations — See Ch. 305.
Wetlands protection rules and
regulations — See Ch. 306.
§ 215-11 LANCASTER CODE § 215-11
1:156
ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Terminology
§ 220-1. Purpose.
§ 220-2. Validity. [Amended 10-24-2000]
§ 220-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings listed below unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A second dwelling unit subordinate in size
to a preexisting single-family dwelling unit on the lot and having separate
cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities, located either in the principal
building or in an existing accessory structure.[Added 5-5-2008 ATM by
Art. 17]
The purpose of this bylaw is declared to be the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience and welfare, by:
(1) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land;
(2) Preventing overcrowding of land;
(3) Conserving the value of land and buildings;
(4) Minimizing traffic hazards and congestion;
(5) Preventing undue concentration of population;
(6) Providing for adequate light, air, and sanitation;
(7) Reducing hazards from fire, flood, and other dangers;
Assisting in the economical provision, utilization and expansion of
transportation, water, sewerage systems, schools, parks, and other
public facilities;
(8)
Enhancing the natural, man-made and historical amenities of the
Town.
(9)
A.
This bylaw is based upon and is intended to implement the
Comprehensive Plan of Lancaster as prepared and revised by the
Lancaster Planning Board.
B.
Date of adoption and effective dates. Zoning was originally adopted in
Lancaster on February 13, 1950, and has been amended from time to
time since then. Amendments after January 1, 1976, are effective upon
the date of adoption by Town Meeting in accordance with MGL c. 40A,
§ 5.
A.
Separability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall
not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
B.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:157
ACCESSORY USE — An activity incidental to, functionally dependent on,
and located on the same premises as a principal use conducted by the same
person or his agent.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A freestanding building exclusively for
residential use, with three or more apartment units.
APARTMENT UNIT — Any room or suite of rooms comprising one complete
housekeeping unit, with its own cooking and food storage equipment and
facilities and its own bathing and toilet facilities wholly within such room or
suite of rooms.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the
mean finished grade of the ground adjoining a building or structure to the
highest point of the roof (or parapet) for flat or shed roofs, to the deck line
for mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.[Added 10-24-2000]
CAMP TRAILER — A vehicle, or trailer to a vehicle, designed as a temporary
shelter for travel or recreational use.
CONSTRUCTION FIELD OFFICE — A structure, mobile home, truck trailer
or similar vehicle used as an office for construction on the same site.[Added
5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Premises used by a building contractor or
subcontractor for the storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies,
and parking of wheeled or tracked equipment in support of
construction on one or more other sites, with or without an office on the
premises.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
DAY CAMP — Premises offering a continuing supervised recreational,
health, educational, religious, and/or athletic program, and without
overnight accommodations.[Added 3-3-1998]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units, whether for rental, condominium ownership, or other form of
tenure.[Added 10-24-2000]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing only one
single-dwelling unit other than an accessory apartment, and attached to no
other residential structure.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling containing two dwelling units,
which may be two attached dwelling units.[Added 10-24-2000; amended
5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms in a dwelling designed and
equipped, including cooking facilities, for one family to occupy as a yearround
residence.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit, who are living together as a bona fide, stable
and committed living unit, being a traditional family unit or the functional
equivalent thereof, exhibiting the generic character of a traditional
family[Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14]
§ 220-3 LANCASTER CODE § 220-3
1:158
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river and the adjacent land areas that
are subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given
year (i.e., the "one-hundred-year flood"). Development in these land areas
is regulated to prevent increases in the water surface elevation associated
with the one-hundred-year flood. The regulatory floodway, as determined
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, is delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps described in § 220-25.[Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by
Art. 14]
FRONTAGE — A front lot line qualified under § 220-10B to be measured
continuously between side lot lines or, for corner lots, between one side lot
line and the midpoint of the corner radius.[Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by
Art. 14]
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of all floors of a building as
measured from the exterior dimensions, but not including storage cellars,
unused attics, unenclosed porches, garages or areas occupied by heating
and ventilating equipment.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The gross floor area less area for corridors,
courts, service areas, storage and office space.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — As defined in the State Department of Public
Health's Minimum Standards of Fitness for Human Habitation; in brief,
those heated areas used daily for living, eating, cooking and sleeping but
excluding garages, circulation areas, storage areas, etc.
HEALTH AND FITNESS CENTER — Facilities for the development and
maintenance of physical fitness and well-being. Possible activities include
but are not limited to the use of indoor/outdoor swimming pools, indoor/
outdoor physical sporting activities including hand and racquet sports,
physical training and education, health spas, physical and rehabilitative
therapy, and medical offices ancillary to the above. Not included is any
form of motorized vehicular recreational or therapeutic activity.[Added
3-3-1998]
ILLUMINATION, DIRECT — Continuous light, not varied in intensity or
color, from a source of artificial light within a translucent sign.
ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT — Continuous white light arranged to shine
onto an area or a sign from a source not visible from any street line nor from
any structure on an adjacent lot.
IMPERVIOUS — Impenetrable by surface water, or having a percolation
rate greater than 30 minutes per inch.
JUNKYARD — The use of any part of a lot, except as specifically permitted in
§ 220-8, for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or scrap material,
or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other
unlicensed vehicles not in running condition, or machinery or parts thereof.
LIVING FACILITY FOR SENIORS — Facility licensed as an assisted living
residence or continuing care retirement community, or another dwelling
whose occupancy is limited to households having at least one member 55 or
more years of age.[Added 10-24-2000]
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:159
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — Facility licensed as a nursing home,
convalescent home, rehabilitation facility, extended care facility, or
intermediate care facility.[Added 10-24-2000]
LOT — A single area of land in one ownership defined by metes and bounds
or boundary lines or a deed recorded in the Registry of Deeds, Worcester
County, or drawn on a plan approved under the Subdivision Control Law,22
or on a plan endorsed by the Planning Board stating "Approval not required
under the Subdivision Control Law," or word of similar import.23
LOT LINE, FRONT — A property line dividing a lot from a street or way.
On lots abutting more than one street, the front lot line shall be that so
designated by a permit applicant or, if not, as designated by the Building
Inspector.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
LOT LINE, SIDE — A property line which connects a front lot line and
another side lot line or a rear lot line.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
MEDICAL CLINIC — An institution or facility providing medical, surgical,
dental, restorative or mental hygiene services to persons not
accommodated overnight therein, under license as a clinic under
Massachusetts General Laws, whether or not affiliated with a hospital or
other health care facility.[Added 10-24-2000]
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable housing unit for year-round living,
built on a chassis and originally designed to be independent of a permanent
foundation, whether or not subsequently connected to a foundation or
utilities.
SCREEN — A substantial, opaque fence at least six feet high, or a solid,
year-round, evergreen hedge which will grow to six feet within three years,
or the equivalent, and maintained in good condition. A strip of dense
vegetation of shrubs and trees not less than 20 feet deep may be considered
an equivalent.
SEASONAL COTTAGE — A building intended for vacation occupancy only,
not occupied for more than six months in the aggregate during any one year
and not meeting the definition of "dwelling" above, but conforming to all
health and safety standards of the Town.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of not less than 15 units serving the
general retail trade and including retail sales and service stores, shops,
banks, indoor theaters, restaurants and similar establishments, planned and
designed as a single unit, and having a gross leasable area of not less than
100,000 square feet, with immediately adjoining off-street parking facilities.
SIGN —
Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on
the premises on which the device is located.
A.
22.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
23.Editor's Note: The former definition of "major residential development," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14.
§ 220-3 LANCASTER CODE § 220-3
1:160
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented
rectangle which could enclose all the display area of the sign, together
with any backing different in color or material from the finish material of
the building face, without deduction for open space or other irregularities.
Structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included
unless internally or decoratively lighted. Only one side of flat, back-to-back
signs need be included in calculating sign area.
STORAGE CONTAINER OR VEHICLE — A freestanding lockable container
or a mobile home, truck trailer, or similar vehicle having in all cases
no plumbing fixtures, used principally for storage of goods, materials, or
personal property at that location as either a principal or accessory use of
the premises.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
STREET — A public way or a private way open to travel by the general
public, determined by the Planning Board to meet the standards of access
adequacy, as established in § 301-6 of Chapter 301, Subdivision of Land,24
of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.[Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall,
tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, mast for radio
antenna or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the
context allows, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS —
The following, however, shall not be considered signs within the context
of this bylaw:
Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion;
(1)
Legal notices, or informational devices erected or required by
public agencies;
(2)
Standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form
the name, type, and price of gasoline;
(3)
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts, or parts internally illuminated or
decorated with gaseous tube or other lights;
(4)
On-premises devices guiding and directing traffic and parking, not
exceeding two square feet in area, and bearing no advertising
matter;
(5)
On awnings or similar devices, lettering not exceeding three inches
in height, or symbols not exceeding four square feet in area.
(6)
B.
A product, waste, or combination of substances which because of
quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical or infectious
A.
24.Editor's Note: Chapter 301 is entitled "Subdivision Rules and Regulations."
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:161
YARD — An area open to the sky, located between a property line and
any structure or element thereof other than a fence, wall, foundation or
projection allowed to encroach on building lines by the State Building Code,
unless otherwise provided in this bylaw.[Added 10-24-2000]
YARD, FRONT — A yard abutting the street line on each street the lot
adjoins, measured perpendicular to a line connecting the foremost points of
the side lot lines.[Amended 10-24-2000; 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
YARD, REAR — A yard abutting a rear property line, which typically is a line
or set of lines approximately parallel to the street frontage, and separating
lots whose frontage is established on different streets. Yards on irregularly
shaped lots where "side" versus "rear" is indeterminate shall be construed
as rear yards.[Amended 10-24-2000]
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending between front and rear yards and abutting
a side property line, which typically is a line or set of lines which intersect a
street line, separating lots whose frontage is established on the same street.
Corner lots commonly have two side yards and no rear yard.[Amended
10-24-2000]
characteristics, poses a substantial hazard to human health or safety if
improperly treated, stored, transported, used, disposed of, or otherwise
managed. Among others, any substance regulated as a hazardous waste
under MGL c. 21C, as amended, shall be considered a toxic or
hazardous material for the purposes of this bylaw.
Substances listed on the Massachusetts Substance List contained in
105 CMR 670.000, Appendix A, substances regulated as hazardous
wastes under MGL c. 21C, as amended, and regulated substances
defined under Subtitle 1, § 9001 of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, as amended.25
B.
25.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
§ 220-3 LANCASTER CODE § 220-3
1:162
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 220-4. Establishment of districts. [Amended 5-5-2003; 5-5-2008
ATM by Art. 14; 5-4-2009 ATM by Art. 12; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12;
5-5-2014 ATM by Arts. 14, 17; 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 17]
For the purposes of this bylaw, the Town of Lancaster is hereby divided into
zoning districts as follows:
Abbreviation Name of District
R Residential
NB Neighborhood Business
EZ
EZ-A
Enterprise
Enterprise Retail Subdistrict A
(The requirements of the EZ district apply to the EZA
subdistrict unless otherwise noted.)
LI Light Industry
LI2 Light Industry 2
GI General Industry
F Floodplain (overlays all other districts: see Article
VII)
WR Water Resource (overlays other districts: see
§ 220-39)
PWSOD Personal Wireless Service Overlay District (see
Article XI)
IPOD Integrated Planning Overlay District
MMOD Medical Marijuana Overlay District
SOD Solar Overlay District
§ 220-5. Zoning Map. [Amended 10-24-2000; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
14]
Basic District Map. The boundaries of the R, NB, EZ (including EZA),
LI, LI2 and GI Zoning Districts are defined and bounded on a map
originally dated December 15, 1990, entitled "Zoning Map, Lancaster,
Massachusetts," as amended from time to time by Town Meeting vote,
which, together with all boundaries, notations and other data shown
thereon, is made part of this bylaw. That map, as amended, is on file in
the office of the Town Clerk.26 [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14;
5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12; 10-28-2013 STM by Art. 7]
A.
26.Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map and the Official Zoning Overlay Map are included
at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:163
§ 220-6. Interpretation of Zoning Map.
Overlay districts. The boundaries of the overlay districts are defined
and bounded as follows:27
The Floodplain District is defined on a series of Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and on the Zoning Overlay Map, as specified at 220
Attachment 3.
(1)
The Water Resource District is defined on the Zoning Overlay Map,
as specified at 220 Attachment 3.
(2)
The Personal Wireless Service Overlay District is defined at
§ 220-42 and on the Zoning Overlay Map, as specified at 220
Attachment 3.
(3)
The Integrated Planning Overlay District (IPOD) is defined on the
Integrated Planning Overlay District Map, as specified at 220
Attachment 4. [Added 5-4-2009 by ATM by Art. 13]
(4)
The Medical Marijuana Overlay District (MMOD) is defined on the
Official Zoning Overlay Map, as specified at 220 Attachment 3.
[Added 5-5-2014 by Art. 17]
(5)
The Solar Overlay District (SOD) is defined on the Official Zoning
Overlay Map, as specified at 220 Attachment 3. [Added 5-2-2016
ATM by Art. 17]
(6)
B.
Location of district lines. A district line drawn on the Zoning Map
generally on or parallel to a street, railroad, utility line or watercourse,
or on a lot line, shall, as relevant, be deemed to be 1) on the center line
of the right-of-way or watercourse, or 2) parallel to the center line as
the distance noted, or 3) on the lot line, as these existed on the date of
adoption of this bylaw.
A.
Lots crossed by a district line. Where the district line divides a lot in one
ownership at the date of adoption of this bylaw, or as of the effective
date of amendment to relevant district lines, the regulations applying
to the less restricted portion may be considered as extending not more
than 25 feet into the more restricted portion of the lot.
B.
Lots crossed by a Town line. When part of a lot in one ownership
lies outside the Town of Lancaster, the portion within Lancaster shall
conform to the use regulations of this bylaw. In applying dimensional
controls to that portion of the lot within Lancaster, the dimensions of
the whole lot shall be considered without reference to the Town line.
C.
Uncertainty of district lines. Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the
exact location of a boundary line, the Building Inspector shall consult
the Planning Board as provided in § 220-60B. The Building Inspector's
D.
27.Editor's Note: 220 Attachment 3 referred to in Subsection B is the Official Zoning Overlay
Map and is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-5 LANCASTER CODE § 220-6
1:164
decision may be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with
MGL c. 40A, § 8.
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:165

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 220-7. Applicability.
§ 220-8. Use Regulation Schedule. [Added 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14;
amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12; 5-5-2014 ATM by Arts. 14, 15,
17]
The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.1. Residential uses. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 17;
5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 11; 5-6-2013 ATM
by Arts. 12, 18; 10-28-2013 STM by Art. 7]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.2. Rural uses. [Added 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; amended
5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.3. Recreational and amusement uses. [Amended 5-5-2003;
5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.4. Public, health, educational and institutional uses. [Added
5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12;
5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 13]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
Designation in § 220-8. The symbols used in the Use Regulation
Schedule shall have the meanings set forth in the Key to the schedule,
which schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
A.
Prohibited uses. No building, structure or land may be used or prepared
for any use in a district where it is prohibited in § 220-8 unless it is a
legal nonconforming use (see § 220-52).
B.
Unlisted uses. No use which is not listed or described in § 220-8,
or expressly authorized under another section of this bylaw, shall be
allowed unless granted a special permit by the Board of Appeals upon
the Board's determination that the proposed use is similar in purpose
and operational characteristics to a use permitted or allowed on special
permit in the district.
C.
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8.5
1:167
§ 220-8.5. Retail, service and office uses. [Added 5-5-2008 ATM by
Art. 14; amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.6. Industrial uses. [Added 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14;
amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12; 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 17]
Principal and accessory uses are delineated in the Use Regulation Schedule,
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-8.7. Integrated Planning Overlay District (IPOD). [Added
5-4-2009 ATM by Art. 12]
Intent and applicability.
The intent of § 220-8.7, Integrated Planning Overlay District
(IPOD), is to provide design flexibility and efficiency in the siting
of development, services and infrastructure; conserve open space;
preserve the rural, historic character of the Town; provide for a
diversity of lot sizes, building densities and housing choices to
accommodate a variety of age and income groups; and to allow the
integration of land for residential, rural, recreational, community,
retail, service, commercial and industrial uses.
(1)
Integrated Planning Overlay Districts (IPODs) are created on the
Zoning Map by Town Meeting vote, just as for any zoning
amendment, except that they overlay rather than replace the
zoning districts being overlaid. Applicants for development within
the overlay district may choose between following the existing
provisions of the district(s) underlying the IPOD or to propose an
Integrated Plan and upon its approval to follow it and the IPOD
requirements set forth below.
(2)
A.
Basic use requirements.
Development under IPOD provisions requires special permit
approval of an Integrated Plan by the Planning Board for the
premises involved. The Planning Board must find that there is no
material impact to the neighborhood.
(1)
All proposed development within an approved Integrated Plan must
be consistent with that Plan unless the Integrated Plan special
permit is subsequently revised making the proposed development
consistent or excluding the location from the Plan.
(2)
(3) The minimum site area of an Integrated Plan shall be 10 acres.
An Integrated Plan may apply to more than a single lot or parcel so
long as the lots and parcels are contiguous and either in the same
(4)
B.
§ 220-8.5 LANCASTER CODE § 220-8.7
1:168
ownership or the application is jointly submitted by owners of each
lot or parcel that is included.
Any use allowed by right or allowable by special permit in at least
one of the underlying zoning districts within which the Integrated
Plan is located shall also be allowed by right or allowable by special
permit, as the case may be, at any location within that Integrated
Plan, including within underlying districts where such use is not
otherwise allowed, with the following exceptions:
Dwelling units are allowed by right within all Integrated Plans
without limitation on form of tenure or structure type,
including single-family, two-family or multifamily.
(a)
Retail, service, and office uses permitted or allowed by special
permit in the Enterprise District are allowed within an
Integrated Plan regardless of whether the Integrated Plan
includes any portion of the Enterprise or other district allowing
that use, provided that no enterprise allowed only by this
exception may exceed 35,000 gross square feet in floor area
unless the Planning Board, in acting on the Integrated Plan
special permit, finds that the use is functionally supportive
of or supported by other existing or planned uses within the
Integrated Plan, and in no event may the enterprise exceed
75,000 gross square feet in floor area or be contained within
a building that exceeds 75,000 gross square feet in floor area.
[Amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
(b)
Hotel, motel or inn, and commercial indoor amusement or
recreation place or place of assembly, are allowed by right
within all Integrated Plans.
(c)
Medium or heavy industrial uses not allowed in an Enterprise
District per § 220-9E(4) are expressly prohibited in the IPOD
Districts. [Amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
(d)
(5)
Residential uses shall comprise not less than 25% and not more
than 75% of the gross floor area planned within any Integrated
Plan.
(6)
Not less than 10% of the Integrated Plan area disturbed by
development shall be devoted to pedestrian walks or plazas and
landscaping, and not less than 20% of the land area of the
Integrated Plan shall be open space meeting the requirements of
§ 220-15C.
(7)
Design requirements.
The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board that the amount and mix of types of development, and the
travel demand management efforts such as car-pooling proposed
for the Integrated Plan, will result in generation of no more than
(1)
C.
§ 220-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8.7
1:169
20 auto trip ends per acre of Plan area. These trips ends should
be calculated during the weekday afternoon peak traffic hour, as
measured on the streets that provide access to the Plan area, net
of pass-by trips and adjusted for estimated non-auto trips, such as
walking among uses within the IPOD. [Amended 5-1-2017 ATM,
by Art. 12]
The allowed number of trip ends within the Integrated Plan may
be increased above 20 per acre by the number of potential trip
ends on other land within the IPOD that has been reduced below
the limit of 20 trip ends per acre, through a restriction enabled
by the developer(s) of the benefiting Integrated Plan, and made
enforceable by the Town through a condition in the Integrated Plan
special permit. [Amended 5-1-2017 ATM, by Art. 12]
(2)
The maximum number of allowable dwelling units within an
Integrated Plan shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre of
lot area, including lot area devoted to nonresidential uses, but
exclusive of streets. The Integrated Plan shall document how that
allowable total is to be distributed among lots within the Plan,
including documentation of the minimum lot area per dwelling unit
on each proposed lot, which may vary among locations within the
Plan. [Amended 5-1-2017 ATM, by Art. 12]
(3)
Rights to development of dwelling units may be transferred as
provided at § 220-15B(3), but if such transfer takes place among
lots within the IPOD then the approval criterion for such transfer
shall be that the transfer must be consistent with an approved
Concept Plan (§ 220-8.7C), instead of the criteria contained in
§ 220-15B(3).
(4)
There is no minimum lot area requirement for nonresidential uses,
unless such a requirement is called for in the approved Integrated
Plan.
(5)
Building height shall not exceed six stories or, if more restrictive,
70 feet unless in acting on the Integrated Plan special permit the
Planning Board determines that the proposed height is consistent
with the intent of IPOD zoning, is essential to the Integrated Plan
design, and will have no adverse effect on the surrounding
neighborhood, taking into consideration:
• Height relative to that of the tree crown on nearby land;
• Height of other existing or planned nearby structures;
• Distance from the Integrated Plan boundary;
• Appropriateness of any resulting building prominence in light
of the functional or symbolic role of the structure;
• Shadowing or loss of privacy on nearby properties, whether
or not within the Integrated Plan; and
(6)
§ 220-8.7 LANCASTER CODE § 220-8.7
1:170
• Whether the increased height is necessary for the building to
be developed;
Rooftop mechanical equipment and its height shall be shown on
special permit plan submittals, and shall be selected, located, and
if necessary screened in order to achieve harmonious integration
with the building design.
Yards abutting the perimeter of the Integrated Plan must comply
with the yard requirements applicable in the underlying basic
districts, except for the following:
No portion of a building having a building height in excess
of 35 feet shall be located closer to the perimeter of the
Integrated Plan than a distance equal to its height above mean
grade.
(a)
District boundary planting as specified at § 220-37F and G
of the Lancaster Zoning Bylaw shall be provided where
nonresidential uses in an Integrated Plan abut a residential
district, with a depth of not less than 100 feet.
(b)
(7)
Other dimensional standards shall be as provided in the approved
Integrated Plan pursuant to § 220-8.7C, rather than those stated
in Article IV, Dimensional Regulations, and may include measures
not otherwise used under Lancaster zoning, such as limits on the
allowed ratio of gross floor area to lot area ("floor area ratio" or
"FAR").
(8)
Parking.
The number of parking spaces for each use shall be as required
by § 220-23, Minimum number of spaces, or as may be
modified by special permit under that section.
(a)
Legal on-street parking spaces within the Overlay District and
adjacent to the premises of the use or uses that they could
serve may be included in satisfying the parking requirement.
(b)
Access to parking shall be shared with adjacent premises
whether in or adjacent to the Integrated Plan where feasible,
subject to the provisions of § 220-22, and shall be located so
as to minimize interruptions of pedestrian movement along
business-oriented streets.
(c)
(9)
A building or portion of a building with massing of more than 75
feet in length must be visually broken into smaller elements with
variations among them in height, roof form, wall plane setbacks,
entrance orientation, materials, or other means.
(10)
Phasing. Any Integrated Plan involving a total of more than 1,000,000
square feet gross floor area summed over all buildings proposed must
D.
§ 220-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8.7
1:171
be developed in stages of not more than 600,000 square feet gross
floor area each. Prior to initiation of development in the second phase,
a report must be submitted to the Planning Board providing data on
the following development outcomes to that point, together with
comparisons with the outcomes anticipated in the application materials
and resulting special permit.
(1) Acres of land subject to open space restrictions;
(2) Acres of land physically altered for development;
Total floor area of buildings given occupancy permits, reported by
category of use;
(3)
Trip generation by the development as a whole measured at the
entrances to the development;
(4)
Demand on public or community water supplies.
The Planning Board shall hold a public meeting to allow the
developer to explain how any disparities between expectations
and outcomes will be offset through the phases to follow in order
to achieve overall compliance.
(5)
Procedures.
Parties seeking special permit approval of an Integrated Plan are
urged to work closely with the Planning Board and Town staff
in developing their proposal in order to assure a well-informed
process, and similarly to arrange for a dialog with those who live
near to or otherwise would be impacted by the proposal.
(1)
Review of applications for any related special permits for which
the Planning Board is the special permit granting authority may be
consolidated into the Integrated Plan special permit process, while
being voted upon separately.
(2)
All applications for approval of an Integrated Plan shall include
an Integrated Plan and Report, which shall contain at least the
following:
Residential uses proposed — tabulation of the number of
dwelling units proposed, categorized by building type (multifamily,
attached single-family, etc.), bedroom type (studio, onebedroom,
etc.), floor area in each type of dwelling unit, and
sales or rental level, including affordability provisions.
(a)
Open space proposed — tabulation of the extent of reserved
open space of various categories, including conservation lands,
recreation areas, and other public use areas.
(b)
Nonresidential uses proposed — tabulation of floor area by
land use category.
(c)
(3)
E.
§ 220-8.7 LANCASTER CODE § 220-8.7
1:172
A plan view context drawing, covering the premises and at
least all parcels abutting and across the street, indicating
street and property lines, and at a conceptual level building
locations, reserved open space areas, and other features of
relevance.
(d)
Itemization of departures from the use, dimensional, parking
or other provisions applicable in the underlying zoning
districts.
(e)
Special provisions proposed, including grants of benefits to
the Town such as land for public purposes, construction of
or contributions towards off-site improvements, or restrictions
proposed such as view corridors or traffic management
provisions.
(f)
A traffic analysis indicating that full construction and
occupancy as provided in the Integrated Plan will be in
compliance with the 20 trips per acre limit, and also will
not cause the peak hour traffic level of service to either be
lower than reasonably expected from development not relying
upon IPOD provisions, or below level of service "C" as defined
in current publications of the Highway Research Board.
[Amended 5-1-2017 ATM, by Art. 12]
(g)
A verbal and graphic analysis documenting that the
development is assured to be compatible with the character
and scale of the immediately surrounding neighborhood.
(h)
An assessment of the impacts of the development upon natural
resources, Town utilities, schools, housing needs, taxes or
other topics of salience in the particular case.
(i)
The Integrated Plan and Report shall be provided to the Town
Clerk and the Planning Board no later than the date on which first
notice is published for the Planning Board hearing for the special
permit, with number of copies and distribution as may be provided
in regulations adopted by the Planning Board for administration of
these provisions, and shall be reviewed at that public hearing. The
Planning Board shall approve such special permit based upon these
considerations:
The consistency of the Integrated Plan and Report with the
intent and requirements of § 220-8.7.
(a)
The degree to which the Integrated Plan furthers the policies
articulated in the 2007 Lancaster Master Plan.
(b)
The consistency of the Integrated Plan with the purposes
stated at § 220-1 of the Lancaster Zoning Bylaw.
(c)
(4)
§ 220-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8.7
1:173
§ 220-9. Supplementary use regulations.
The completeness and technical soundness of the Integrated
Plan and Report.
(d)
The degree of assurance that there will be compatibility of
building design and siting with the existing vicinity through
selection of building materials and colors, building scale and
massing, fenestration, roof forms, and signage design.
(e)
Following Planning Board approval of a special permit for an
Integrated Plan, permit applications relying upon that Plan shall
require site plan review by the Planning Board under the provisions
of § 220-34, Site plan review. The Planning Board shall approve
such site plan, provided that it is consistent with the approved
Integrated Plan, and consistent with the provisions of § 220-8.7. A
site plan shall not be found consistent unless each of the following
is met:
The uses proposed are not inconsistent with those of the
Integrated Plan in type and extent.
(a)
The proposed locations of individual buildings, parking, and
open space shall be substantially consistent with the approved
Integrated Plan, and all of the applicable use and dimensional
regulations have been met.
(b)
Means have been established to assure compliance with
special provisions stipulated at § 220-8.7E(3)(f).
(c)
(5)
An approved Integrated Plan may not be changed except through
amendment of the previously issued special permit by the Planning
Board following a new public hearing and review.
(6)
Living facilities for seniors. Housing for the elderly, including
multifamily dwellings, may be authorized on special permit as provided
in § 220-8.1 provided that the following requirements are met.
(1) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet.
Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet plus 6,000 square feet per
dwelling unit in excess of eight.
(2)
Yards: not less than 20 feet shall be maintained as open area, with
grass, bushes, flowers, or trees along each side lot, rear lot, and
front lot line, except for entrance and exit driveways, and such
open space shall not be built upon, nor paved nor used for parking.
(3)
Location and treatment of parking areas: all off-street parking shall
be paved, and located at the rear or side of the building for which
it is to be used.
(4)
A.
§ 220-8.7 LANCASTER CODE § 220-9
1:174
Long-term health care facility. Long-term health care facilities may be
authorized on special permit as provided in § 220-8.4 provided that the
following requirements are met.
(1) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet.
Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet, plus 3,000 square feet per
bed after the first 16.
(2)
Yards: not less than 20 feet shall be maintained as open area, with
grass, bushes, flowers, or trees along each side lot, rear lot, and
front lot line, except for entrance and exit driveways, and such
open space shall not be built upon, nor paved nor used for parking.
(3)
Location and treatment of parking areas: all off-street parking shall
be paved, and located at the rear or side of the building for which
it is to be used.
(4)
B.
Multifamily dwelling. Multifamily dwellings may be authorized on
special permit as provided in § 220-8.1 provided that the following
requirements are met.
Location: within that portion of the Residence Zone bounded by
Main Street, George Hill Road, Goss Lane, Sterling Road, Mill
Street to the railroad tracks, northerly by the railroad tracks,
Kilbourn Road to Main Street;
(1)
(2) Sewerage: must be connected to public Town sewerage;
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet;
Minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet, plus 12,000 square feet per
dwelling unit in excess of four.
(4)
Yards: not less than 20 feet shall be maintained as open area, with
grass, bushes, flowers, or trees along each side lot, rear lot, and
front lot line, except for entrance and exit driveways, and such
open space shall not be built upon, nor paved nor used for parking.
(5)
Location and treatment of parking areas: all off-street parking shall
be paved, and located at the rear or side of the building for which
it is to be used.
(6)
Advisory review. The Board of Appeals shall provide that
application materials are forwarded for the Planning Board to
review and report on applications for multifamily dwellings. The
Planning Board shall consider, among other matters:
(a) Compliance with this bylaw and its purposes;
(b) The need for dwelling units of the type and cost proposed;
(7)
C.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:175
The safety and adequacy of circulation for cars, deliveries,
bicycles and pedestrians both within and external to the site
and the adequacy of parking and loading arrangements;
(c)
The avoidance of unnecessary damage to the natural resources
and amenities of the site and the provision of appropriate
landscaping;
(d)
(e) Drainage and erosion within and issuing from the site;
The relationship of the scale, mass and siting of the buildings
to other buildings nearby;
(f)
The Town's ability to provide fire and police protection to the
buildings as designed;
(g)
The provisions for continued maintenance of buildings and
grounds.
(h)
Home occupation. Home occupations or professional offices are
allowed as provided at § 220-8.1 if in accordance with the following:
The principal operator resides on the premises, employs not more
than one other person, and sells no products prepared by others;
(1)
There is no indication of such occupation visible on the exterior
of the building or on the lot, except for required parking and
permitted signs;
(2)
The activity does not produce noise, odor, traffic or other nuisances
perceptible at the lot line at a higher level than is usual in a
residential neighborhood.
(3)
D.
Industrial use requirements. Industrial uses permitted at § 220-8.6A
and B (printing, publishing, and assembly, finishing or packaging of
products; other general industrial uses including manufacturing and
processing) must comply with the following:
Applicants must document that there will be no on-site disposals
of wastes containing greater concentration of toxic or hazardous
substances than commonly found in domestic wastewater.
(1)
There shall be no manufacturing, packaging, or distribution of toxic
or hazardous materials.
(2)
(3) Electromagnetic radiation shall not exceed FCC regulations.
There shall be no medium or heavy industrial uses in a Light
Industry or Enterprise district (especially, but not limited to, any
of the following: asphalt plants; blast furnaces; coke manufacture;
creosote manufacture; chemical manufacture; gas manufacture;
production or refining of petroleum products; manufacture of
explosives, fireworks or highly flammable substances; and/or
storage, collection, treatment, burial, incineration, or disposal of
(4)
E.
§ 220-9 LANCASTER CODE § 220-9
1:176
radioactive or other wastes). [Added 5-7-2001; amended
5-6-2013 by Art. 12]
Accessory outdoor storage and display. Accessory outdoor storage and
display permitted at § 220-8.5AA must comply with the following.
All stored or displayed goods (except that undergoing repair) must
be in usable condition without further handling.
(1)
No bulk goods such as building supplies to be stored or displayed
outdoors.
(2)
No stored or displayed goods and no gasoline pumps shall be within
any required yard.
(3)
All stored or displayed goods shall be screened from any lot line
adjoining a Residence District or an existing dwelling.
(4)
F.
Accessory apartments. [Added 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 17]
The principal single-family detached dwelling shall have been
lawfully in existence for at least five years prior to the date of
application for the special permit under this section.
(1)
Either the primary single-family detached dwelling or the proposed
accessory apartment must be and remain owner-occupied, except
for temporary absences of no more than 12 consecutive months.
(2)
The habitable floor area of the accessory apartment, whether
located in a detached accessory structure or in the principal singlefamily
dwelling structure, shall not exceed 1/3 of the combined
habitable floor area of the apartment and the single-family dwelling
or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less.
(3)
The accessory apartment shall have its own separate entrance from
the outside. There shall be no more than one entrance door to the
single-family detached dwelling on any single facade. All stairways
to upper floors shall be enclosed within the exterior walls of the
dwelling.
(4)
The accessory apartment unit shall be designed to be occupied
by no more than three persons, and shall conform to the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health Minimum Standards
for Human Habitation and all other applicable state codes for such
occupancy.
(5)
If the dwelling is not to be served by both Town water and Town
sewerage, then the applicant must document that the Board of
Health has determined that provisions for water and sewage
disposal will upon occupancy be adequate for the anticipated
number of inhabitants.
(6)
G.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:177
At least three parking spaces must be provided to service the
primary dwelling plus the accessory apartment. Not more than one
parking space may be located within a required yard. If more than
two outdoor parking spaces are to be provided on the premises,
their visibility must be reduced through use of landscaping
materials per § 220-37.1B.
(7)
The special permit shall be approved, provided that the proposal
satisfies Subsection G(1) through (7) above, and that the Board
of Appeals determines that there will be net benefits to the
community through the proposed housing provision and the design
of the proposal, after consideration of the following: [Amended
5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 21]
The importance of the benefit resulting from serving either
a community housing need or a special need of potential
occupants.
(a)
How compatible the design of any exterior construction or
alterations, if any, is with the design of existing structures on
the site and in the neighborhood.
(b)
How well any site alterations to accommodate parking or
building expansion avoid damage to natural resources, to
privacy and sunlight on abutting premises, to the character of
the neighborhood, and to safety.
(c)
(8)
Applicants must submit plans and calculations to demonstrate
compliance with the above requirements, including the floor area
limitations of Subsection G(3), the access requirements of
Subsection G(4), and the parking requirements of Subsection G(7).
(9)
§ 220-9 LANCASTER CODE § 220-9
1:178
ARTICLE IV
Dimensional Requirements28
§ 220-10. Lot dimensions.
Lot area. The following requirements must be met without counting any
area in a street or recorded way open to public use. At least 90% of the
lot area requirement must be met without including any "wetland" as
defined in MGL c. 131, § 40.
LI, LI2, EZ, and GI Districts: minimum lot area = 64,000 square
feet. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by
Art. 12; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 14]
(1)
(2) (Reserved)29
Residential (R) and Neighborhood Business (NB): lot area shall
have a minimum of two acres (87,120 square feet). [Amended
5-4-1998; 10-24-2000]
(3)
Lot area requirements for special uses are as follows:
(a) Apartment dwelling: see § 220-8.1F.
(b) Rest home, housing for the elderly: see § 220-8.1C.
Campground: the number of sites times 1/2 the lot area
requirement of Subsection A(4)(b).
(c)
Seasonal group accommodations: the proposed number of
persons to be accommodated times 1/8 the lot area
requirement of Subsection A(4)(b).
(d)
(4)
A.
Lot frontage. Minimum lot frontage in all districts shall be 225 feet, to
be met along a continuous portion of a way determined by the Planning
Board to meet the standards of access adequacy established in Chapter
301, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, and to
which the lot has both rights of access and potential physical access.
[Amended 5-4-1998; 10-24-2000; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14]
B.
Lot frontage exception. Lots having less than the normally required lot
frontage may be created and built upon for residential use provided
that such lots are shown on a plan endorsed by the Planning Board
as "Approved for Reduced Lot Frontage." Plans shall be so endorsed if
meeting each of the following, but not otherwise: [Added 6-11-1991]
(1) Each lot shall have frontage of at least 35 feet.
C.
28.For development within an Integrated Planning Overlay District the requirements of §
220-8.7B shall govern regarding lot area and frontage, yards, and building dimensions,
rather than those contained below in §§ 220-10 through 220-12. [Added 5-4-2009 ATM by
Art. 12]
29.Edtior's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which provided the minimum lot area for LO
Districts, added 5-3-1988, was repealed 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12.
§ 220-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:179
§ 220-11. Yard dimensions.
Egress over that frontage shall be determined to create no greater
hazard owing to grade and visibility limitations than would be
normal for a standard lot in the same area.
(2)
Feasibility of compliance with § 220-22H, Extended driveways, is
demonstrated for each lot.
(3)
Each lot having reduced lot frontage contains at least 4 1/2 acres
without counting the area within any access strip. "Access strip" in
this case shall mean any portion of the lot between the street and
the point where lot width equals 165 feet or more.
(4)
All other normal lot requirements as specified in Article IV,
Dimensional Requirements, are met.
(5)
Each lot having less frontage than normally required shall be
capable of containing a square with sides of at least 165 feet, said
square being shown on the plan submitted to the Planning Board
for endorsement and each such lot shall also comply with the lot
shape requirements of § 220-14.
(6)
No lot having less than normally required frontage shall be
endorsed by the Planning Board if its access strip abuts another
such lot, except that the Planning Board may approve one and
only one such abutting lot if it determines that such approval
will not derogate from the purpose of the Zoning Bylaw as set
forth in § 220-1 hereof. The Planning Board shall not, under any
circumstances, endorse any plan as "Approved for Reduced Lot
Frontage" where endorsement of such a plan would create more
than two contiguous reduced frontage lots.
(7)
Front yard setback: [Amended 5-3-1988; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14;
5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
Not less than 40 feet in EZ (except that the front yard setback
shall be 100 feet for a lot facing a lot across a street that lies in
a Residential district), 40 feet in the LI and LI2 Districts, or 30
feet in other districts, measured from the street sideline, or the
following measured from the street center line, if more restrictive:
[Amended 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
(a) Arterial street: 74 feet.
(b) Collector street: 60 feet.
(c) Minor street: 55 feet.
(1)
(NOTE: Arterial and collector streets are so designated on the
Zoning Maps; all others are minor streets.)
(2)
A.
B. Side and rear yard setback:
§ 220-10 LANCASTER CODE § 220-11
1:180
In EZ, not less than 30 feet, except the setback shall be increased to
100 feet when abutting any residential district or existing dwelling.
[Added 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 1230]
(1)
GI Districts: not less than 30 feet. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM by
Art. 14]
(2)
LI and LI2 Districts: not less than 30 feet, except increased to 50
feet when abutting any Residential District or existing dwelling.
[Amended 5-3-1988; 5-5-2008 by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by
Art. 12]
(3)
(4) All other districts: not less than 20 feet.
Permitted uses in required yards. All required minimum setback areas
shall, except for driveways and permitted signs, be landscaped or left
with natural vegetation, with the following exceptions:
In Residence Districts up to 25% of the area of front yard of lots
may be used for accessory parking; [Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by
Art. 14]
(1)
Rear yards may be used for accessory structures occupying no
more than 30% of such yard, provided no structure, other than a
boat- or bathhouse on a water body, is closer than 15 feet to any lot
line;
(2)
Side and rear yards in EZ, LI, LI2 and GI Districts may be occupied
by parking or by permitted accessory outdoor storage provided
that no parking or storage is closer than 50 feet (except 100 feet in
the EZ district) to any Residence district or to any dwelling existing
prior to the adoption of this bylaw, and in EZ, LI or GI Districts,
such parking or storage must be thoroughly screened by dense
natural vegetation of a suitable height to conceal these areas.
[Amended 5-3-1988; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM
by Art. 12; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 14]
(3)
Side and rear yards in an NB District may be occupied for parking
provided no unscreened parking is within 15 feet of a Residence
District line.
(4)
C.
Setback for soccer fields. No soccer field or associated parking area
shall be closer than 150 feet from the lot line of a property with
a residential dwelling unit. This setback may be reduced by special
permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board may consider site
conditions and the use of vegetation and fencing and other types of
screening to mitigate adverse impacts from noise, litter, trespassing
and stray soccer balls. Land currently used for soccer at the time of the
adoption of this provision shall be exempt from this provision.
D.
30.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsection B(1) through B(3) as
Subsection B(2) through B(4), respectively.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:181
§ 220-12. Building dimensions.
§ 220-13. Fences and walls; corner clearance. [Amended 5-2-2011
ATM by Art. 15]
EZ District waivers: The Planning Board may grant a special permit
to waive compliance with the yard dimensions of § 220-11 for the EZ
District if it finds that due to the size, shape, or natural conditions
of the property the yard requirements would not allow reasonable
development of the site. In granting a special permit, the Board may
impose conditions to protect the public interest and minimize impacts
on residential properties or the environment. The Board shall not grant
a waiver to allow a yard dimension that is less than 50 feet. [Added
5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
E.
Building or structure height. No building or portion thereof or other
structure of any kind shall exceed 40 feet building or structure height
in the LI, LI2, GI and EZ Districts or 32 feet in any other district, except
as provided in Subsection B. [Amended 10-24-2000; 5-5-2008 ATM
by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
A.
Exceptions. Buildings or other structures may exceed the limits of
Subsection A in the following cases:
Chimneys, towers, spires, cupolas, antennas or other projections
of or attachments to a building that do not enclose potentially
habitable floor space, provided that they do not exceed the height
of the building by more than 10 feet or 20% of building height,
whichever is the greater, or
(1)
Within the Personal Wireless Service Overlay District a personal
wireless service structure if authorized on special permit as
provided in Article XI, or
(2)
A structure or projection not used for human habitation and not
permitted by Subsection B(1) or (2) above, provided that it is
authorized for that height by special permit from the Board of
Appeals, upon determination by the Board that the proposed height
is functionally important for the use, that all public safety
requirements will be met, that the added height will not result
in substantial increase in off-site shadow cover or reduction in
privacy on adjoining premises, that the structure or projection and
its use will not result in threats to visual compatibility with the
surroundings and, in the case of an antenna for use by a federally
licensed amateur radio operator, that any restriction so imposed
complies with the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 3, dealing with such
antennas. [Amended 10-24-2000]
(3)
B.
A. Fences and walls.
§ 220-11 LANCASTER CODE § 220-13
1:182
Fences and walls may be erected along or within 12 inches of a
property line only upon issuance of a building or fence permit by
the Building Inspector indicating that as proposed the fence is in
compliance with the following. Application for such permit must be
accompanied by a certified plot plan or a surveyor's parcel plan,
noting the proposed location of the fence or wall.
(1)
Within the required front yard setback on the lot, fences and walls
that obstruct vision must be in compliance with § 220-13B, Corner
clearance.
(2)
Elsewhere on the lot, if the fence or wall exceeds six feet above
grade it must be set back from the property line by a distance equal
to its height.
(3)
Corner clearance. On corner lots, no fence, wall, sign, structure or
plantings shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow or
parking spaces be located so as to materially impede the vision of
motor vehicle operators. No obstruction to such vision other than the
land at its natural grade shall be allowed between the heights of 2 1/2
and eight feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets
and within a triangular area bounded by the two street lot lines and a
straight line connecting those two lines at a point 25 feet from their
intersection.
B.
Modification. The requirements of § 220-13A and B may be modified by
the Zoning Board of Appeals through the issuance of a special permit
based upon its finding that such modification is warranted by concerns
such as animal control or high levels of ambient noise or light that
cannot otherwise be abated or other public interest considerations,
and its finding that the modification would not be detrimental to the
neighborhood nor would it jeopardize vehicular or pedestrian safety or
convenience.
C.
§ 220-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:183
§ 220-14. Lot shape. [Added 6-11-1991]
§ 220-15. Flexible development. [Amended 10-6-2008 STM by Art.
11]
No lot shall be created which is so irregularly shaped or extended that
the square of the lot perimeter exceeds 30 times the gross lot area for
any lot in excess of 80,000 square feet, or 25 times the gross lot area
for any other lot, unless authorized on special permit by the Planning
Board, upon the Board's determination that development can be better
fitted to the characteristics of the land and to the purposes of the bylaw
if such configuration is allowed.
A.
The "gross lot area" includes the entire area enclosed by lot lines,
including wetland and any other areas excluded from the calculation
of "lot area." However, a portion of the lot in excess of the required
lot area may be excluded from the computation by use of a straight
imaginary lot line, provided that the entire required frontage is
included in the portion used for the calculation.
B.
Intent. The intent of these flexible development provisions is to allow
greater flexibility and creativity in residential development in order to
gain:
Location of development on sites best suited for development,
and protection of land not suited for development, reflecting such
considerations as:
Permanent preservation of open space for agriculture,
conservation, or recreational use, especially in large
contiguous areas within the site or linked to off-site protected
areas;
(a)
Protection of water bodies, streams, wetlands, wildlife
habitats, and other conservation resources;
(b)
Protection of the character of the community through
preserving open space within view from public roads,
preservation of stone walls and other historic landscape
features, preservation of scenic vistas, and through siting of
dwellings at low-visibility locations;
(c)
Protection of street appearance and capacity by avoiding
development close to such streets, except in already compactly
developed areas;
(d)
(1)
Efficient patterns for construction and maintenance of public
facilities and services such as streets and utilities;
(2)
(3) Privacy for residents of individual lots; and
(4) Avoidance of unnecessary development costs.
A.
§ 220-14 LANCASTER CODE § 220-15
1:184
Dimensional requirements. Subject to conformance with the standards
contained in the following Subsection B(1) through (3), the Planning
Board may by special permit authorize the creation and use of
residential building lots complying with the alternative frontage and lot
area regulations contained in Subsection B(4) below rather than those
otherwise applicable to the zoning district in which the land is located.
Base number of building lots. The base number of building lots
allowed to be created in a flexible development shall be equal to
the number of building lots into which the parcel could reasonably
be expected to be divided under normally applicable dimensional
and (if not sewered) on-site disposal regulations. That number may,
at the owner's option, be determined by Planning Board estimate
or by an alternative "conventional" plan certified to comply by a
registered land surveyor and professional engineer. In either event,
the Planning Board's final determination of the base number shall
be conclusive. In addition to building lots, one or more parcels
of deed-restricted open space shall be created in a flexible
development in compliance with the regulations of Subsection C.
(1)
Bonus lots. As an open space and affordability incentive, the
Planning Board may allow an increase over the base number of
lots otherwise allowed, using the following calculations; provided,
however, that in no event shall the number of bonus lots allowed
exceed 50% of the base number of building lots.
Open space. A number of bonus lots may be awarded equal
to the base number times a percentage that equals 1/2 the
percentage of open space set aside in excess of the minimum
required, to a bonus limit of 10% of the base number. For
example, a ten-percent bonus increase above the base number
is allowed if open space set aside is 20% or more higher than
the minimum required. Fractions of 0.5 lots or more shall be
rounded up, and others rounded down.
(a)
Affordability. Dwelling units permanently restricted to
occupancy by persons, families or households who qualify as
low or moderate income, as those terms are defined for the
area by the Commonwealth's Department of Housing and
Community Development, may be added to the base number,
up to a bonus limit of not more than 1/3 of the base number.
(b)
(2)
Transfer of development rights. By agreement of its owner, land
may be used in calculating the base number of lots under
Subsection B(1) or the bonus lots under Subsection B(2) even
though such land is not contiguous with or in the same ownership
as the premises being developed, but only as follows:
The land used in such calculation (the "transfer land") must be
determined by the Planning Board to be of special importance
to remain in a natural state because of its visual prominence or
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:185
potential vista blockage, because of its ecological significance
and fragility, because it has special importance as farmland, or
because it is important to the Town's open space plan.
The land being developed must not itself have the qualities
specified immediately above.
(b)
The transfer land must not be wetlands (as defined in MGL c.
131, § 40), or be used to satisfy lot area requirements for any
other development, or already be restricted from development
by a conservation restriction or other binding device.
(c)
Prior to issuance of any building permit dependent upon the
transfer, such transfer land shall be made subject to a
permanent conservation restriction held by the Town pursuant
to MGL c. 194, §§ 31-33, prohibiting nonagricultural
development.
(d)
Alternative dimensional requirements. Lot area, lot frontage and
width, and yard setback requirements of §§ 220-10 through 220-11
shall not apply to individual lots within a flexible development
authorized under this § 220-15, provided that the Planning Board
has approved the proposed alternative lot dimensions for the
development, subject to the following limitations:
Lots having primary frontage on a street other than a street
created by the development shall not have reduced frontage or
front yard setbacks unless the Planning Board determines that
doing so improves consistency of building spacing and bulk
with the character of the existing vicinity.
(a)
At least 50% of the required frontage and side and rear yard
setbacks for the district shall be maintained in the
development unless a further reduction is authorized by the
Planning Board for a particular lot reflecting special
circumstances of the lot.
(b)
A buffer area of not less than 50 feet shall be provided around
identified resource areas on or adjacent to the tract such as
ponds, wetlands, streams and riverfront areas, rock outcrops,
ledge, agricultural or recreational fields, and land held for
conservation purposes. Driveways necessary for access and
egress to and from the tract may cross such buffer areas. No
vegetation in this buffer area shall be disturbed, destroyed
or removed, except to provide for necessary access and for
normal maintenance of structures and landscapes approved as
part of the project. The Planning Board may waive or reduce
the buffer requirement in these locations where it determines
that a smaller buffer (or no buffer) will suffice to accomplish
the objectives set forth herein, or where necessitated to allow
economic use of the property as a whole.
(c)
(4)
§ 220-15 LANCASTER CODE § 220-15
1:186
Open space requirements. The following open space requirements must
be met unless the Planning Board determines that owing to
peculiarities of the site a smaller amount of open space would better
serve the intent of these provisions to facilitate sensitive use of Town
resources. In all other cases, a minimum of 40% of the land in the
flexible development shall be reserved as open space. Any proposed
open space land, unless conveyed to the Town or its Conservation
Commission, shall be subject to a recorded restriction and/or
conservation easement enforceable by the Town. Such restriction or
easement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Planning Board, and
shall provide that such land shall be perpetually kept in an open state,
that it shall be preserved exclusively for one or more of the purposes
set forth in Subsection C(3) below, and that it shall be maintained in a
manner which will ensure its suitability for its intended purposes.
The percentage of the open space that is wetlands shall not
normally exceed the percentage of the flexible development parcel
that is wetlands; provided, however, that the Planning Board may
allow a greater percentage of wetlands to be included in such
open space upon a demonstration that such inclusion promotes the
purposes of this bylaw.
(1)
Designated open spaces shall be contiguous with each other in
a continuous system except where separated by a roadway or
an accessory amenity, and except where the Planning Board
determines that allowing noncontiguous open space will promote
the goals of this bylaw and/or protect identified conservation
resources.
(2)
The open space shall be used for wildlife habitat and conservation
and one or more of the following additional purposes: historic
preservation, education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, visual amenity, and
shall be served by suitable access for such purposes. The Planning
Board may permit up to 5% of the open space to be paved or built
upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such
open space (i.e., pedestrian walks and bike paths).
(3)
Wastewater and stormwater management systems serving the
development may be located within the open space. Surface
systems, such as retention and detention ponds, shall not qualify
towards the minimum open space required.
(4)
Ownership of the open space. The designated open space shall be
conveyed to:
(a) The Town or its Conservation Commission; or
A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation of open space and any of the purposes for such
open space set forth above; or
(b)
(5)
C.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:187
A corporation or trust owned jointly or in common by the
owners of lots or dwelling units within the flexible
development. If such corporation or trust is utilized, ownership
thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or units.
Maintenance of such open space and facilities shall be
permanently guaranteed by such corporation or trust through
provisions for mandatory assessments of maintenance
expenses to each lot or unit. The trust or corporation
documents shall include an express consent to allow the Town,
at its own option, to enter and access the open space and
facilities and perform repairs, if the trust or corporation fails
to provide adequate maintenance. Each individual deed for the
lots in the flexible development, the open space deed, and the
trust or articles of incorporation shall include provisions to
effect these requirements. Documents creating such trust or
corporation shall be subject to Planning Board approval, and
shall thereafter be recorded.
(c)
Multifamily dwellings. Multifamily dwellings may be permitted in a
flexible development subject to the above provisions of § 220-15 and
subject to the following:
The number of dwelling units may not exceed the number of
building lots (including bonus lots) which could be allowed under
the provisions of Subsection B, Dimensional Requirements, of this
§ 220-15.
(1)
The proposed development must meet at least five of the following
guidelines:
Each dwelling unit should have a direct outside entrance not
shared with any other unit.
(a)
Setbacks and building alignment should be reflective of that
existing in the vicinity.
(b)
Individual attached units should be distinguished from each
other through building massing, such as through differences
in facade setback, roof height, major unit or roof gable
orientation, without reliance on surface decoration or trim to
distinguish them.
(c)
No more than four dwelling units should be attached together
in a single structure.
(d)
The scale of parking areas should be kept small through having
no more than eight parking spaces within any parking area
not separated from others by intensive landscaping and, if
containing more than two spaces, being located somewhere
other than within a front yard area.
(e)
(2)
D.
§ 220-15 LANCASTER CODE § 220-15
1:188
Existing vegetation and other site features should be retained
to the extent reasonably feasible.
(f)
New plantings should be reflective of those common in the
vicinity with regard to species, scale and location.
(g)
Special permit considerations. A special permit for a flexible
development shall be granted only upon Planning Board determination
that such alternative form of development of the subject land better
serves the bylaw intent than would development under otherwise
applicable rules, considering possible deterioration of water quality,
visual intrusion, displacement of natural features, or traffic conflicts.
E.
Documentation.
All lots created under the provisions of § 220-15, Flexible
development, shall be shown on a recorded plan referencing the
recorded special permit under § 220-15, and containing notations
specifying that no additional building lots are to be created through
future division of the land shown on the plan, and specifying the
maximum number of dwelling units to be allowed on each lot.
(1)
In addition, a permanent restriction, running with land and
enforceable by the Town, shall be recorded with respect to the
land included in the flexible development, provided that no land
within the development may be divided into additional building lots
and specifying the maximum number of dwelling units that may be
developed on the land.
(2)
F.
Subdivision Control Law. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
conflicting with the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K et seq.,
and a special permit issued under this section shall not supplant the
applicable requirements of the Subdivision Control Law.
G.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:189

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)31
[Added 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 16]
§ 220-16. through § 220-20. (Reserved)
31.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers, added 5-6-2013 ATM
by Art. 16, provided for a temporary moratorium on medical marijuana treatment centers
that expired 6-30-2014. See now Art. XVI, Medical Marijuana Overlay District.
§ 220-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:191

ARTICLE VI
Required Off-Street Parking
§ 220-21. Applicability.
No use of premises shall be authorized or extended and no building shall be
erected or enlarged unless parking and loading requirements are met for
the new or added use. Any use existing prior to adoption of this bylaw which
is later changed or enlarged shall provide an additional number of parking
spaces at least equal to the difference between the number required for the
total proposed use less the number which would have been required for the
prior use under this bylaw.
§ 220-22. General requirements.
Location. Required parking shall be provided for the principal use it
is to serve, except that parking required for two or more adjacent
buildings or uses may be combined where it is evident that it will
continue to be available to all the uses served.
A.
Combined parking lots. The total parking provided shall meet the total
requirements of all uses served unless the Board of Appeals grants a
special permit for reduced requirements where peak parking for the
uses served occurs at different times.
B.
Space per car. Each parking space shall be at least nine feet by 20 feet
and shall be directly accessible from an aisle or private driveway.
C.
Access to parking and loading areas.
No curb cut or access for parking or loading facilities shall exceed
30 feet in width and no maneuvering to enter a parking or loading
space shall take place within a public right-of-way. All loading
operations shall be conducted from a side or rear yard.
(1)
In the case of a shopping center, such curb cuts will not exceed
60 feet in width and such curb cuts shall not be closer to one
another than 250 feet. Further, in the case of a shopping center,
the loading operations provisions shall be inapplicable, except that
such loading facilities shall be screened.
(2)
D.
Development of parking and loading areas. All required parking and
loading areas shall be graded, surfaced and drained to the satisfaction
of the Board of Public Works to the extent necessary to avoid nuisances
such as dust, erosion or excessive water flow across public streets or
onto adjacent properties. Any lighting of parking areas shall be shielded
from public streets and from properties in any Residence District.
E.
Large parking areas. Any parking area for 20 or more cars shall have
each space clearly marked.
F.
§ 220-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:193
§ 220-22.1. Curb cuts; driveways. [Added 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 17]
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 220-60A, these curb cut provisions shall
be administered and enforced by the Board of Public Works.
Shared driveways. A shared driveway shall not be considered adequate
access if it is the sole means of access for parking spaces on more
than two lots, except that the Planning Board may by special permit
authorize service to a larger number of lots where it determines that
doing so serves the interests of safety and does not circumvent the
intent of Chapter 301, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of
Lancaster.
G.
Extended driveways. Parking whose sole means of access is a driveway
more than 100 feet in length shall be credited towards meeting these
requirements only if the drive meets the following standards:
Traveled way width of at least 10 feet, compacted gravel or other
all-weather surface, with branches cleared to 12 feet width;
(1)
(2) Maximum grade of 12%;
(3) Center line radius of at least 80 feet;
Means of reversing direction for a vehicle of thirty-foot length,
eight-foot width, and fifty-seven-foot outside turning radius;
(4)
If in excess of 300 feet length, passing turnouts spaced not more
than 300 feet apart, the first being at the driveway connection with
the street; and
(5)
If in excess of 1,000 feet length, a special permit to be acted on by
the Planning Board, to be approved on determination of necessity
and adequacy of provisions for safety and convenience.
(6)
H.
Scope.
The creation of a new or altered connection of a street or driveway
to a street in the Town of Lancaster requires the prior issuance
of a permit for doing so by the Board of Public Works, with the
exceptions of:
Driveways already in existence where the use remains
unchanged;
(a)
Driveways subject to MGL c. 81, § 21 (Massachusetts curb cut
permit);
(b)
Driveways reviewed by municipal boards under existing laws
or regulations, including but not limited to scenic road
regulations or subdivision regulations.
(c)
(1)
(2) For long driveways (more than 100 feet), see also § 220-22H(6).
A.
§ 220-22 LANCASTER CODE § 220-22.1
1:194
Procedure.
Application.
The applicant shall provide three copies of an application to
the Board of Public Works, including a plan showing:
Any street or driveway that is to be created, altered, or
closed and its relationship with the accessed way;
[1]
Design and construction details described under
Subsection D.
[2]
(a)
The Board of Public Works shall consult with the
Superintendent of Public Works, Building Inspector, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, Planning Director and other interested Town
officials to obtain their comments on the plan, and shall within
21 days of receipt of a complete application notify the
applicant either that the proposal conforms with the Town's
standards or that it does not, citing any necessary
modifications, conditions, or restrictions.
(b)
(1)
Review. The Town will inspect the project during and after
construction. If the Town's requirements are met, the Board shall
upon written application for release issue a curb cut certificate
of approval forthwith, and release any security being held. If the
Board takes no action within 21 days of the date of complete
application for release of security, the curb cut security is to be
released forthwith and the Town Clerk may so certify.
Access. The Board has the authority to halt construction and/
or to prohibit access to said street or driveway if construction
is not consistent with the approved plan, until noncompliant
conditions have been corrected.
(a)
Approval. The Board of Public Works shall sign off on the
permit following satisfactory completion of construction.
(b)
(2)
Appeal. A decision of the Board of Public Works on an application
for a curb cut permit may be appealed to the Board of Appeals in
accordance with MGL c.40A, §§ 8 and 15.
(3)
B.
Enforcement.
Security. Where apt, the Board of Public Works may require the
posting of security to assure the completion of requirements within
the way being accessed consistent with the approved application.
(1)
Revocation. Any violation of this permit or failure to comply with all
requirements of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Board
of Public Works shall result in revocation of the permit and denial
of access to the way.
(2)
C.
§ 220-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22.1
1:195
Forfeiture. Failure to satisfactorily complete required actions may
result in the forfeiture of any security that has been posted.
(3)
Design and construction standards.
Geometry. Driveways shall be located to the best advantage with
regard to alignment with the public way and to intersect with it
at as close to a right angle as possible, and in no event at less
than 60° or more than 120°. The curbline radius of the edge of the
intersection with the traveled way shall be a minimum of five feet
for a single-family residential driveway on a minor street, and not
more than 30 feet on a collector or arterial street, as designated in
the Lancaster Zoning Map.
The last 20 feet of the driveway before the traveled way shall
be:
If serving a single-family residence, at least nine feet in
width if no longer than 100 feet and at least 10 feet in
width if longer;
[1]
At least 12 feet and not more than 24 feet in width for
other uses.
[2]
(a)
Those final 20 feet of the driveway shall be offset by up to 20
feet from the property sideline depending upon the needs of
the anticipated use and the location.
(b)
(1)
Sight distance. No wall or other obstruction shall be constructed,
planted or maintained at the intersection being created which
reduces sight distance to less than that needed for safe egress
in light of the speed of traffic on the road. No new driveway
shall be located where the minimum sight distance would be less
than 450 feet in each direction on arterial streets, 275 feet on
collector streets, and 175 feet on minor streets, as designated on
the Lancaster Zoning Map.
(2)
Stormwater. Existing drainage swales parallel to the way shall
not be obstructed by driveways or intersecting streets. Culverts
of appropriate size and durable material shall be provided by the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Public Works Superintendent.
Culverts should be set back a minimum of four feet from the edge
of the traveled way. Culvert length should exceed the width of the
driveway at that point by a minimum of six feet in length.
(3)
Grading and drainage shall be configured such that no surface
water drains onto any public way or onto any lot in separate
ownership.
(4)
Gradient. The driveway gradient shall be:
Consistent within the intersected public way with that of the
sidewalk if one exists;
(a)
(5)
D.
§ 220-22.1 LANCASTER CODE § 220-22.1
1:196
§ 220-23. Minimum number of spaces. [Amended 5-3-1988;
6-11-1991; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14]
The number of off-street parking spaces provided must be not fewer than
indicated below, unless in performing site plan review under § 220-34 the
Planning Board or, in acting on a special permit, the special permit granting
authority, determines that a lesser number would be adequate for all
parking needs because of special circumstances such as shared parking
for uses having peak parking demands at different times, unusual age or
other characteristics of site users, company-sponsored carpooling, or other
parking demand-reducing measures.
Use 1 Parking Space Per:
Seasonal cottage; day camp 1 bedroom to a limit of 2
Hotel, motel 1 rented sleeping room plus 1 per 2
employees.
Nursing home 4 beds
Dormitory 4 beds plus 1 per 2 employees
Educational facilities 1 staff member, or 4 seats in the
largest public assembly room,
including auditorium and
gymnasium, whichever number is
greater
Not less than 0.5% or greater than 5.0% in the first six feet
outside of the right-of-way;
(b)
(c) Not more than 9% for the next 14 feet; and
(d) Not more than 12% after that.
Reversing direction. Parking and driveways for accommodating
four or more vehicles shall be configured so that backing onto or
off of the road is not necessary.
(6)
Materials. Street intersections shall use materials as required by
the Subdivision Regulations of the Lancaster Planning Board.32
Driveways shall have a durable, dustless, all-weather surface
suitable for year-round use, such as bituminous concrete.
(7)
Following consultation with the Superintendent of Public Works,
Town Planner, Police Chief and Fire Chief, the Board of Public
Works may modify the application of these requirements based on
sound engineering practice to accommodate special cases of site
configuration and driveway usage.
(8)
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 301, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 220-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-23
1:197
Use 1 Parking Space Per:
Place of assembly with seating, such
as a church, funeral parlor,
auditorium, restaurant, theater
3 seats
Place of assembly without fixed
seats, such as skating rinks, dance
halls
3 persons' capacity based on the
Massachusetts State Building Code
Retail sales of furniture,
automobiles, nursery stock and such
goods as required extensive display
areas
800 square feet of display area
whether indoors or out
Medical or dental offices or clinics 175 square feet of gross floor area
Automobile service stations 100 square feet of service bay area
Other retail and service
establishments
250 square feet of gross floor area
plus 1 space per enterprise
Offices, banks, and post offices 250 square feet of gross floor area
Manufacture, processing, assembly,
packaging, storage
250 square feet gross floor area of
offices, or 300 square feet of
production area, or 2,000 square
feet of storage area, but capable of
expansion to not fewer than one
space per 300 square feet gross
floor area
Other permitted uses Adequate spaces to accommodate
customers, patrons and employees,
as determined by the Planning
Board
§ 220-23 LANCASTER CODE § 220-23
1:198
ARTICLE VII
Floodplain Regulations
[Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 220-24. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Floodplain Regulations to provide standards for
the use of those lands deemed subject to seasonal or periodic flooding;
to eliminate potential dangers to the health and safety of the occupants
thereof; and to prevent loss and damage to property.
§ 220-25. Establishment of district.
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The
district includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Lancaster
designated as Zones A and AE, on the Worcester County Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.
The map panels of the Worcester County FIRM that are wholly or partially
within the Town of Lancaster are panel numbers 25027C0287E,
25027C0288E, 25027C0289E, 25027C0293E, 25027C0294E,
25027C0451E, 25027C0452E, 25027C0454E, 25027C0456E,
25027C0457E, 25027C0458E, 25027C0459E, 25027C0462E, 5027C0466E
and 25027C0467E dated July 4, 2011. The exact boundaries of the
Floodplain District are defined by the one-hundred-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Worcester County
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 4, 2011. The FIRM and FIS
report are incorporated herein by reference and made part of the Town's
Official Zoning Overlay Map33 and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning
Board and Building Inspector.
§ 220-26. Development regulations.
No building for residential use (See § 220-8.1.) shall be erected within
the Floodplain District. With that exception, within the Floodplain
District the underlying permitted uses are allowed, provided that they
meet the additional requirements of this Article VII, as well as those
of the Massachusetts State Building Code dealing with construction in
floodplains.
A.
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts.
All development in the district, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40, and with the
following:
(1)
B.
33.Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:199
Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which
addresses floodplain and coastal high hazard areas (currently
780 CMR 120.G, Flood Resistant Construction and
Construction in Coastal Dunes);
(a)
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);
(b)
(c) Inland wetlands restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary
sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
(d)
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
(2)
Within Zone A, where the base flood elevation is not provided on
the FIRM, the Building Inspector shall obtain any existing base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, commonwealth,
or other source, as criteria for application of the requirements of this
and other applicable flood hazard controls.
C.
In Zone AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway within
the Town of Lancaster designated on the Worcester County FIRMs, the
following provisions shall apply:
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures, and other development, are
prohibited unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the one-hundred-year flood.
(1)
Any encroachment meeting the above standard shall comply with
the floodplain requirements of the State Building Code.
(2)
D.
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other
floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge (i.e., the onehundred-
year flood). Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
E.
In a riverine situation, the Conservation Commission Agent shall notify
adjacent communities, the NFIP State Coordinator (Note: As of 2011,
the State Coordinator is in the MA DCR at 251 Causeway St., Suite
600-700, Boston 02114-2104.), and the FEMA Region I NFIP Program
Specialist (Note: As of 2011, the FEMA NFIP Program Specialist is
F.
§ 220-26 LANCASTER CODE § 220-26
1:200
at Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I, 99 High St., 6th
floor, Boston 02110.) of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:201

ARTICLE VIII
Signs and Illumination
§ 220-27. General regulations.
§ 220-28. Permitted forms of illumination.
§ 220-29. Limitations on sign location and size.
Interference with traffic. No sign shall be so placed or so worded,
designed, colored or illuminated as to obscure or distract from signs
regulating traffic.
A.
B. Motion. Flashing or moving signs are prohibited in all districts.
Setbacks and corner clearance. No sign, including temporary signs,
shall be closer than 20 feet to any street or lot line unless affixed to a
building. The requirements of corner clearance (§ 220-13) shall apply.
C.
Signs on Town property. All signs on Town property, except for
temporary or directional signs as permitted in § 220-30, shall require a
special permit from the Board of Appeals.
D.
Sign content. Except for permitted directional signs, sign content shall
pertain exclusively to products, services, or activities on the premises.
Sign shall not display brand names, symbols, or slogans of nationally
advertised products or services except in cases where the majority of
the floor or lot area on the premises is devoted to that brand, product
or service.
E.
In R Districts. There shall be no illumination of signs or outdoor areas
unless the Board of Appeals grants a special permit for indirect
illumination in cases where such illumination would not prove
detrimental to residential uses or highway traffic.
A.
In other districts. Illumination of signs and outdoor areas in NB, EZ, LI,
LI2 and GI Districts shall be indirect. [Amended 5-3-1988; 5-5-2008
ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
14]
B.
General location of signs. All signs shall be placed on the premises to
which their message pertains, with the following exceptions:
(1) Municipal, state or federal signs;
(2) Permitted temporary posters or political signs;
Directional signs pertaining to an institutional, educational or
recreational use, provided a special permit is granted by Board of
Appeals for their location and indirect illumination, if any.
(3)
A.
Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per
premises, in the principal front yard only, and shall not be placed on
B.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-29
1:203
§ 220-30. Exceptions for temporary and directional signs.
a tree, rock, or utility pole. In Residence Districts, no such sign shall
exceed three square feet in area on residential premises, nor 12 square
feet on nonresidential premises or on premises for sale. In all other
districts, such signs are limited to an area not greater than 30 square
feet or one square foot for each four linear feet of the principal lot
frontage, whichever is smaller. [Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 14]
Attached signs.
Attached signs may be placed only on the side of a building facing a
street and shall not project more than three inches from the face of
the building, nor above the line of the eaves, and shall not obscure
any window, door, or other architectural feature. In Residence
Districts, the maximum area of signs shall not exceed three square
feet for each permitted family or home occupation on residential
premises, or 12 square feet for each permitted nonresidential
premises. In any other district, the aggregate area of all signs on
any face of a building fronting a street shall not exceed 10% of the
area of that face or 30 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(1)
In the case of a shopping center, the maximum area of such signs
on any face of the shopping center building shall not exceed one
square foot to each linear foot of such building face measured
horizontally along such building face. Such signs shall be permitted
on all faces of the building but shall be limited to major department
stores, entrances and theaters.
(2)
C.
Temporary posters for noncommercial events, political signs. Such
signs are limited to a period of 45 days preceding and seven days after
the relevant event and to not more than one, not to exceed 12 square
feet, per residential premises in Residence Districts nor more than two,
not exceeding 20 square feet each, on all other premises.
A.
Directional signs. Accessory signs directing traffic to entrances or exits
from the building or parking area are permitted in any district and all
yards, provided:
No freestanding directional sign exceeds two square feet in area,
or is placed higher than three feet above the ground;
(1)
(2) No such sign is closer than 10 feet to a street lot line;
The number of such signs is limited to the minimum necessary to
give clear directions;
(3)
(4) The sign bears no advertising matter.
B.
§ 220-29 LANCASTER CODE § 220-31
1:204
§ 220-31. Size, location and illumination exceptions. [Added
5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 1934]
The Board of Appeals may grant exceptions regarding the size, location and
allowable illumination of signs (such as allowing direct illumination) upon
its determination that the objectives of facilitating efficient communication,
avoidance of visual conflict with the environs, and good relationships
between signs and the buildings to which they relate are satisfied,
considering the following among other considerations.
§ 220-31.1. Permit required; fees.
Sign size is appropriate in relation to development scale, viewer
distance, speed of vehicular travel, street width, and signage on nearby
premises.
A.
Visibility of other public or private signage on nearby premises is not
unreasonably diminished.
B.
Sign content is simple and neat, with minimum wording to improve
legibility.
C.
Sign placement, colors, lettering style, and form are compatible with
building design.
D.
Sign design and location do not interrupt, obscure or hide architectural
features of the building, such as columns, sill lines, cornices, or roof
edges.
E.
Sign brightness is not inconsistent with that of other signs in the
vicinity.
F.
Permits. No sign of three square feet or more in area shall be erected,
enlarged, or structurally altered without a sign permit issued by the
Building Inspector.
A.
Fee. Signs shall be subject to an annual inspection fee as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Fees, of the Code of the Town
of Lancaster.
B.
34.Editor's Note: This article also provided for the redesignation of former § 220-31. The
section was renumbered as § 220-31.1 to maintain the numbering format of the Code.
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31.1
1:205

ARTICLE IX
Earth Products Removal
§ 220-32. Authorization.
Exceptions. The removal of earth products, which term shall include
all types of soil, humus, loam, sand and gravel, as well as bedrock,
is prohibited unless authorized by the Select Board except under the
following circumstances:
When such removal is incidental to and in connection with the
erection of a building for which a building permit has been issued
by the Building Inspector of the Town;
(1)
When such removal is required in order to construct a street that
has been approved by the Planning Board;
(2)
When such removal is in accordance with special permission from
the Board of Appeals issued under the provisions of existing bylaws
now in effect.
(3)
A.
Authorization by Select Board. [Amended 5-3-1988]
In any other case earth products shall not be removed from any
premises except as authorized on a special permit granted by
the Select Board. Actions by the Select Board on such special
permit shall be based upon the same considerations and procedural
requirements stated in the bylaw for the Board of Appeals,
including § 220-61D, except as otherwise may be required by
statute.
(1)
The Select Board shall impose any restrictions necessary to protect
the interest of the Town while keeping in mind the general purpose
of the bylaw to regulate the stripping of loam so as to prevent the
injurious effects brought about by the creation of waste areas. A
minimum depth of nine inches of loam must be left and spread over
the site unless a landowner can clearly demonstrate that a lesser
depth of loam preexists on the site, in which case a depth equal to
the preexisting depth shall be required to be left and spread over
the site. The entire disturbed area shall be fertilized and seeded
with a durable ground cover sufficient to stabilize and maintain
finished grade. The Select Board may require a higher minimum
depth of loam if, in its opinion after examining the site, the Board
determines that it is necessary to the best interest of the Town and/
or abutting landowners.
(2)
The Select Board shall limit the size of the operation, the method
of operation, the number of vehicles entering and leaving the site,
the amount of earth products removed within a specified period
of time and generally regulate the operation so as to allow the
landowner use of his land but to prevent substantial injury to the
public interest of the Town.
(3)
B.
§ 220-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-32
1:207
§ 220-33. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Record of restrictions. Any restrictions or conditions imposed by the
Select Board shall be attached to the letter of permit and copies of said
permit and attached restrictions shall be sent to the Planning Board,
Board of Appeals, Water and Road Boards, Board of Health, Building
Inspector, and Town Clerk.
C.
Time limit. No earth products removal permit shall be issued for a
period of less than six months or more than 24 months. A permit may be
renewed without a public hearing by majority vote of the Select Board.
D.
Limit of removal. The Select Board may in its discretion limit the
amount of earth products removed from the Town upon a determination
that: [Amended 5-3-1988]
There is or will in the future be a need for the products within the
Town; or
(1)
The transportation of the earth products will create a hazardous
condition because, but not limited to, the estimated number of
vehicles per day, the size and weight of the vehicles, the expected
spreading of dirt, dust on the roadways and in the air.
(2)
E.
Unless incidental to construction on the premises under a current
building permit, no earth materials shall be removed within 10 feet of
spring high water table within the Water Resource District, or within
six feet of spring high water table elsewhere.
F.
Security. The Select Board may at its discretion, require a bond,
certified check or other security for compliance with the conditions of
this bylaw.
A.
Revocation. The Select Board may, after a public hearing on proof of
violation of any condition of this bylaw or restriction imposed by the
Select Board, revoke any permit or permits issued by it.
B.
Penalty. The penalty for violation of this bylaw shall be fines as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Code of the
Town of Lancaster.
C.
Extension of prior permits. Persons now operating with earth products
removal permits granted either by the Select Board or the Board of
Appeals shall be granted six months after passage of the above Bylaw
at a Town Meeting to obtain a new permit or cease operation after the
six-month period has elapsed.
D.
§ 220-32 LANCASTER CODE § 220-33
1:208
ARTICLE X
Environmental Controls
§ 220-34. Site plan review.
Applicability. Applications for building permits or certificates of use and
occupancy involving creation of, addition to, or substantial alteration of
a parking area, if either it serves a nonresidential principal use or if it
serves only a residential use and has 10 or more parking spaces, or if
there is a change in use on a site, shall be subject to site plan review.
[Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 20; 10-28-2013 STM by Art. 8]
A.
Procedure.
Applications subject to site plan review shall be accompanied by
three prints of plans of the proposal. The Building Inspector shall
forward two copies to the Planning Board for its review, and shall
not approve any application subject to such review without receipt
of written plan approval by the Planning Board or its designated
agent, unless 60 days elapse from the date of the first Planning
Board meeting following transmittal of plans to the Board.
[Amended 10-24-2000]
(1)
If, after receiving an application, the Planning Board determines
that in order to review that application it requires technical advice
unavailable from municipal employees, it may employ outside
consultants. Whenever possible it shall work cooperatively with
the applicant to identify appropriate consultants and to negotiate
payment of all of consultant fees by the applicant. Alternatively,
the Board may require that the applicant pay a reasonable review
fee for the employment of outside consultants chosen by the Board
alone.
(2)
B.
Drawing requirements. A site plan shall be submitted that accurately,
and at a scale and in detail acceptable to the Planning Board, locates
the boundaries of the lot, adjacent streets or ways, existing and
proposed structures, walkways and principal drives and service entries,
parking, landscaping, screening, recreation areas, utilities, and storm
drainage. For plans creating more than 35,000 cubic feet of building
volume or more than 25 parking spaces, site plans must be prepared
by a registered architect, landscape architect, or professional engineer,
unless this requirement is waived by the Planning Board prior to
application because of unusually simple circumstances. For premises in
the Light Industry, Light Industry 2 or Enterprise District, submittals
to the Planning Board shall also include ground floor plans and
architectural elevations. [Amended 5-3-1988; 6-11-1991; 5-5-2008
ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
C.
Decision. Plans shall be approved provided that the Planning Board
determines that, subject to any corrections it may require, the
requirements of §§ 220-35 to 220-38 will be satisfied; in areas changed
D.
§ 220-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-34
1:209
§ 220-35. Design guidelines. [Amended 5-3-1988]
in zoning district subsequent to October 7, 1985, the plans are
consistent with a concept plan approved at the time of rezoning or
subsequently by two-thirds vote of an Annual or Special Town Meeting,
or with a special permit authorizing departure from such plan (see
§ 220-63, Concept plans), and that no other conflicts between the
proposal and the Zoning Bylaw have been observed.
Any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide
adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment and
adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage consistent
with the functional requirements of Chapter 301, Subdivision of Land,
of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, currently in effect; and shall be
so designed that for the given location and type and extent of land use,
the design of building form, building location, egress points, grading,
and other elements of the development shall be so as to: [Amended
5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12]
Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees
six-inch-trunk diameter and larger, the area of wetland vegetation
displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil
erosion, and threat of air or water pollution;
(1)
Maximize pedestrian or vehicular safety and convenience within
the site and egressing from it;
(2)
Minimize obstruction of water views; minimize the visibility of
parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public
ways or premises residentially used or zoned; and minimize glare
from headlights or area lighting.
(3)
Assure that the design and location of structures on the site avoid
damage to or incompatibility with historical and archeological
resources, such as antique buildings and structures, barns,
stonewalls, earthworks and graves. [Added 10-6-2008 STM by
Art. 12]
(4)
A.
Building design. Within Light Industry, Light Industry 2 or Enterprise
Districts, approval of proposals subject to review under § 220-34 shall
require a special permit under Subsection C of this section if involving
a new building or a building alteration or extension visible from a
public way or public property, unless it meets each of the following:
[Amended 6-11-1991; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by
Art. 12]
Primary wall and roof surfaces appear similar to the materials
commonly found on existing buildings within the Town;
(1)
Major dimensions of the building are approximately parallel or
perpendicular to one or more nearby streets, if within 100 feet of
such street;
(2)
B.
§ 220-34 LANCASTER CODE § 220-35
1:210
§ 220-36. Disturbance controls and lighting. [Amended 10-6-2008
STM by Art. 12]
§ 220-36.1. Disturbance controls. [Amended 10-6-2008 STM by Art.
12]
No activity shall be permitted unless the following are met:
The building is not made in effect a sign through painting with bold
colors or other graphics devices, or through otherwise unnecessary
use of unconventional building form;
(3)
There is some element of consistency with any buildings on
abutting premises if facing the same street, such as eave height,
wall materials, or window proportions.
(4)
If the building exceeds 35,000 cubic feet and contains at least twice
the cubage of a principal building on any abutting lot, the building
design uses breaks in massing, roof planes, wall planes, and other
means to reduce the apparent difference in scale.
(5)
Special permits. Special permits required under Subsection B of this
section shall be acted upon by the special permit granting authority
(SPGA) otherwise required to act upon the application or, if none is
otherwise required, by the Planning Board. Such special permits shall
be approved if meeting any one or more of the following.
Subject to any conditions the SPGA may impose, the guidelines of
Subsections A and B of this section will be met, or
(1)
The proposal, despite not meeting one or more of the guide lines,
is appropriate to its context, considering the established character
of the vicinity, the degree of departure by the proposal from that
character, and the functional or symbolic role the structure is
intended to play, or
(2)
No better compliance would be reasonably possible, considering
the basic use and intensity of the proposal, or
(3)
The proposal will have minimal consequences for Town appearance
because of its low public visibility, owing to obscure location or
screening.
(4)
C.
Guidelines. The Planning Board shall adopt and from time to time
amend reasonable guidelines and regulations for their administration
[Amended 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12]
D.
Standard. No sound, noise, vibration, odor, or flashing (except for
warning devices, temporary construction or maintenance work,
parades, special events, or other special circumstances) shall be
observable without instruments more than 200 feet from the
boundaries of the originating premises at locations within a GI District,
A.
§ 220-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36.1
1:211
§ 220-36.2. Lighting. [Added 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12]
or more than 40 feet from the boundaries at locations within any other
district. However, the Planning Board may authorize on special permit
an activity not meeting these standards, in cases where the Board
determines that, because of peculiarities of location or circumstance,
no objectionable conditions will thereby be created for the use of other
properties.
Performance compliance. For a proposed facility whose future
compliance with this requirement is questionable, the Building
Inspector may require that the applicant furnish evidence of probable
compliance, whether by example of similar facilities or by engineering
analysis. Issuance of a permit on the basis of that evidence shall certify
the Town's acceptance of the conformity of the basic structure and
equipment, but future equipment changes and operating procedures
must be such as to also comply with this standard.
B.
Objective. The regulation of outdoor lighting is intended to enhance
public safety and welfare by providing for adequate and appropriate
outdoor lighting, provide for lighting that will complement the
character of the Town, reduce glare, minimize light trespass, and
reduce the cost and waste of unnecessary energy consumption.
A.
Applicability.
The requirements of this section shall apply to outdoor lighting
on lots and parcels in all districts, but shall not apply to one- and
two-family dwellings on lots on which they are the principal use,
streetlighting, lights that control traffic, or other lighting for public
safety on streets and ways.
(1)
When an existing outdoor lighting installation is being modified,
extended, expanded or added to, the entire outdoor lighting
installation on the lot shall be subject to the requirements of this
section if 20% or more of the fixtures will be new or altered.
(2)
Nonconforming temporary outdoor lighting necessitated by
construction, special nonrecurrent events, or emergency
contingencies may be used upon issuance of a temporary lighting
permit by the Building Inspector.
(3)
The following light sources are prohibited:
(a) Neon signs;
(b) Mercury vapor and quartz lamps; and
(c) Searchlights.
(4)
B.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
C.
§ 220-36.1 LANCASTER CODE § 220-36.2
1:212
COLOR RENDERING INDEX (CRI) — A measurement of the amount
of color shift that objects undergo when lighted by a light source as
compared with the floor of those same objects when seen under a
reference light source of comparable color temperature. CRI values
generally range from zero to 100, where 100 represents incandescent
light.
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction
of the direct light rays at the light source with respect to the vertical,
beyond which no direct light is emitted.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted from the lamp, off the reflector or
reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a
luminaire.
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps, and which may
include a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens or diffuser lens.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination. One footcandle is equal to one
lumen per square foot.
FULLY SHIELDED LUMINAIRE — A lamp and fixture assembly
designed with a cutoff angle of 90°, so that no direct light is emitted
above a horizontal plane.
GLARE — Light emitted from a luminaire with an intensity great
enough to produce annoyance, discomfort, or a reduction in a viewer's
ability to see.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The vertical distance from the finished
grade of the ground directly below to the lowest direct light-emitting
part of the luminaire.
INDIRECT LIGHT — Direct light that has been reflected off other
surfaces not part of the luminaire.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of direct light produced by a luminaire
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which it is located, or onsite
lighting producing more than 0.3 footcandles horizontal brightness
at ground level at any point off premises, except within a street.
LUMEN — A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For purposes of this bylaw, the
lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by the
manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps
and a fixture.
Plan contents. Wherever outside lighting is proposed, every application
for a building permit, electrical permit, special permit, variance, or site
plan shall be accompanied by a lighting plan which shall show:
D.
§ 220-36.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36.2
1:213
The location and type of any outdoor luminaires, including the
height of the luminaire;
(1)
The luminaire manufacturer's specification data, including lumen
output and photometric data showing cutoff angles;
(2)
The type of lamp, such as metal halide, compact fluorescent, LED
or high-pressure sodium; [Amended 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 11]
(3)
That light trespass onto any street or abutting lot will not occur.
This may be demonstrated by manufacturer's data, cross-section
drawings, or other means.
(4)
Control of glare and light trespass:
Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than
2,000 lumens shall be of fully shielded design.
(1)
All luminaires, regardless of lumen rating, shall be equipped with
whatever additional shielding, lenses, or cutoff devices are
required to eliminate light trespass onto any street or abutting
lot or parcel and to eliminate glare perceptible to persons on any
street or abutting lot or parcel.
(2)
Subsection E(1) above shall not apply to any luminaire intended
solely to illuminate any freestanding sign or the walls of a building,
but such luminaire shall be shielded so that its direct light is
confined to the surface of such sign or building.
(3)
All lamps subject to this bylaw shall have a minimum color
temperature of 2,000° K. and a maximum color temperature of
4,500° K. [Amended 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 11]
(4)
Control of illumination levels. All parking areas and pedestrian
facilities serving nonresidential uses and open to the general public
shall be provided with illumination during all hours from dusk to
dawn while those facilities are open to the general public. Such
illumination shall provide not less than 0.2 average maintained
horizontal footcandles. However, in performing site plan review
under § 220-34, the Planning Board may approve alternative
arrangements if it determines that, because of special
circumstances or alternative provisions, the specified illumination
is not necessary or appropriate for the protection of the public
safety. [Amended 5-7-2018 ATM by Art. 11]
(5)
E.
Lamp types:
Lamp types shall be selected for optimum color rendering as
measured by their color rendering index (CRI), as listed by the
lamp manufacturer. Lamps with a color rendering index lower than
50 are not permitted. This subsection shall not apply to temporary
decorative lighting which may include colored lamps, such as
holiday lighting.
(1)
F.
§ 220-36.2 LANCASTER CODE § 220-36.2
1:214
§ 220-37. Landscaping requirements; erosion and stormwater
control. [Amended 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12]
§ 220-37.1. Landscaping requirements. [Amended 10-6-2008 STM
by Art. 12]
No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. Processes, such
as arc welding, which create light flashes shall be confined within
buildings or shielded to prevent either direct glare or flashing.
(2)
A luminaire attached to the exterior of a building or structure for
area lighting shall be mounted no higher than 20 feet above grade
and shall be shielded to control glare.
(3)
A luminaire attached to a pole shall be mounted no higher than 20
feet above grade and shall be shielded to control glare.
(4)
Hours of operations. Outdoor lighting shall not be illuminated between
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., with the following exceptions:
If the use is being operated, such as a business open to customers,
or where employees are working, or where an institution or place
of public assembly is conducting an activity, normal illumination
shall be allowed during the activity and for not more than 1/2 hour
after activity ceases;
(1)
Low-level lighting sufficient for the security of persons or property
on the lot may be in operation between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
provided the average illumination on the ground or on any vertical
surface is not greater than 0.5 footcandles.
(2)
G.
Special permits. In accordance with § 220-35, Subsection C, the
Planning Board, acting as the special permit granting authority, may
grant a special permit modifying the requirements of this section,
provided it determines that such modification is consistent with the
objectives set forth in § 220-36.2, Subsection A. [Amended 5-7-2018
ATM by Art. 11]
H.
Applicability. Street, sideline, parking area, and district boundary
plantings shall be provided as specified below when any new building,
addition, or change of use requires a parking increase of 10 or more
spaces. In performing site plan review under § 220-34, the Planning
Board may authorize alternatives to the following specifications, taking
into consideration existing vegetation, topography, soils, and other site
conditions, provided that equivalent screening, shading, and
articulation are achieved.
A.
Plantings. Required plantings shall include both trees and shrubs, and
may include ones existing on the site. To be credited towards meeting
these requirements, trees must be at least 2 1/2 inches in caliper four
feet above grade, be of a species common in the area, and be ones
which reach an ultimate height of at least 30 feet. To be credited
B.
§ 220-36.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-37.1
1:215
towards meeting these requirements, shrubs must be at least 24 inches
in height at the time of building occupancy, reach an ultimate height of
at least 36 inches, and be of a species common in the area. Plantings
shall consist of at least one tree per 30 linear feet of planting area
length and at least one shrub per three feet. Plantings preferably will
be grouped, not evenly spaced, and shall be located or trimmed to avoid
blocking egress visibility. The planting area shall be unpaved except for
access drives and walks essentially perpendicular to the area.
Street planting area. Street planting is required for nonresidential
premises abutting an arterial street, as designated on the Zoning Map.
Required street planting shall be provided within 15 feet of the street
property line along the entire street frontage except at drives.
C.
Sideline planting area. Sideline planting is required for premises
abutting an arterial street. Required sideline planting shall be provided
within five feet of the side lot line between the front lot line and the
building setback (as built, not as required).
D.
Parking area plantings. A minimum of 2% of the interior area of parking
lots containing 30 or more spaces must be planted. A minimum of
one tree and four shrubs exclusive of perimeter plantings must be
planted for every 1,500 square feet of parking lot. Planting areas must
each contain not less than 30 square feet of unpaved soil area. Trees
and soil plots shall be so located as to provide visual relief and wind
interruption within the parking area, and to assure safe patterns of
internal circulation.
E.
District boundary planting area. District boundary planting is required
on any premises along the full length of any boundary abutting or
extending into a Residential District and being developed for a use
not allowed in that Residential District, unless abutting property is
determined by the Building Inspector to be unbuildable or visually
separated by topographic features. Required planting shall be located
within 10 feet of the boundary.
F.
Existing vegetation. Wherever possible, the above requirements shall
be met by retention of existing plants. If located within 25 feet of a
street, no existing tree of six-inch-trunk diameter or greater (measured
four feet above grade), dense hedgerow of four or more feet in both
depth and height, or existing earth berm providing similar visual
screening shall be removed or have grade changed more than one foot
unless dictated by plant health, access safety, or identification of the
premises.
G.
Exceptions. Where plant materials as required would harmfully
obstruct a scenic view, substitution of additional low level plantings
which will visually define the street edge or property line may be
authorized, provided that proposed buildings are also designed and
located to preserve that scenic view.
H.
§ 220-37.1 LANCASTER CODE § 220-37.1
1:216
§ 220-37.2. Erosion and stormwater control. [Added 10-6-2008 STM
by Art. 12]
Maintenance. All plant materials required by this bylaw shall be
maintained in a healthful condition. Dead limbs shall be promptly
removed, and dead plants shall be replaced at the earliest appropriate
season.
I.
Enterprise district vegetated buffer: In lieu of § 220-37.1F, whenever a
development in an Enterprise District abuts a residential property or
residential district, the development shall provide a vegetated buffer
for a parallel depth of 100 feet from the abutting side/rear property
lines. The buffer zone shall consist of existing natural vegetation
supplemented with a variety of trees and shrubs in order to provide
visual relief from the proposed development. The approving board may
require a vegetated border along the residential property or district
that consists of staggered rows of shrubs and trees, the majority of
which shall be evergreen. The border vegetation shall reach a height of
10 feet within four years of planting and shall provide visual screening
of the development.35 The approving board may waive the requirements
of this section if it determines that the abutting property is unbuildable
or visually separated by natural or topographic features. [Added
5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12]
J.
Stabilization. Any area of bare earth exposed through nonresidential
and nonagricultural building development must be permanently
stabilized through replanting, paving or other means of eliminating
wind or water erosion. Such stabilization must be completed prior
to building occupancy, or a performance bond must be posted in an
amount sufficient to assure completion of such work.
A.
Requirements. Parties planning construction which will expose more
than 43,560 square feet (one acre) of bare earth during development,
through either removal or filling on the same parcel or on contiguous
parcels in the same ownership, must apply for, obtain and comply with
a stormwater management permit through the Planning Board, per the
Stormwater Management Bylaw, Chapter 170 of the Town of Lancaster
Bylaws. In addition, the following must be complied with:
Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in a way which will minimize soil erosion. An erosion and
sediment control plan shall be submitted having sufficient
information on existing and proposed topography, vegetation and
control measures to allow determination of compliance.
(1)
Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(2)
(3) The disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum.
B.
35.The Town Planner may provide a list of recommended plantings to achieve this purpose.
§ 220-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-37.2
1:217
§ 220-38. Parking design and traffic planning. [Amended 10-6-2008
STM by Art. 12]
§ 220-38.1. Parking design. [Added 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12]
Where necessary, temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be
used to protect areas exposed during development.
(4)
Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, silt traps) shall
be installed and maintained where necessary to remove sediment
from runoff waters from land that is undergoing development.
(5)
Open drainage features (detention basins, vegetated swales, rain
gardens) shall be installed and maintained where necessary to
collect runoff waters and allow them to recharge the underlying
soils.
(6)
The angle of vegetated slopes and fills shall be no greater than
the angle which can be retained by vegetative cover or alternative
proposed erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes
left exposed must immediately be planted or otherwise provided
with permanent ground cover or other means sufficient to retain
erosion.
(7)
A ground cover sufficient to retain erosion must be planted or
otherwise provided within 30 working days, season permitting, on
any portion of the tract upon which further active construction is
not being undertaken.
(8)
The development plan or land-disturbing activity shall be fitted to
the topography and soils as to create the least erosion potential.
(9)
Referrals. The Building Inspector may require review of erosion control
proposals by the Soil Conservation Service or other experts in soil
mechanics in cases where doubt as to adequacy of proposed measures
exists. Selection of techniques and determination of adequacy of
measures shall, unless otherwise specified, be consistent with
Guidelines for Soil and Water Conservation in Urbanizing Areas of
Massachusetts, USDA Soil Conservation Service, 1975.36
C.
Objective. To document existing neighborhood parking conditions, to
evaluate the off-site impacts of the proposed parking, and to mitigate
any adverse parking impacts on the neighborhood.
A.
Format and scope. All applications for site plan review shall provide the
following documentation regarding the proposed parking design:
B.
36.Editor's Note: Section 220-38, Erosion control, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 10-6-2008 STM by Art. 12. See now § 220-37.2. Original Section 13.60, For
Devens Intermim Planning Overlay District, was deleted 10-24-2000.
§ 220-37.2 LANCASTER CODE § 220-38.1
1:218
Existing off-site and on-street neighborhood parking conditions,
including identification of streets likely to be affected by traffic or
other impacts of the proposed development.
(1)
(2) Projected impact of proposed parking on the neighborhood.
Proposed mitigation measures for adverse impacts identified
above. Information should include area of parking shaded by trees,
area of screening, alternative pavers, and creative parking lot
design.
(3)
The design of the parking facility shall take into consideration
natural, cultural and historical features and setting, as well as the
scale of the facility in relation to the building(s) on the site.
(4)
Parking design standards. The Board will review the parking design
documentation and evaluate for the following:
Hazards. The parking area and access roads shall not create a
hazard to abutters, vehicles or pedestrians.
(1)
Placement of parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be at the
rear or side(s) of the principal structure and shall not abut a
public way for more than 20 feet. If site encumbrances make this
requirement impossible to achieve, parking may be allowed to
abut a public way only if the parking lot is buffered and screened
from the public way using dense, native vegetation to the greatest
extent possible. The design of the parking facility shall take into
consideration natural, cultural and historical features and setting.
(2)
Pedestrian and bicycle access. Provisions for pedestrian and
bicycle access shall be safe and convenient, so that the
development as a whole enhances rather than degrades access by
foot or bicycle. Parking areas shall accommodate pedestrian access
through the use of raised crosswalks, usable landscaped islands,
benches, and abundant shade trees, among other design attributes.
(3)
Plantings. Refer to § 220-37.1, Subsections B and E for
requirements on plantings in parking areas.
(4)
Emergency access. Appropriate access for emergency vehicles
shall be provided to the principal structure. Such access need not
be paved, yet shall be stable and constructed to withstand a fire
vehicle.
(5)
Size of facility. Parking lots shall be configured so that no section
of lot shall contain more than 50 spaces, and each section of the
lot shall be visually separated from any other section of the lot
on- or off-premises through the use of major landscaping, earthen
berms or grade changes. No more parking than is required by
this bylaw shall be provided unless the applicant demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that unusual circumstances
(6)
C.
§ 220-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-38.1
1:219
§ 220-38.2. Traffic impact assessment. [Added 10-6-2008 STM by
Art. 12]
justify the amount of parking proposed as being necessary despite
reasonable efforts at parking demand reduction.
Objectives. To document existing traffic conditions (both vehicular and
pedestrian) in the vicinity of the proposed project, to describe the
volume and effect of projected traffic generated by the proposed
project, and to identify measures proposed to mitigate any adverse
impacts on traffic.
A.
Applicability. The Board may request an applicant for site plan review
to prepare a traffic impact assessment even if the project does not meet
any of the following criteria. The Board may also waive all or part of
the traffic impact assessment if a project does meet any of the following
criteria. Projects with one or more of the following characteristics shall
prepare a traffic impact assessment:
(1) Proposing 30 or more parking spaces;
Proposing a vehicular service establishment, such as a gasoline
service station; a facility for the sale, rental or repair of motor
vehicles; or car wash establishment;
(2)
Containing frontage and access on a state-numbered highway and
proposing more than six parking spaces.
(3)
B.
Qualifications. The traffic impact assessment shall be prepared by a
registered professional civil or traffic engineer in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
C.
Format and scope. All applications for site plan review shall provide the
following documentation as part of the traffic impact assessment:
Existing traffic conditions. Average daily and peak-hour volumes,
average and peak speeds, sight distances, accident data, and levels
of service (LOS) of intersections and streets likely to be affected by
the proposed development. Generally, such data shall be presented
for all streets and intersections adjacent to or within 1,000 feet
of the projected boundaries or impacted by the development and
shall be no more than six months old at the date of application.
Further, information regarding existing pedestrian circulation and
ways shall be provided.
(1)
Projected traffic conditions for design year of occupancy.
Statement of design year of occupancy, background traffic growth
for the previous five years, impacts of proposed developments
which have already been approved in part or in whole by the Town.
(2)
Projected impact of proposed development. Projected peak-hour
and daily traffic generated by the development on roads and ways
(3)
D.
§ 220-38.1 LANCASTER CODE § 220-38.2
1:220
in the vicinity of the development; sight lines at the intersections of
the proposed driveways and streets; existing and proposed traffic
controls in the vicinity of the proposed development; proposed
pedestrianways and design elements to maximize pedestrian safety
and usage; and projected post-development traffic volumes and
level of service (LOS) of intersections and streets likely to be
affected by the proposed development.
Proposed measures to minimize traffic conflict and mitigate any
affected intersections or ways.
(4)
Traffic impact standards. The Board will review the traffic impact
assessment and evaluate for the following:
Level of service. The level of service (LOS) of all impacted
intersections and streets shall be adequate following project
development, or the total value of off-site traffic improvements
required or approved by the Planning Board as a condition of
approval in any location within the Town affected by the proposed
project shall be roughly proportional to the cost of mitigating the
effects of the proposed project. For purposes of this standard:
LOS shall be determined according to criteria set forth by
the Transportation Research Board of the National Research
Council.
(a)
"Impacted" means intersections projected to receive at least
5% of the anticipated average daily or peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development.
(b)
"Adequate" shall mean a level of service "B" or better for all
streets and intersections, with the exception of "D" or better
for all state-numbered highways and their intersections or, if
Level D has already been reached or exceeded, no further
decline in the level of service.
(c)
"Mitigating" shall mean the strategies and methods used to
ensure that the LOS is adequate in all impacted areas.
(d)
(1)
Traffic conflict. The proposed site plan shall minimize points of
traffic conflict, both pedestrian and vehicular. The following
guidelines shall be used to achieve this standard:
Entrance and exit driveways shall be so located and designed
as to achieve maximum practicable distance from existing and
proposed access connections from adjacent properties.
(a)
Where possible, adjoining parcels shall have unified access and
promote interparcel circulation.
(b)
(c) Left-hand turns shall be minimized.
(2)
E.
§ 220-38.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-38.2
1:221
§ 220-39. Water Resource District.
Driveways shall be so located and designed as to discourage
the routing of vehicular traffic to and through residential
streets.
(d)
Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be accommodated on
and off site and shall be separated from motor vehicle
circulation as much as practicable. Existing pedestrianways
shall be maintained and where no pedestrianways exist,
proposals shall create pedestrianways and connections
between streets, the proposed development, surrounding
neighborhoods, and other surrounding uses. Said ways shall be
landscaped and handicapped accessible.
(e)
Purpose of district. The purpose of this Water Resource District is:
To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
Community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of
drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of the
Town of Lancaster,
(1)
To preserve and protect existing and potential sources of drinking
water supplies,
(2)
(3) To conserve the natural resources of the Town, and
To prevent temporary and permanent contamination of the
environment.
(4)
A.
Scope of authority. The Water Resource District is an overlay district
superimposed on all other zoning districts. The overlay district shall
apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing
buildings and new or expanded uses. Applicable activities or uses which
fall within the Water Resource District must comply with the
requirements of this district as well as with the underlying zoning.
Uses that are prohibited in the underlying zoning districts shall not be
permitted in the Water Resource District.
B.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock, sand or gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Material or structure on, above, or below
the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to
penetrate directly into the soil.
MINING — The removal or relocation of geological materials such as
topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.
C.
§ 220-38.2 LANCASTER CODE § 220-39
1:222
RECHARGE AREAS — Areas that collect precipitation or surface water
and carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas may include areas designated
as Zone I, Zone II, or Zone III.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant,
actual or potential hazard to human health if such substance or mixture
were discharged to land or water of the Town of Lancaster. Toxic
or hazardous materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic
chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious
wastes, acids, and alkalis, and all substances defined as "toxic" or
"hazardous" under MGL c. 21C and c. 21E and 310 CMR 30.00 and also
include such products as solvents and singers in quantities greater than
normal household use.
WATER RESOURCE DISTRICT — The zoning district defined to overlay
other zoning districts in the Town of Lancaster. The Water Resource
District may include specifically designated recharge areas.
ZONE II — The area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well
under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be
realistically anticipated [180 days of pumping at safe yield with no
recharge from precipitation, as defined in 310 Code of Massachusetts
Regulations (CMR) 22.00].
ZONE III — The land area beyond the area of Zone II from which
surface water and groundwater drain into Zone II, as defined in 310
CMR 22.00.
Establishment and delineation of Water Resource District. For the
purpose of this district, there are hereby established within the Town of
Lancaster certain groundwater protection areas, consisting of aquifers
or recharge areas which are delineated on the map titled "Lancaster,
MA: Official Zoning Overlay Map" (220 Attachment 3), dated April
2011, as may be amended from time to time by Town Meeting vote
under the recommendation of a registered professional engineer (civil
or sanitary), hydrologist, geologist, or soil scientist. This map is hereby
made a part of the Town of Lancaster Zoning Bylaw and is on file in
the office of the Town Clerk. [Amended 5-2-2011 ATM by Art. 21;
10-28-2013 STM by Art. 7]
D.
District boundary disputes.
If the location of the district boundary in relation to a particular
parcel is in doubt, resolution of boundary disputes shall be through
a special permit application to the Planning Board, which will act as
the special permit granting authority (SPGA). Any application for a
special permit for this purpose shall be accompanied by adequate
documentation.
(1)
The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in
question to show where the bounds should properly be located. At
the request of the owner(s), the Town of Lancaster may engage
(2)
E.
§ 220-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:223
a registered professional engineer (civil or sanitary), hydrologist,
geologist, or soil scientist to determine more adequately the
boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land,
and may charge the owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the
investigation.
Use regulation. In the Water Resource District, the following
regulations shall apply:
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the Water
Resource District provided that all necessary permits, orders, or
approvals required by local, state or federal laws are also obtained:
(a) Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife;
Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting
where otherwise legally permitted;
(b)
(c) Foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths, and bridges;
Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies
and dams, splash boards, and other water control supply and
conservation devices;
(d)
Maintenance, repair, and enlargement of any existing
structure, subject to Subsection F(2), Prohibited uses, and
Subsection F(3), re: special permitted uses;
(e)
Residential development, subject to Subsection F(2),
Prohibited uses, and Subsection F(3), re: special permitted
uses;
(f)
Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry,
harvesting, and grazing, subject to Subsection F(2), Prohibited
uses, and Subsection F(3), re: special permitted uses;
(g)
Construction, maintenance, repair, and enlargement of
drinking water supply related facilities such as, but not limited
to, wells, pipelines, aqueducts, and tunnels. Underground
storage tanks related to these activities are not categorically
permitted.
(h)
(1)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited:
(a) Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
Storage of liquid petroleum products, except the following:
Normal household use, outdoor maintenance, and heating
of a structure;
[1]
Waste oil retention facilities required by statute, rule, or
regulation;
[2]
(b)
(2)
F.
§ 220-39 LANCASTER CODE § 220-39
1:224
Emergency generators required by statute, rule, or
regulation;
[3]
Treatment works approved under 314 CMR 5.00 for
treatment of ground- or surface waters; provided that
storage, listed in Subsection F(2)(a) through this (d)
above, is in freestanding containers within buildings or
above ground with secondary containment, adequate to
contain a spill the size of the containers total storage
capacity.
[4]
(c) Land filling of sludge or septage as defined in 310 CMR 32.05;
Storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in
compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31;
(d)
Individual sewage disposal systems that are designed in
accordance with 310 CMR 15.00 to receive more than 110
gallons of sewage per quarter acre under one ownership per
day, or 440 gallons of sewage on any acre under one ownership
per day, whichever is greater, except the replacement or repair
of an existing system that will not result in an increase in
design capacity above the original design;
(e)
Storage of de-icing chemicals unless such storage, including
loading areas, is within a structure designed to prevent the
generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
(f)
(g) Storage of animal manure unless covered or contained;
Earth, removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand,
gravel, or any other earth material (including mining activities)
to within six feet of historical high groundwater as determined
from monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation
data complied by the United States Geological Survey, except
for excavations for building foundations, roads, or utility
works;
(h)
Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous
waste subject to MGL c. 21C and 310 CMR 30 except the
following:
Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR
30;
[1]
Household hazardous waste collection centers and events
under 310 CMR 30.390;
[2]
[3] Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A;
Water remediation treatment works approved under 314
CMR 5;
[4]
(i)
§ 220-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:225
Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in MGL c.
140B, § 1;
(j)
Treatment works that are subject to 314 CMR 5 including
privately owned sewage treatment facilities, except the
following:
The replacement or repair of an existing treatment works
that will not result in a design capacity of the existing
treatment works;
[1]
The replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal
system(s) with wastewater treatment works that will not
result in a design capacity greater than the design
capacity of the existing system(s);
[2]
Treatment works approved by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection designed for the
treatment of contaminated groundwater.
[3]
(k)
Storage of liquid hazardous materials as defined in MGL c.
21E, unless in a freestanding container within a building or
above ground with secondary containment adequate to contain
a spill the size of the container's storage capacity;
(l)
Industrial and commercial uses which discharge process
wastewater on site;
(m)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing de-icing
chemicals if brought in from outside the district;
(n)
Storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners, as
defined in MGL c. 128, § 64, unless such storage is within a
structure designated to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated runoff or leachate;
(o)
The use of septic system cleaners, which contain toxic or
hazardous chemicals.
(p)
Uses and activities requiring a special permit. The following uses
and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of a Special
permit by the special permit granting authority (SPGA) under such
conditions as it may require:
Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform
to the Water Resource District;
(a)
The application of pesticides, including herbicides,
insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides, for nondomestic or
nonagricultural uses in accordance with state and federal
standards. The special permit shall be granted if such
standards are met. If applicable, the applicant should provide
documentation of compliance with a yearly operating plan
(b)
(3)
§ 220-39 LANCASTER CODE § 220-39
1:226
(YPO) for vegetation management operations under 333 CMR
11 or a Department of Food and Agriculture approved pesticide
management plan or integrated pest management (IPM)
program under 333 CMR 12;
The application of fertilizers for nondomestic or
nonagricultural uses. Such applications shall be made in a
manner so as to minimize adverse impacts on groundwater due
to nutrient transport, deposition, and sedimentation;
(c)
Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, permitted in the underlying zoning
(except as prohibited under Subsection (3)(b). Such activities
shall require a special permit to prevent contamination of
groundwater;
(d)
The construction of dams or other water control devices,
ponds, pools or other changes in water bodies or -courses,
created for swimming, fishing, or other recreational uses,
agricultural uses, or drainage improvements. Such activities
shall not adversely affect water quality or quantity;
(e)
Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2,500
square feet of any lot, whichever is greater. A system for
groundwater recharge must be provided which does not
degrade groundwater quality. For nonresidential uses,
recharge shall be by stormwater infiltration basins or similar
system covered with natural vegetation, and dry wells shall
be used only where other methods are infeasible. For all
nonresidential uses, all such basins and wells shall be
preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate
removal of contamination. Any and all recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner.
(f)
The SPGA may adopt regulations to govern design features of
projects. Such regulations shall be consistent with subdivision
regulations adopted by the municipality.
(4)
The applicant shall file six copies of a site plan and attachments.
The site plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by
the SPGA and be stamped by a professional engineer. All additional
submittals shall be prepared by qualified professionals. The site
plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include the following
information where pertinent:
A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers,
fuel, and other potentially hazardous materials to be used
or stored on the premises in quantities greater than those
associated with normal household use;
(a)
(5)
§ 220-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:227
For those activities using or storing such hazardous materials,
a hazardous materials management plan shall be prepared and
filed with the Hazardous Materials Coordinator, Fire Chief, and
Board of Health. The plan shall include:
Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous
materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage,
accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism,
including spill containment and clean up procedures;
[1]
Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous
materials, and wastes with impervious floor surfaces;
[2]
Evidence of compliance with the regulations of the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act 310
CMR 30, including obtaining an EPA identification number
from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
[3]
(b)
Proposed downgradient location(s) for groundwater
monitoring well(s), should the SPGA deem the activity a
potential groundwater threat.
(c)
The SPGA shall hold a hearing, in conformity with the provision of
MGL c. 40A, § 9, within 65 days after the filing of the application,
and after the review by the Town, boards, departments, and
commissions. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
publication and posting and by first-class mailings to "parties of
interest" as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 11. The decision of the SPGA
and any extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall be filed
with the SPGA and Town Clerk within 90 days following the closing
of the public hearing. Failure of the SPGA to act within 90 days
shall be deemed as a granting of the permit. However, no work
shall commence until a certification is recorded as required by said
MGL c. 40A, § 11.
(6)
Written notice of any violations of this section shall be given by the
Building Inspector to the responsible person as soon as possible
after detection of a violation or a continuing violation. Notice to
the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed notice to the
responsible person. Such notice shall specify the requirement or
restriction violated and the nature of the violation, and may also
identify the actions necessary to remove or remedy the violations
and preventive measures required for avoiding future violations
and a schedule of compliance. A copy of such notice shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission, (Town) Engineer/Department of Public
Works, and Water Department. The cost of containment shall be
borne by the owner and operator of the premises.
(7)
For situations that require remedial action to prevent adverse
impact to the water resources within the Water Resource District,
(8)
§ 220-39 LANCASTER CODE § 220-39
1:228
the Town of Lancaster, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health,
or any of their agents may order the owner or operator of the
premises to remedy the violation. If said owner and/or operator
does not comply with said order, the Town of Lancaster, the
Building Inspector, the Board of Health, or any of their agents,
if authorized to enter upon such premises under the terms of
the special permit or otherwise, may act to remedy the violation.
The remediation cost shall be the responsibility of the owner and
operator of the premises.
Procedures for issuance of special permit.
The special permit granting authority (SPGA) under this bylaw
shall be the Town of Lancaster Planning Board. Such special permit
shall be granted if the SPGA determines, in conjunction with the
Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, (Town) Engineer/
Department of Public Works and Planning Board that the intent
of this bylaw as well as specific criteria are met. The SPGA shall
not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner's
application materials include, in the SPGAs opinion, sufficiently
detailed, definite and credible information to support positive
findings in relation to the standards given in this section. The
SPGA shall document the basis for any departures from the
recommendations of the other (Town) boards or agencies in its
decision.
(1)
Upon receipt of the special permit application, the SPGA shall
transmit one copy to the Planning Board, Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission, and the (Town) Engineer/Department
of Public Works for their written recommendations. Failure to
respond in writing within 35 days of receipt by the Board shall
indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency. The
necessary number of copies of the application shall be furnished by
the applicant.
(2)
The SPGA may grant the required special permit only upon finding
that the proposed use meets the following standards, those
specified in Subsection F of this bylaw, and any regulations or
guidelines adopted by the SPGA. The proposed use must:
In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect
the existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is
available in the Water Resource District, and
(a)
Be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils,
topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related
natural characteristics of the site to be developed.
(b)
(3)
The special permit granting authority may retain qualified experts
at the reasonable expense of the applicant if necessary in order to
evaluate the application.
(4)
G.
§ 220-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:229
Conditions. Special permits shall be granted only subject to such
conditions as necessary to assure adequate safeguarding of water
quality, which may include the following, among others:
Monitoring wells to be located downgradient of potential
pollution sources, with periodic sampling to be provided to the
Board of Health at the owner's expense.
(a)
Pollutant source reduction, including limitations on use of
parking area de-icing materials and periodic cleaning or
renovation of pollution control devices, such as catch basin
sumps.
(b)
(5)
Severability. A determination that any portion or provision of this
overlay protection district is invalid shall not invalidate any other
portion thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously
issued thereunder.
H.
§ 220-39 LANCASTER CODE § 220-39
1:230
ARTICLE XI
Personal Wireless Service Facility Regulations
[Added 4-5-2000]
§ 220-40. Purpose and definitions.
In order to conform to its responsibilities under the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 in a manner consistent with the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the public, and the preservation of
property values in the Town, this Zoning Bylaw governs the establishment
of new or altered personal wireless service ("PWS") facilities in the Town.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the term "personal wireless service" and
"personal wireless service facility" shall have the same meaning as in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c)(7)(C).
§ 220-41. Scope.
From the effective date of this bylaw, no building or special permit shall
be issued for the placement, construction, erection or modification of any
structure to provide for PWS facilities either as a principal use, or as an
accessory use in the Town, except in the Personal Wireless Service Overlay
District (PWSOD) and in accordance with the regulations set forth below.
§ 220-42. Personal Wireless Service Overlay District.
There shall be one Personal Wireless Service Overlay District. The Personal
Wireless Service Overlay District shall consist of the land designated on the
Lancaster Assessor's Maps as:
Assessor's Map
Number Parcel Location
5 32 Fort Pond Road
14 7 Lunenburg Road
26 2 Bolton Town Line
28 1 Brockelman Road
30 135A Main Street
37 31 Winsor Road
38 137 Center Bridge Road
42 115 Mill Street Extension
43 1 Mill Street Extension
§ 220-43. Special permit.
The Board of Appeals may by special permit authorize the placement,
construction, erection or modification of a freestanding PWS structure
of up to 100 feet in height in the PWSOD; or a PWS structure of up
to 20 feet in height above the height of the building or other structure
A.
§ 220-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-43
1:231
on which it is mounted in the PWSOD, provided that the Board of
Appeals finds in its judgment, after soliciting and reviewing comments
from other Town boards, departments, agencies, and their staff, that
reasonable measures shall be taken or already have been taken to:
Mitigate against negative impacts on visual quality affecting
neighboring properties and street by incorporating reasonable
design, siting and screening methods; and
(1)
Protect against potential damage to neighboring properties and
streets from structural failure or collapse or damage from falling
ice.
(2)
In making such findings, the Board of Appeals shall consider the extent
to which the proposed PWS structure together with any related
equipment (collectively the "PWS facility") meets the following criteria:
The PWS structure shall be located such that if it were to fall or
collapse, it would fall or collapse entirely within the boundaries of
the parcel on which it is to be located;
(1)
The PWS facility shall be sited, designed and constructed in such
a manner that existing vegetation is preserved to the maximum
extent practicable;
(2)
Any fencing proposed shall be screened by a landscape buffer of
evergreen shrubs or trees planted along the exterior side of the
fence, with a mature height at least equivalent to the fence height,
and no such fencing shall be of razor wire or barbed wire;
(3)
Lighting shall be limited to that needed for emergencies and/or as
required by the FAA;
(4)
To the extent technologically feasible, all network interconnections
from the PWS facility shall be via land lines;
(5)
Lattice-style tower and PWS structures requiring three or more
legs and/or guy wires for support are prohibited;
(6)
In the PWSOD, the total height for freestanding PWS structures,
including attached accessories, shall not exceed 100 feet in height
as measured from the ground level at the base of the structure. In
the PWSOD, the height of a PWS structure mounted on a building
or other structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the ridge
line of the roof of the building on which it is mounted, or 20 feet in
height above the top of the structure on which it is mounted if other
than a building. In no event, however, shall the height of a mounted
PWS structure in the PWSOD exceed 100 feet as measured from
the ground level at the base of the building or other structure on
which it is mounted.
(7)
B.
§ 220-43 LANCASTER CODE § 220-43
1:232
The PWS facility shall be designed to accommodate co-location of
multiple users to the extent technologically practicable in order to
reduce the number of PWS facilities located in the Town;
(8)
New PWS facilities will be considered only if existing or already
approved facilities cannot accommodate the equipment planned for
the new facility;
(9)
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed technology is
the safest and least obtrusive to the neighborhood landscape
currently available;
(10)
The PWS facility shall be sited and designed in a manner, which
minimizes its visibility from neighboring residences and streets.
(11)
The Board of Appeals may waive strict compliance with any of the
above-listed criteria, provided it determines that such waiver would not
derogate from the intent of these regulations, and further provided that
a waiver of compliance from the height limitations of 100 feet may be
granted by the Board of Appeals only if it is determined by independent
consultants hired by the Town that additional height is required to
provide service coverage within the Town of Lancaster. In no case shall
such height exceed 150 feet as measured from the ground level of the
PWS structure or from the ground level at the base of the building or
other structure on which the PWS structure is mounted.
C.
Special permit application.
The special permit application shall include a site plan meeting the
requirements of Article X, Environmental Controls, to the extent
possible. In addition, the application shall include: [Amended
5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14]
A rendering, model or similar, to-scale representation,
accurately depicting the proposed facility within the context of
the site on which it is to be located and the surrounding areas;
(a)
A report or reports prepared by professional engineers
describing:
The technical, economic and other reasons for the facility
height, location and design;
[1]
The capacity of the facility, including the number and types
of transmitters and receivers it can accommodate and the
basis for the calculations of the capacity;
[2]
How the proposed facility complies with all applicable
Federal and State standards;
[3]
(b)
Written official statements of compliance with, or exemption
from, the regulations of all federal and state agencies
governing personal wireless facilities or uses, including but
(c)
(1)
D.
§ 220-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-43
1:233
not limited to the FAA, FCC, Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission, and Massachusetts Department of Health.
The applicant shall pay the reasonable costs for the Board of
Appeals to have independent consultants review of the application
materials.
(2)
The applicant seeking a special permit for a PWS facility shall
provide a demonstration of the visual impact of the proposed PWS
structure by raising a balloon, or a temporary structure, on the
proposed site to the height of the proposed structure for such time
as the Board of Appeals determines to be necessary.
(3)
Special permits authorized under this section shall be renewed
every two years provided the special permit holder has filed an
annual certification demonstrating continuing compliance with the
special permit and applicable federal and state regulatory
requirements.
(4)
Any parts of the PWS facility which have not been used for one
year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense.
The Board of Appeals may, as a condition of any special permit or
renewal granted under this section, require the applicant or special
permit holder to post a bond or other financial security with the
Town Treasurer in an amount deemed sufficient to cover demolition
and removal of the facilities in the event of discontinuance of use.
(5)
§ 220-43 LANCASTER CODE § 220-43
1:234
ARTICLE XII
Adult Entertainment Uses
[Added 5-5-2003]
§ 220-44. Authority.
This bylaw is enacted pursuant to MGL c. 40A and pursuant to the Town's
authority under the Home Rule Amendment to the Massachusetts
Constitution to serve the compelling Town interests of limiting the location
of certain adult entertainment uses, as defined and designated herein, in
response to studies demonstrating their deleterious effects.
§ 220-45. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Adult Entertainment Bylaw to address and mitigate
the secondary effects of the adult entertainment establishments and
sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and defined herein.
Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime, adverse
impacts on public health, adverse impacts on the business climate of
municipalities, adverse impacts on the property values of residential and
commercial properties, and adverse impacts on quality of life. All of said
secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and general welfare of
the Town of Lancaster and its inhabitants. The provisions of this bylaw have
neither the purpose or intent of imposing a limitation on the content of any
communicative matter of materials, including sexually oriented matter or
materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this bylaw to restrict of
deny access by adults to adult entertainment establishments or to sexually
oriented matter or materials that are protected by the Constitutions of the
United States or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or
deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials may
have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matter or materials. Neither is
it the purpose or intent of this bylaw to legalize the sale, rental, distribution
or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter of materials.
§ 220-46. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — Includes the following uses:
A. Adult bookstores, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
B. Adult motion-picture theaters, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
C. Adult paraphernalia store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
D. Adult video store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
Establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons, as defined by
MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
E.
§ 220-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:235
§ 220-47. Special permit; criteria and standards.
Adult entertainment uses shall be permitted only in the Light Industry 2
(LI2) District, only upon the grant of a special permit by the Select Board.
Special permits shall only be issued under this section following public
hearings held within 65 days after filing of an application with the Select
Board, a copy of which application shall forth with be given to the Town
Clerk by the applicant. Such a special permit shall not be granted unless
each of the following standards has been met:
The application for a special permit for an adult use shall provide the
name and address of the legal owner of the establishment, the legal
owner of the property, and the manager of the proposed establishment.
A.
No adult use special permit shall be issued to any person convicted of
violating the provisions of MGL c. 119 § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28.
B.
All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a
manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment
by the public.
C.
No adult use shall be allowed to display for advertisement or other
purpose any signs, placards or other like materials to the general public
on the exterior of the building or on the interior where the same may
be seen through glass or other like transparent material any sexually
explicit figures or words as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
D.
No adult use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate
adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view
displays or linger on the premises.
E.
The proposed adult entertainment use shall comply with the off-street
parking requirements set forth in this bylaw.
F.
No adult entertainment use shall have any flashing lights visible from
outside the establishment.
G.
H. No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign.
No special permit shall be issued for an adult entertainment use unless
the applicant shall have first submitted a site plan to the Planning
Board and obtained the Planning Board's approval of such site plan
pursuant to Article X. The site plan shall depict all existing and
proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways, service areas and other
open uses.
I.
The sale, dispensation or consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited on premises where an adult entertainment use
establishment exists.
J.
§ 220-47 LANCASTER CODE § 220-48
1:236
§ 220-48. Conditions.
The special permit granting authority may impose reasonable conditions,
safeguards and limitations on time or use of any special permit granted,
including a condition that any such special permit shall be personal to the
applicant, shall not run with land and shall expire upon expiration of the
applicant's lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject property.
§ 220-49. Expiration.
A special permit to conduct an adult entertainment use shall expire after
a period of two calendar years from its date of issuance and shall be
automatically renewable for successive two-year periods thereafter,
provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the special
permit granting authority prior to said expiration and that no objection to
said renewal is made and sustained by the special permit granting authority
based upon the public safety factors applied at the time that the original
special permit was granted.
§ 220-50. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable and, in the event that any
provision of this article is determined to be invalid for any reason, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 220-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-50
1:237

ARTICLE XIII
Standard Exemptions
§ 220-51. Nonconforming buildings.
§ 220-52. Nonconforming uses.
Continuance, alteration, extension. Any lawful single- or two-family
building in existence at the time of adoption of this bylaw may continue
unchanged, or may be altered and extended in any way which would not
result in new or increased violation of any of the dimensional or parking
requirements of this bylaw. No other nonconforming building may be
altered or extended unless authorized by a special permit acted on by
the Board of Appeals upon its finding that such change in structure
and in the extent of the associated use will not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming
structure and use. [Amended 10-24-2000]
A.
Reconstruction.
A nonconforming building which has been destroyed in part or
whole, by catastrophe or otherwise, may be reconstructed as in
Subsection A above provided that such reconstruction is begun
within six months after destruction and is substantially completed
within two years of destruction.
(1)
Any destroyed portion of a nonconforming building which has not
been substantially reconstructed within two years of destruction
shall conform to all the dimensional and parking requirements of
this bylaw.
(2)
B.
Razing of destroyed or condemned buildings. Any building or other
structure which has remained unused after damage and has not been
restored to usable condition within five years of damage and any
dwelling condemned for habitation and vacant for five years after
condemnation shall, within the following year and at the owner's
expense, be restored to usable condition or be razed and the site shall
be cleared of debris, cellar holes and all other hazards. Owners of any
buildings destroyed or condemned prior to the effective date of this
bylaw shall have six years from the effective date in which to comply.
C.
Continuance. Any lawful use in existence at the time of adoption of this
bylaw may continue unchanged.
A.
Change in use. Any change in use or increase in the number of dwelling
units shall require an occupancy permit. The most recent
nonconforming use which has not been discontinued as defined in
Subsection C below may be replaced by another nonconforming use
upon granting of a special permit by the Board of Appeals upon its
finding that such change in use will not be substantially more
B.
§ 220-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-52
1:239
§ 220-53. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 10-24-2000]
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use.
[Amended 10-24-2000]
Resumption after discontinuance. Any use replacing a discontinued
nonconforming use shall conform to the use and parking regulations
of this bylaw. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to have been
discontinued if it has been abandoned or not used for a period of two
years. [Amended 10-24-2000]
C.
Dwellings in nonresidential districts. Any lot in an LI, LI2, EZ, or GI
District which was in existence and in separate ownership from all
adjoining land on May 3, 1988, and which has a minimum of 5,000
square feet of area and 50 feet of frontage on a way which meets
the adequacy requirements referenced in § 220-10B of this bylaw, may
be used for one single-family detached dwelling. [Added 10-24-2000;
amended 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12;
5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 14]
D.
Preexisting lots. The protections afforded under MGL c. 40A, § 6,
Subsection 4, to certain preexisting lots for single- and two-family use
shall apply in the same manner to lots for nonresidential use.
A.
Inconsequential change. Existing legally nonconforming lots, whether
built upon or not, may be changed in shape or combined, provided that
the change does not thereby increase the number of potential building
lots, or create or increase a nonconformity, as noted by the Planning
Board in reviewing a plan submitted for endorsement that approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, or otherwise.
Making such change shall not terminate the protection from current
requirements provided in MGL c. 40A or in this bylaw. [Amended
5-1-2017 ATM, by Art. 14]
B.
§ 220-52 LANCASTER CODE § 220-53
1:240
ARTICLE XIV
Owner's Duties and Rights
§ 220-54. Building permit.
New, reconstructed, altered or moved buildings. Before undertaking
construction, reconstruction in excess of $500, or removal of a building
site within Lancaster, the owner must secure a building permit from the
Building Inspector.
A.
Validity of prior permits. Any building or special permit lawfully issued
prior to the first publication of notice of the public hearing on a relevant
amendment to this bylaw shall be valid provided construction is begun
within six months of issue and continued in good faith.
B.
Temporary structures. Temporary structures may be authorized by the
Building Inspector for a period not to exceed six months or subject to
conditions and time limits designed to protect the district.
C.
Form of application.
Applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan
of the lot in duplicate, with sufficient information thereon to allow
the Building Inspector to determine whether the proposed use
and structure comply fully with this bylaw. Such information shall
include as a minimum:
(a) Proposed use of the building and land;
(b) Location of the lot and of proposed entrances thereto;
(c) Rights-of-way and easement on or adjoining the lot;
(d) Placement of all buildings on the lot;
(e) Area of lot and area of each existing and proposed building;
(f) Number of stories and height of all buildings;
(g) Provision for parking and loading spaces where applicable;
Such additional information as the Inspector may request,
including certification by a registered land surveyor.
(h)
(1)
The drawings shall be at the scale and in the form required by the
Inspector.
(2)
D.
Building permit. A building permit shall not be issued by the Building
Inspector until the front two lots' bounds have been permanently set in
proper locations by a registered land surveyor.
E.
§ 220-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-55
1:241
§ 220-55. Occupancy permit.
Before occupying a new building, or changing the use of part or all of an
existing building, or increasing the number of dwelling units on the lot, or
using a lot now vacant or used for agriculture for any other purpose, or
changing the use of a lot from one nonagricultural purpose to another, the
owner must secure an occupancy permit from the Building Inspector.
§ 220-56. Special permit application and duration. [Amended
10-24-2000]
Where the proposed use of land or buildings is one classified in Article III
or elsewhere as allowable only by special permit, the owner shall secure a
special permit from the Board of Appeals or other designated special permit
granting authority before applying for building and occupancy permits. A
special permit shall lapse if not exercised within two years as provided in
MGL c. 40A, § 9.
§ 220-57. Relief from denial of permit. [Amended 10-24-2000]
If an owner expects to be or is denied a permit necessary under this bylaw,
he may take the following actions as appropriate.
§ 220-58. Zoning amendment procedures.
Appeal. If the denial of a permit is believed to be due to an error in
the interpretation of this bylaw, the owner may, within 30 days of such
denial, file a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk, for transmittal to the
Board of Appeals.
A.
Variance: application and duration. If the owner believes that literal
application of this bylaw will cause a hardship unique to his property, he
may, before or after application for a building permit; file an application
for a variance with the Town Clerk for transmittal to the Board of
Appeals. If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within
one year of the date of granting, they shall lapse.
B.
Court appeal. Any person or any municipal officer or board aggrieved
by a decision of a municipal officer or board may, in accordance with
MGL c. 40A, § 17, appeal to the appropriate court within 20 days after
the decision has been filed with the Town Clerk.
C.
Submittal of proposed amendment. If any person believes that the text
or map of this bylaw should be changed, he may submit an amendment
to the bylaw to be passed on at a Town Meeting. Such Warrant article
may be submitted to the Select Board by the owner of land to be
affected, or by a petition signed by 10 registered voters of the Town for
action at an Annual Town Meeting, or by 100 such signatures for action
at a Special Town Meeting, or otherwise as provided by MGL c. 40A,
§ 5. The petitioners should consult the Select Board as to the time and
form of the submittal.
A.
§ 220-55 LANCASTER CODE § 220-58
1:242
§ 220-59. Limit on repetitive actions.
Notification of nonresidents. Any nonresident owner of land in
Lancaster may request notices of all public hearings under this bylaw
and of zoning boundary or use changes affecting his property in the
manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5.
B.
Repetitive petitions. As provided in MGL c. 40A, § 16, no appeal,
application or petition that has been unfavorably acted upon by a
special permit granting authority shall be favorably acted upon within
two years of denial unless: [Amended 10-24-2000]
Notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of
relevant proceedings, and
(1)
The special permit granting authority finds, by a vote of four of its
five members, specific and material changes in the conditions upon
which the previous unfavorable action was based and notes such
changes in its proceedings, and
(2)
Four of the five members of the Planning Board consent thereto in
the case of permits acted upon by the Board of Appeals.
(3)
A.
Repetitive amendments. No proposed zoning bylaw which has been
unfavorably acted upon by Town Meeting shall be considered within
two years of such action unless its adoption is recommended in the final
report of the Planning Board.
B.
§ 220-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-59
1:243

ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 220-60. Building Inspector; violations and penalties.
§ 220-61. Board of Appeals.
Enforcing officer. The Building Inspector appointed under the
Lancaster Building Bylaw shall enforce the Zoning Bylaws and the
decisions of the Board of Appeals.
A.
Interpretation of bylaw. In the Building Inspector's interpretation and
application of the bylaw, the provisions of this bylaw shall be held to
be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of its purposes.
Where this bylaw imposes greater restrictions than imposed by other
bylaws, the provisions of this bylaw shall control. Where there is
reasonable doubt as to the meaning of any provision in this bylaw, the
Building Inspector or Board of Appeals shall consult the Planning Board
regarding the intent of the provision, allowing 14 days for a response
before rendering a decision.
B.
Issuance of permits. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit
until he is satisfied after inspection that all the requirements of this
bylaw, or of Article XIII, Standard Exemptions, insofar as applicable,
have been met, except as otherwise instructed in writing by the Board
of Appeals upon granting a special permit, appeal or variance. The
Building Inspector shall specify in writing the reason for refusal of any
permit required by this bylaw.
C.
Notice and penalties for violations.
Any suspected violation of this bylaw shall be inspected, and any
violation found shall be reported and specified in writing by the
Building Inspector to the owner, to any other occupants affected
and to the Select Board.
(1)
If the Building Inspector is requested in writing to enforce this
bylaw against any person allegedly in violation thereof and declines
to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such
enforcement of any action, or refusal to act, and the reasons
therefor, within 14 days of receipt of such request. An appeal to the
Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by reason
of his or her inability to obtain enforcement action, as provided at
MGL c. 40A, § 8. [Amended 10-24-2000]
(2)
Whoever violates any provisions of this bylaw, or any of the
conditions under which a permit is issued or any decision rendered
by the Board of Appeals, may be fined in an amount as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Fines, of the Code of the
Town of Lancaster for each offense, each day that such violation
continues constituting a separate offense. [Amended 5-3-1988]
(3)
D.
§ 220-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-61
1:245
Appointment, organization and powers. There shall be a Board of
Appeals of five members and three associate members appointed by the
Select Board as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 12. Members of the Board of
Appeals in office at the time of adoption of this bylaw shall continue in
office for the remainder of their terms. Said Board shall annually elect
a Chairman from its own number and a Clerk. It shall adopt rules for
the conduct of its business and file a copy thereof with the Town Clerk.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the power granted to it under MGL
c. 40A, including the power to grant special permits required by this
bylaw.
A.
Notices of public hearings. The Board of Appeals shall give public
notice of any appeal, application or petition in the manner provided in
MGL c. 40A, § 11. [Amended 10-24-2000]
B.
Decisions. Decisions of the Board shall be made within a period
consistent with MGL c. 40A. [Amended 10-24-2000]
C.
Approval of special permits. [Amended 10-24-2000]
The Board of Appeals shall not approve a special permit unless it
finds that in its judgment all the following conditions are met:
All requirements applicable to the class of special permit
sought are fulfilled;
(a)
The specific site is an appropriate location for the buildings
and uses proposed;
(b)
There is safe access from roads adequate for the traffic
expected, adequate parking is provided and internal
circulation is adequate for emergency vehicles;
(c)
Board of Health requirements for water and sanitation
arrangements are followed;
(d)
The use as developed and operated will not adversely affect the
neighborhood;
(e)
(f) The purposes of this bylaw (§ 220-1) are substantially met.
(1)
In approving a special permit, the Board shall attach such
conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the
neighborhood and the Town.
(2)
D.
Approval of variances. Before a variance may be authorized, the Board
shall find that all of the conditions set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 10, have
been met and shall give the reasons for its findings regarding each
condition in detail. The Board of Appeals shall impose such limitation
on time and use and such other conditions as it may deem desirable to
protect the public interest and to ensure that the variance granted is
not greater in degree or duration than is justified by the hardship to be
relieved.
E.
§ 220-61 LANCASTER CODE § 220-61
1:246
§ 220-62. Planning Board.
§ 220-63. Concept plan.
Use variances. [Amended 10-24-2000]
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance for use, but only
if it finds that the following criteria are met, as well as those
established for variances by MGL c. 40A, § 10.
Such variance shall be applied only to structures in existence
and adapted for the intended purpose at the time that the
proposed use was made nonconforming through amendment to
the Zoning Bylaw or Map;
(a)
The proposed use or activity is one that is beneficial to the
community at large, or to its existing public or semipublic
institutions;
(b)
No reasonable alternative is provided in the bylaw for the
location of the proposed use.
(c)
(1)
Anyone filing a petition for a use variance shall submit complete
copies of said petition to the Planning Board and the Select Board
at least 35 days prior to the scheduled public hearing on said
variance petition. The Select Board and the Planning Board shall
have 35 days from receipt of a copy of the application to comment
on the applicability of the provisions above and to suggest needed
conditions and safeguards before the Board of Appeals renders a
decision.
(2)
F.
Public hearing on amendments. The Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing on any zoning amendment proposed in a Warrant article before
the following Town Meeting. The Board may, on its own initiative,
hold preliminary public hearings on a proposed zoning amendment in
advance of its submittal in a Warrant article. Notices of such hearing
shall be given in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 11, and at the
expense of the petitioners. The Board shall submit a report with its
recommendations on the proposed amendment to the Town Meeting.
A.
Special permits. In cases where the Planning Board is designated as the
special permit granting authority, its actions shall be based upon the
same considerations and procedural requirements stated in the bylaw
for the Board of Appeals, including § 220-61D, except as otherwise may
be required by statute.
B.
Petitioners for Zoning Map change to NB, EZ, LI, LI2 or GI Districts
shall, prior to their public hearing, submit a concept plan to the
Planning Board with the exception of petitions submitted by the
Planning Board. A concept plan shall consist of the following:
[Amended 5-3-1988; 5-5-2008 ATM by Art. 14; 5-2-2011 ATM by
Art. 22; 5-6-2013 ATM by Art. 12; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 14]
A.
§ 220-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-63
1:247
A schematic development plan, indicating the location of zoning
district boundaries, the boundaries of the lot, buildings, roads,
drives, parking, reserved open space, wells, on-site disposal
facilities, drainage system, topography and grading, areas of
retained vegetation, and planting areas.
(1)
Floor plans and architectural elevations of any currently planned
structures and any existing structures.
(2)
Materials indicating the proposed maximum number of square feet
of gross floor area for each category of land use; analysis
supporting the demand for such use, indicating the anticipated
market area, and indicating what share of the market comes from
Lancaster; methods of water supply and sewage disposal; time
schedule for construction of units and improvements; service
improvements proposed at the developer's and those anticipated
at the Town's expense; and means, if any, of providing for design
control.
(3)
Analysis of the consequences of the proposed development,
evaluating the following impacts at a level of detail appropriate to
the scale of development proposed:
Natural environment: groundwater and surface water quality,
groundwater level, stream flows, erosion and siltation,
vegetation removal (especially unusual species and mature
trees), and wildlife habitats.
(a)
Public services: traffic safety and congestion, need for water
system improvements, need for additional public recreation
facilities, need for additional school facilities.
(b)
Economics: municipal costs and revenues, local business
activity, local jobs.
(c)
Visual environment: visibility of buildings and parking, visual
consistency with existing development in the area.
(d)
(4)
Consistency with such concept plan shall be required under site plan
review, unless departure is authorized on special permit from the
Planning Board, to be granted only if the Board determines that such
departure is necessitated by contingency beyond the applicant's control
or anticipation, and is consistent with the intent of the original concept
plan.
B.
§ 220-63 LANCASTER CODE § 220-63
1:248
ARTICLE XVI
Medical Marijuana Overlay District
[Added 5-5-2014 by Art. 17]
§ 220-64. Establishment.
The Medical Marijuana Overlay District ("MMOD") is established as an
overlay district. The boundaries of the MMOD are shown on the Zoning
Map on file with the Town Clerk. Within the MMOD, all requirements of
the underlying district(s) remain in effect, except where these regulations
provide an alternative to such requirements. Land within the MDOD may
be used either for (1) a registered marijuana dispensary ("RMD"), in which
case the requirements set forth in this section shall apply; or (2) a use
allowed in the underlying district, in which case the requirements of the
underlying district shall apply. If the provisions of the MMOD are silent
on a zoning regulation, the requirements of the underlying district shall
apply. If the provisions of the MMOD conflict with the requirements of the
underlying district, the requirements of the MMOD shall control.
§ 220-65. Purpose.
To provide for the placement of RMDs, in accordance with the Humanitarian
Medical Use of Marijuana Act, MGL c. 94C, App. § 1-1 et seq., in locations
suitable for lawful medical marijuana facilities and to minimize adverse
impacts of RMDs on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods,
historic districts, schools, playgrounds and other locations where minors
congregate by regulating the siting, design, placement, security, and
removal of RMDs.
§ 220-66. Definitions.
Where not expressly defined in the Zoning Bylaws, terms used in the MMOD
Bylaw shall be interpreted as defined in the Humanitarian Medical Use of
Marijuana Act, MGL c. 94C, App. § 1-1 et seq., and the Department of Public
Health Regulations promulgated thereunder, 105 CMR 725.001 et seq., and
otherwise by their plain language.
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — Also known as a "medical
marijuana treatment center," means a not-for-profit entity registered under
105 CMR 725.100, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes [including
development of related products such as edible marijuana-infused products
("MIPs"), tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments], transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing
marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to registered
qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. Unless otherwise specified,
"RMD" refers to the site(s) of dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of
marijuana.
§ 220-67. Location.
A. RMDs may be permitted in the MMOD pursuant to a special permit.
§ 220-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-67
1:249
§ 220-68. Procedure.
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority (SPGA)
for a RMD special permit.
RMDs may not be located within 1,000 feet of the following:
School, including a public or private elementary, vocational, or
secondary school or a public or private college, junior college, or
university;
(1)
(2) Child care facility;
(3) Library;
(4) Playground;
(5) Public park;
(6) Youth center;
(7) Public swimming pool;
(8) Video arcade facility; or
(9) Similar facility in which minors commonly congregate.
B.
The distance under this section is measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the property line of the protected uses identified in
Subsection B to the nearest point of the property line of the proposed
RMD.
C.
The distance requirement may be reduced by 25% or less, but only if:
The applicant demonstrates that the RMD would otherwise be
effectively prohibited within the municipality;
(1)
The applicant demonstrates that the RMD will employ adequate
security measures to prevent diversion of medical marijuana to
minors who are not qualifying patients pursuant to 105 CMR
725.004.
(2)
D.
Application: In addition to the special permit application, the applicant
shall include:
A copy of its registration as a RMD from the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health ("DPH");
(1)
A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD that
identifies the square footage available and describes the functional
areas of the RMD, including areas for any preparation of MIPs;
(2)
(3) A detailed site plan that includes the following information:
A.
§ 220-67 LANCASTER CODE § 220-68
1:250
Compliance with the requirements for parking and loading
spaces, for lot size, frontage, yards and heights and coverage
of buildings, and all other provisions of this bylaw;
(a)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
on the site and for the location of driveway openings in relation
to street traffic;
(b)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
off the site, if vehicular and pedestrian traffic off site can
reasonably be expected to be substantially affected by on-site
changes;
(c)
Adequacy as to the arrangement and the number of parking
and loading spaces in relation to the proposed use of the
premises, including designated parking for home delivery
vehicle(s), as applicable;
(d)
Design and appearance of proposed buildings, structures,
freestanding signs, screening and landscaping; and
(e)
Adequacy of water supply, surface and subsurface drainage
and light.
(f)
A description of the security measures, including employee security
policies, approved by DPH for the RMD;
(4)
A copy of the emergency procedures approved by DPH for the
RMD;
(5)
A copy of the policies and procedures for patient or personal
caregiver home delivery approved by DPH for the RMD;
(6)
A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer, acquisition,
or sale of marijuana between RMDs approved by DPH;
(7)
(8) A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures; and
A description of any waivers from DPH regulations issued for the
RMD.
(9)
The SPGA shall refer copies of the application to the Building
Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, and the Department of Public Works. These
boards/departments shall review the application and shall submit their
written recommendations. Failure to make recommendations within 35
days of referral of the application shall be deemed lack of opposition.
B.
After notice and public hearing and consideration of application
materials, consultant reviews, public comments, and the
recommendations of other Town boards and departments, the SPGA
may act upon such a permit.
C.
§ 220-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-69
1:251
§ 220-69. Special permit conditions on RMDs.
The SPGA shall impose conditions reasonably appropriate to improve site
design; traffic flow; public safety; protection of water quality, air quality,
and significant environmental resources; preservation of the character of
the surrounding area and otherwise serve the purpose of this section. In
addition to any specific conditions applicable to the applicant's RMD, the
SPGA shall include the following conditions in any special permit granted
under this bylaw:
§ 220-70. Exemption from RMD special permit requirement.
RMDs that demonstrate that they are protected pursuant to the agricultural
exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3, are not required to obtain a special
A. Hours of operation, including dispatch of home deliveries.
The permit holder shall file a copy of any incident report required
under 105 CMR 725.110(F) with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
the SPGA within 24 hours of creation by the RMD. Such reports may
be redacted as necessary to comply with any applicable state or federal
laws and regulations.
B.
The permit holder shall file a copy of any summary cease and desist
order, quarantine order, summary suspension order, order limiting
sales, notice of a hearing, or final action issued by DPH or the Division
of Administrative Law Appeals, as applicable, regarding the RMD with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and SPGA within 48 hours of receipt by
the RMD.
C.
The permit holder shall provide to the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and Chief of the Police Department, the name, telephone number and
electronic mail address of a contact person in the event that such
person needs to be contacted after regular business hours to address
an urgent issue. Such contact information shall be kept updated by the
permit holder.
D.
The special permit shall lapse within five years of its issuance. If the
permit holder wishes to renew the special permit, an application to
renew the special permit must be submitted at least 120 days prior to
the expiration of the special permit.
E.
The special permit shall be limited to the current applicant and shall
lapse if the permit holder ceases operating the RMD.
F.
The special permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the
applicant's registration by DPH.
G.
The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
SPGA in writing within 48 hours of the cessation of operation of the
RMD or the expiration or termination of the permit holder's registration
with DPH.
H.
§ 220-69 LANCASTER CODE § 220-70
1:252
permit, but shall apply for site plan approval pursuant to § 220-34. The
requirements of § 220-34 shall apply by their terms to RMDs not protected
pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 3.
§ 220-71. Prohibition against nuisances.
No use shall be allowed in the MMOD which creates a nuisance to abutters
or to the surrounding area, or which creates any hazard, including but
not limited to, fire, explosion, fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust,
vapors, offensive noise or vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent
or electrical interference, which may impair the normal use and peaceful
enjoyment of any property, structure or dwelling in the area.
§ 220-72. Severability.
The provisions of this bylaw are severable. If any provision, paragraph,
sentence, or clause of this bylaw or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the other provisions or application of this bylaw.
§ 220-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-72
1:253

ARTICLE XVII
Solar Energy Systems
[Added 5-2-2016 ATM by Art. 1737]
§ 220-73. Purpose.
§ 220-74. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE SCREENING — Shall consist of a vegetative barrier, fencing
and/or other appropriate materials to provide visual and aural protection to
abutting properties.
BUFFER STRIP — A strip of land between the ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation, including any structures accessory thereto, and
the boundary of a parcel, reserved for plant material, berms, walls or
fencing to serve as a visual barrier.
FENCING — Chain-link fencing that is "solid slatted" and erected to a
height of eight feet to provide site security and additional visual protection
to abutting properties.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATION — A solar
photovoltaic array that is structurally mounted on the ground.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any materiel identified as such under any
applicable law, rule or regulation, including, without limitation, the
Massachusetts Oil and Hazardous Materials Release Prevention and
Response Act, MGL c. 21E; the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide appropriate siting for solar
photovoltaic energy systems for power generation, while preserving the
right of homeowners to install solar systems for residential use.
Roof-mounted solar energy installations may be constructed in any
zoning district without need for a special permit.
(1)
Ground-mounted solar energy installations within a Solar Overlay
District may be constructed without need for a special permit and
according to the site plan criteria as set forth herein.
(2)
Ground-mounted solar energy installations in the Residential and
Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts are allowed by special
permit through the Planning Board.
(3)
A.
The provisions in this section of the Zoning Bylaw shall apply to the
construction, operation, repair, and/or removal of all solar electric
systems, and to physical modifications that materially alter the type,
configuration or size of these installations or related equipment.
B.
37.Editor's Note: This bylaw also repealed former Art. XVII, Moratorium on Solar Energy
Facilities, added 5-4-2015 ATM by Art. 15.
§ 220-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-74
1:255
Management Act, MGL c. 21C; the Massachusetts Contingency Plan; the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act,
as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.; and the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.; whose purpose,
without limitation, is to provide for the protection of health, safety, public
welfare and the environment by the prevention and control of any activity
which may cause, contribute to or exacerbate a release or threat of release
of any hazardous material.
PLANT MATERIAL — Trees or shrubs of a type and height that sufficiently
screen the arrays, without blocking the necessary sun that would hinder the
panel's performance, including ground cover that would screen the lower
portion of the arrays.
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic
array that is placed on the roof of residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional and government buildings.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY — An arrangement of solar photovoltaic
panels.
SOUND BARRIERS — Fencing, vegetation, or other absorptive materials
constructed to protect abutting properties in any circumstance that result in
sound exceeding 10 decibels above ambient sound at the abutting property
lines.
§ 220-75. Roof-mounted solar energy installations.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide guidance for the
creation of renewable energy for individual residences, businesses,
institutions, and municipal buildings, as-of-right.
A.
Roof-mounted solar energy installation. Roof-mounted solar energy
installations shall be located so as not to increase the total height of the
structure more than one foot above the applicable zoning regulations
related to height in the district in which it is located, or such further
height as is determined by the Building Inspector to be essential for
proper operation, but in no case more than four feet.
B.
Required documents. The following documents shall be required:
Sun and shadow diagrams specific to the proposed installation to
determine the solar access.
(1)
Detailed information, including maps, plans or dimensional
sketches showing proposed location of the solar installation.
(2)
Site drawings showing the building and structure footprints,
property lines, location and the dimensions of solar arrays,
ridgeline of roof and description of the installation.
(3)
(4) Elevation drawings showing heights of buildings and solar arrays.
C.
§ 220-74 LANCASTER CODE § 220-75
1:256
§ 220-76. Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations.
Permitting. Roof-mounted solar energy installations require only a
building permit. All data listed above shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector. All other necessary permits shall be obtained before a
building permit is issued.
D.
As-built plans. As-built plans shall be submitted prior to final inspection
to the Building Inspector.
E.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to facilitate the creation of new
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation,
monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that
address public safety, minimize impacts on environmental, scenic,
natural and historic resources, and to provide adequate financial
assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
(1)
Subject to the requirements below, ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations are permitted as-of-right in a Solar
Overlay District.
(2)
A.
Solar Overlay District.
Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are allowed by
right in the following zoning district(s), which together shall
constitute the Solar Overlay District:
(a) Location No. 1: Enterprise Zoning District.
(b) Location No. 2: General Industry Zoning District.
(c) Location No. 3: Light Industry Zoning District.
(d) Location No. 4: Light Industry 2 Zoning District.
(1)
Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations may be located on
any lot within the overlay district.
(2)
B.
Residential and Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts. Groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations are allowed by special permit
through the Planning Board in the Residential and Neighborhood
Business Zoning Districts.
C.
Site plan review.
All ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall require
site plan review under the Zoning Bylaw. The Building Inspector
shall not issue a building permit unless, and until, the Planning
Board submits a site plan approval document to the Building
Inspector.
(1)
D.
§ 220-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-76
1:257
A building permit will be issued by the Building Inspector that
shows evidence the project is consistent with state and federal
building codes, the findings and directives of the site plan approval,
and local bylaws and regulations, including those set forth by the
Conservation Commission. As-built plans shall be submitted prior
to final inspection to the Building Inspector with copies to the
Planning Board.
(2)
Conditions. The Planning Board may impose any conditions upon site
plan approval deemed necessary to achieve the purpose of this bylaw,
such as, but not limited to, the following:
Reduction or increase of minimum setback requirements and
reduction of buffer strip requirements; [Amended 5-7-2018 ATM
by Art. 12]
(1)
(2) Modification of exterior appearance;
(3) Limitation of size or extent of facilities;
(4) Regulation of traffic and site plan features;
Screening of premises from view by use of appropriate walls,
fencing or buffer strips;
(5)
(6) Limitation of sound levels;
(7) Control of the number, location, size and lighting of signs;
(8) Additional design and siting modifications where appropriate.
E.
Utility notification. Evidence shall be provided at the time of the
application for the site plan review that the utility company that
operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has
been informed of the applicant's intent to construct a solar photovoltaic
installation and that approval to connect to the grid has been granted
or appropriate application(s) have or will be made to such utilities
for interconnection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement. Reasonable efforts should be made to place all utility
connections underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions,
shape and topography of the site.
F.
Fees. An application for a site plan review shall be accompanied by the
required fee. The applicant will also be responsible for payment of any
consultants requested by the Planning Board to provide professional
review, including legal counsel. The Planning Board may require the
applicant to deposit with the Planning Board in advance a reasonable
amount to provide for such review, the use of which shall be governed
by MGL c. 44, § 53G.
G.
Setbacks and buffer strips.
(1) Buffer strips.
H.
§ 220-76 LANCASTER CODE § 220-76
1:258
All ground-mounted installations shall be surrounded by a
buffer strip which shall be 100 feet from any structures in a
Solar Overlay District, unless it abuts a Residential District, in
which case the buffer strip shall be 200 feet in depth along
such abutting lot lines.
(a)
All ground-mounted installations in a Residential or
Neighborhood Business Zoning District shall have a buffer
strip that is 200 feet from any structure.
(b)
Setbacks.
Front yard. The front yard setback shall be at least 50 feet in a
Solar Overlay District; provided, however, that when it abuts a
Residential District, the front lot setback shall not be less than
200 feet. The front yard setback shall be at least 200 feet in a
Residential or Neighborhood Business Zoning District.
(a)
Side yard. Each side yard setback shall be at least 50 feet in
a Solar Overlay District; provided, however, that when it abuts
a Residential District, the side yard setback shall not be less
than 200 feet. The side yard setback shall be at least 200 feet
in a Residential or Neighborhood Business Zoning District.
(b)
Rear yard. The rear yard setback shall be at least 50 feet in a
Solar Overlay District; provided, however, that when it abuts
a Residential District, the rear yard setback shall not be less
than 200 feet. The rear yard setback shall be at last 200 feet in
a Residential or Neighborhood Business Zoning District.
(c)
(2)
All inverters, regardless of type, transformers or other equipment
that have the potential to exceed allowed decibels will be located
no less than 250 feet from property lines, regardless of the zoning
or overlay district.
(3)
Required documents. In addition to documents required for site plan
review, the following will be required for ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations. The Planning Board may waive one or more
of these requirements in its sole discretion under appropriate
circumstances.
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts;
(1)
All plans and maps shall show property lines, physical features, and
infrastructure, including roads used to access the property site;
(2)
Proposed changes to landscape of site, including grading,
vegetation, tree removal, planting of screening vegetation, location
of structures;
(3)
Locations of wetlands and priority habitat areas defined by the
Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program;
(4)
I.
§ 220-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-76
1:259
Locations of floodplains or periodically inundated areas subject to
moderate- or high-hazard dams;
(5)
A list of any hazardous materials proposed to be located on the site
plan to prevent their release to the environment as appropriate;
(6)
Drawings of the installation showing the proposed layout of the
system and any potential shading from nearby structures;
(7)
One- or three-phase line electrical diagrams detailing the
installation, associated components and electrical interconnection
methods with all National Electrical Code-compliant disconnects
and overcurrent devices;
(8)
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the electric generating PV panels, mounting system,
inverters, etc.;
(9)
(10)Name of property owner, address, telephone number, e-mail;
(11)Name of lessor or lessee, address, telephone number, e-mail;
(12)Name of contact person, address, telephone number, e-mail;
(13)Name of design engineer, address, telephone number, e-mail;
(14)Names of contractors, address, telephone number, e-mails;
(15)Name of installer, address, telephone number, e-mail;
(16)Zoning district designation for parcel of land, map and parcel;
Documentation of actual or proposed access to the project site
sufficient to allow for construction and operation and maintenance
of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation;
(17)
(18)Provision for water that may be needed for fire protection;
Description of the financial surety that is required in the following
section: Financial security;38
(19)
Sight line representations depicting in profile the view of the
proposed installation, and any appurtenant structures, from the
location upon any public road within 300 feet that would have the
most unobstructed view of the installations, and from the closest
wall of each residential building within 300 feet of the highest point
of the installation;
(20)
A screening plan, in compliance with the following section: Visual
impact;39
(21)
38.Editor's Note: See § 220-76M.
39.Editor's Note: See § 220-76J(6).
§ 220-76 LANCASTER CODE § 220-76
1:260
A decommissioning plan that describes the removal of all
structures, electrical infrastructure or other equipment, the
location or repository for all demolition debris, and plans for site
re-use or restoration; and
(22)
A security plan that depicts the appropriate security fencing,
lighting, surveillance system and signage.
(23)
Design standards.
Lighting and security. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations
shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of
other parts of the installation, such as any appurtenant structures,
shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes
and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where
feasible, any required lighting shall be directed downward and
shall incorporate full cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution, in
compliance with § 220-36 of the Zoning Bylaw. Surveillance and
security cameras shall be shielded from viewing abutting private
property or invading the privacy of any abutting residential
property owner.
(1)
Signage. All signs shall comply with the Zoning Bylaw and shall
not be used for displaying any advertising except to identify the
owner and/or operator of the solar installation and a twenty-fourhour
emergency contact telephone number.
(2)
Land clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to
what is necessary for construction, operation and maintenance
of the installation. Any land disturbance shall be subject to
stormwater management criteria and by applicable laws,
regulations and bylaws.40
(3)
Safety, emergency service and environmental standards. The
applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical
schematic and site plan. The applicant shall develop an emergency
response plan, including showing all means of shutting down the
solar installation. The applicant shall submit the name of the
person answerable to inquiries throughout the life of the
installation. If the designated person changes, the name of the new
designated person shall be submitted as an addendum.
(4)
Monitoring and maintenance.
The applicant shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the installation which shall include measures
for maintaining the site, including safe access, stormwater
control, structural repairs and the integrity of security
measures. These measures must be acceptable to the Fire
Chief and emergency medical services personnel. If needed,
(a)
(5)
J.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Stormwater Control.
§ 220-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-76
1:261
training of service personnel will be provided by the applicant.
The owner/operator shall be responsible for the cost of
maintaining the installation.
The applicant shall also submit a Monitoring/Inspection Form
under the site plan review during construction, and shall
further submit a report to the Building Inspector on the
condition of the structure and site by January 15 each year.
(b)
Visual impact. Any ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
shall be designed to minimize visual impacts, including preserving
natural vegetation to the maximum extent possible, blending in
equipment with the surroundings, and adding vegetative buffers to
screen abutting residential properties whether developed or not.
Siting shall be such that the view of the solar electric generating
installation from other areas of Town shall be as minimal as
possible. Buffer strips shall surround the proposed project. A
screening plan, that assures the facility is shielded to the greatest
extent possible from public view, shall be required to be reviewed
under the site plan review.
(6)
Height. The height of any structure associated with a groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall not exceed 20 feet.
(7)
Roads. All access roads and interior roads shall be constructed to
minimize grading, removal of stone wall or trees, and to minimize
impacts to environmental or historic resources.
(8)
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials that are stored, used
or generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a "Very
Small Quantity Generator of Hazardous Waste" as defined by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 310
CMR 30.000 and shall meet all requirements of the DEP and
Massachusetts Contingency Plan, including storage of hazardous
materials in a building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent
to any floor drains to prevent discharge to the outdoor
environment. If hazardous materials are utilized within the solar
electric equipment, then impervious containment areas capable of
controlling any release to the environment and to prevent potential
contamination of groundwater are required.
(9)
Noise.
Noise generated by a solar photovoltaic installation, and by
any associated equipment and machinery, shall conform to
applicable state and local noise regulations, including the
DEP's Division of Air Quality noise regulations, 310 CMR 7.10.
The site shall not produce any other vibration, harmonics or
interference which would be perceived or impact the normal
function of electronics off site.
(a)
(10)
§ 220-76 LANCASTER CODE § 220-76
1:262
The MassDEP noise regulation is contained in 310 CMR 7.10.
According to MassDEP, a source of sound violates the
Department's noise regulation, if the source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10
dB(A) above ambient; or
[1]
Produces a "pure tone" condition: when a sound pressure
level, at any given octave band center frequency, exceeds
the levels of the two adjacent octave bands by three or
more decibels.
[2]
(b)
The MassDEP criteria are evaluated both at the property line
and at the nearest inhabited residence or other sensitive land
use. "Ambient" is defined as the background A-weighted sound
level that is exceeded 90% of the time, measured during
equipment operating hours.
(c)
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant
shall conduct a test of ambient conditions during startup and
provide a report of decibel levels for the inverters. Facility
noise level shall not exceed the existing DEP regulation. If
necessary, mitigation measures will be determined by the
Board and the costs of such measures will be borne by the
applicant.
(d)
Modifications. All modification requests to a solar photovoltaic
installation, including changes in arrays, addition to number of arrays
or change in placement made after issuance of the required building
permit, shall require review through the site plan review for compliance
with this bylaw.
K.
Discontinuance and removal. Absent notice of proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered
discontinued when it fails to operate for more than one year without
the written consent of the Planning Board. Upon written request from
the Building Inspector addressed to the contact address provided and
maintained by the owner and operator as required above, the owner
or operator shall provide evidence to the Building Inspector
demonstrating continued use of the installation. Failure to provide such
evidence within 30 days of such written request shall be conclusive
evidence that the installation has been discontinued. The owner or
operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150
days after the date of discontinuance or the proposed date of
decommissioning operations. The owner or operator shall notify the
Planning Board and Building Inspector by certified mail of their
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. The
notification shall consist of the methodology of physical removal of
all structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines,
disposal of all solid and hazardous waste, and stabilization or
L.
§ 220-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-76
1:263
§ 220-77. Inclusionary uses and conflicts.
revegetation of the site. If the owner or operator fails to remove the
installation in accordance with the above criteria, the Town may, after
the receipt of an appropriate court order or consent of the property
owner, enter the property and physically remove the installation at the
owner's expense. As a condition of the site plan review, a property
owner shall agree to allow the Town entry to remove an abandoned or
decommissioned installation. The cost for such removal will be charged
to the property owner, and shall constitute a lien upon the land in
accordance with the provisions of MGL 139, § 3A, or other applicable
law.
Financial security. Proponents of ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
projects shall provide a form of surety, either through an escrow
account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event
the Town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape,
in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Site Plan
Review Authority, but in no event to exceed more than 125% of the cost
of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth
herein. Such surety will not be required for municipally or state-owned
facilities. The project owner/operator shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified
engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating
increased removal cost due to inflation.
M.
The Planning Board may, in conducting site plan review, waive one
or more of the requirements of Subsections J, K, L, M, above, in its
sole discretion under appropriate circumstances. [Amended 5-7-2018
ATM by Art. 12]
N.
Small accessory or ornamental solar products which do not generate
electricity for use in a dwelling or structure are exempt from the
provisions in this bylaw.
A.
In the event that any part of this article conflicts with other
requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, the requirements of this article shall
apply.
B.
§ 220-76 LANCASTER CODE § 220-77
1:264
ARTICLE XVIII
Temporary Moratorium on Recreational Marijuana Retailers
[Added 11-6-2017 STM by Art. 1]
§ 220-78. Purpose.
§ 220-79. Definition.
On November 8, 2016, the voters of the commonwealth approved a law
regulating the cultivation, processing, distribution, possession and use
of marijuana for recreational purposes (new MGL c. 94G, Regulation of
the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed). The
law, which allows certain personal use and possession of marijuana,
took effect on December 15, 2016, and (as amended on December 30,
2016, by Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016 and thereafter, on July 28,
2017, by Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017) requires a Cannabis Control
Commission to issue regulations regarding the licensing of commercial
activities by March 15, 2018 and to begin accepting applications for
licenses no later than April 1, 2018.
A.
Currently under the Lancaster Zoning Bylaw, a non-medical marijuana
retailer (hereinafter, a "marijuana retailer"), as defined in MGL c. 94G,
§ 1, is not specifically addressed in the Zoning Bylaw. Regulations to
be promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission may provide
guidance on certain aspects of local regulation of marijuana retailers.
B.
The regulation of recreational marijuana raises novel legal, planning
and public safety issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider
the regulation of marijuana retailers and address such issues, as well as
to address the potential impact of the state regulations on local zoning
and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning
Bylaw regarding regulation of marijuana retailers.
C.
The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land
and structures in the Town for marijuana retailers that sell marijuana
and marijuana-related products to the general public, so as to allow
sufficient time to address the effects of such structures and uses in the
Town and to enact bylaws in a consistent manner.
D.
"Marijuana retailer" shall mean "an entity licensed to purchase and
deliver marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana
establishments and to deliver, sell, or otherwise transfer marijuana and
marijuana products to consumers."
A.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the term "marijuana retailer" does
not apply to a "marijuana cultivator," "independent testing laboratory,"
or "marijuana product manufacturer" that may deliver or transfer
marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not to
consumers, as those terms are defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, nor to the
medical use of marijuana for lawful purposes, as that is defined in MGL
c. 94I, § 1.
B.
§ 220-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:265
§ 220-80. Temporary moratorium.
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provisions
of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary
moratorium on the use of land or structures for a marijuana retailer. The
moratorium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018. During the
moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address
the potential impacts of marijuana retailers in the Town, and to consider the
Cannabis Control Commission's regulations regarding marijuana retailers,
and shall consider adopting new Zoning bylaws in response to these new
issues.
§ 220-80 LANCASTER CODE § 220-80
1:266
Chapter 301
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 17, Art. IV.
Community development and planning — See
Ch. 55.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater management rules and
regulations — See Ch. 305.
Wetlands protection rules and
regulations — See Ch. 306.
§ 220-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-80
1:267

ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 301-1. Adoption; effective date. [Amended 6-13-2011]
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Lancaster
by MGL c. 41, § 81Q, said Board hereby adopts these revised rules and
regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Lancaster. Such
rules and regulations shall be effective in June 2011.
§ 301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-1
1:269

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 301-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE ACCESS — Vehicular access to lots that is reasonably
convenient, safe, comfortable and durable for use by the public, as specified
at § 301-6B, C and D.[Added 6-13-2011]
APPLICANT — Must be the owner of all the land included in the proposed
subdivision or the owner's agent or representative, or his
assigns.[Amended 4-27-1987]
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Lancaster.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which handles traffic equivalent to that
generated by 50 homes or more, or which serves nonresidential abutting
property.
DEAD-END STREET — A street, extension of a street, or system of streets
connected to other streets only at a single point.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — The Floodplain District as established in
Chapter 220, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
LANE — A street which carries traffic equivalent to that generated by 12 or
fewer dwelling units, which has no abutting property either used or zoned
for commerce or industry, and which is not capable of extension.
MINOR STREET — A street which cannot qualify as a lane but which can be
expected to handle less traffic than a collector street.
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision any part of which lies
within any district other than the Residential District established by
Chapter 220, Zoning.[Added 4-27-1987]
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision which lies entirely within
the Residential District established by Chapter 220, Zoning.[Added
4-27-1987]
VITAL ACCESS — Vehicular access to lots minimally sufficient to allow them
to be reached by police, fire and other agencies charged with protecting the
public peace, safety and welfare, including an alternate means of access if
access is subject to periodic interruption.[Added 6-13-2011]
§ 301-3. Plan procedures.
Necessity. Only those plans which constitute subdivisions as that term
is defined in MGL c. 41, § 81L, require the approval of the Planning
Board. However, all plans, whether subdivisions within the meaning
of the law or not, must have either approval as a subdivision, or
endorsement that they do not require approval, before they will be
A.
§ 301-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-3
1:271
§ 301-4. Plan believed not to require approval. [Amended
6-13-2011]
accepted for recording at the Registry of Deeds or for registering at the
Land Court.
Date of submittal. [Amended 6-13-2011]
All plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board either by
delivery at a public meeting of the Planning Board or by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the
Planning Board. Plans intended to be submitted at a regular
meeting of the Planning Board must be forwarded to the Town
Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. five business days prior to the
Planning Board meeting, and must appear on the agenda for that
meeting. The date of submission shall be the date of the Planning
Board meeting at which a plan is delivered, or in the case of a plan
sent to the Planning Board by registered or certified mail, the date
the plan is received by the Planning Board.
(1)
No plan for review, whether for approval or for endorsement that
approval is not required, shall be accepted as a submittal unless
and until all information necessary for such review, as described
herein under the applicable provisions of submission requirements,
are fully provided, unless waived in writing by the Board. At the
time of submission, a determination shall be made by the Planning
Board, using a checklist, that the submission materials are either
complete or incomplete. [Added 4-27-1987]
(2)
If the submission has been determined to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be so advised forthwith, and requested to withdraw
the plan and application, and to resubmit when submittals are
complete. A plan shall not be considered submitted and the review
period will not begin until submittals are substantially complete.
[Added 4-27-1987]
(3)
Plans intended for review by the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by a check made payable to the Town of Lancaster.
The check shall provide payment for administrative and review
fees as applied under various sections of these regulations.
Administrative fees are nonrefundable and are provided to cover
the expenses to the Planning Board for notices and general
administrative costs. Review fees are an estimate of the cost to
the Planning Board to obtain professional, independent,
nongovernmental review services related directly to the project.
Unexpended review fees will be returned to the applicant.
(4)
B.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of
Deeds, or to be filed with the Land Court, a plan of land and who
believes that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law,41 may submit his plan to the Planning Board in the manner
A.
§ 301-3 LANCASTER CODE § 301-4
1:272
§ 301-5. Subdivision plan and approval required.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law44 of any land within the Town, or proceed with the
set forth above, accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that
the plan does not require approval. Said person shall submit to the
Planning Board two prints of the plan and an application (Form A).42
Said person shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the
Town Clerk stating the date of submission for such determination (Form
A). Form A shall be accompanied with payment of an administrative fee
as established from time to time by the Planning Board.43
In order to be considered by the Board, such plans shall show all of the
following:
A locus plan of the land showing its total configuration in relation
to surrounding streets and to abutting boundaries at two inches
equals 1,000 feet;
(1)
Any existing structures on the land shown on the plan and
dimensions of yards relating to such structures;
(2)
Any existing structures on any remaining adjoining land owned by
the applicant and dimensions of yards relating to such structures,
if such structure is within 50 feet of a property line being created;
(3)
Indication of remaining frontage of any adjoining land in the same
ownership;
(4)
Present owner of the land shown on the plan, and all abutting
owners; and
(5)
Location of any easement or way, public or private, across the land,
with a designation as to the use of the same.
(6)
A notation, as appropriate, indicating all lots or parcels shown on
the plan that are not buildable lots.
(7)
B.
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it
shall forthwith, without a public hearing, endorse on the plan the words
"Planning Board approval under Subdivision Control Law not required."
Said plan shall be returned to the applicant and the Board shall notify
the Town Clerk of its action.
C.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall within 21 days of submission of said
plan so inform the applicant and return the plan. The Board shall also
notify the Town Clerk of its determination.
D.
41.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
42.Editor's Note: Said form is included at the end of this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Fees and Deposits at the end of this chapter.
§ 301-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-5
1:273
improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of ways, or
the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a definitive
plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the
Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 301-6. Access adequacy.
General. No plan shall be endorsed as not requiring approval under
the Subdivision Control Law and no subdivision plan shall be approved
unless each building lot to be created by such plan has adequate access
as intended under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K
through 81GG.
A.
Standards of access adequacy. [Amended 9-11-2000; 6-13-2011]
Streets within a subdivision. Streets within a subdivision shall be
determined to provide adequate access if and only if complying
with the standards established in Article IV of this regulation,
except as waived by the Board.
(1)
Ways providing access to a subdivision. Ways providing access to
the streets within a subdivision shall be determined to provide
adequate access only if there is assurance that, prior to
construction on any lots, the following standards will be met by
those ways:
Development Potentially Served
12 or Fewer
Dwelling
Units
13 to 49
Dwelling
Units
More Units
or Business
Minimum right-ofway
(feet)
33 40 50
Surface type 8-inch gravel 3-inch bit.
concrete
3-inch bit.
concrete
Surface width
(feet)
18 feet 20 24
Minimum sight
distance (feet)
125 feet 225 400
Maximum grade 12% 11% 9%
(2)
Existing ways providing frontage outside subdivisions. An existing
private way shall be determined to provide access adequate to
constitute lot frontage for lots not within a subdivision only if
meeting the standards of Subsection B(2) unless the Planning
Board determines that in a specific case unusual circumstances
render lesser provisions adequate to serve the lot with access and
utilities. An existing public way shall be determined to provide
(3)
B.
44.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 301-5 LANCASTER CODE § 301-6
1:274
access adequate to constitute frontage for lots not within a
subdivision only if it provides at least "vital access" to those lots,
such as for emergency vehicles and, if the access provided is
subject to periodic interruption, an alternative means of emergency
access is available.
Obligations. The Board may require, as a condition of its approval of a
subdivision plan, that the developer dedicate or acquire and dedicate
a strip of land for the purpose of widening access ways to a width as
required above, and that he either make physical improvements within
such way or compensate the Town for the cost of such improvements in
order to meet the standards specified above.
C.
Waivers. The Board may waive strict compliance with these
requirements only upon its determination, following consultation with
the Board of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Select Board,
that the way in fact will be sufficient to serve the needs for access and
utilities to serve potential needs of land abutting on or served by the
way in question.
D.
§ 301-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-6
1:275

ARTICLE III
Procedure for Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 301-7. Preliminary plan.
General. A preliminary plan MUST be submitted for any proposed
nonresidential subdivision and MAY be submitted for any proposed
residential subdivision. The submission of such a preliminary plan will
enable the subdivider, the Board, other municipal agencies, and owners
of property abutting the subdivision to discuss and clarify the problems
of such subdivision before a definitive plan is prepared. Therefore, it is
strongly recommended that a preliminary plan be filed in every case.
[Amended 4-27-1987]
A.
Submittals.
Any person who seeks approval of a preliminary plan of a
subdivision shall:
Submit to the Planning Board:
[1] An application (Form B).45
[2] Five prints of the preliminary plan.
An application fee as established from time to time by the
Planning Board.46
[3]
(a)
Submit to the Board of Health:
[1] A copy of the application (Form B).
[2] One print of the preliminary plan.
(b)
Submit to the Town Clerk (by delivery of certified mail):
[1] A copy of the application (Form B).
(c)
(1)
In addition to those items required to be submitted, it is requested
that the following be furnished:
A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its street configuration
in relation to the surrounding area and to zoning district
boundaries at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet.
(a)
In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land
owned by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision, a
plan showing in a general manner the proposed overall
development of all of said land.
(b)
(2)
B.
45.Editor's Note: Said form is included at the end of this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Fees and Deposits at the end of this chapter.
§ 301-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-7
1:277
Preliminary findings, in a general way, of the environmental
analysis, if expected to be required.
(c)
Plan contents. The preliminary plan shall be clearly drawn at a suitable
scale (preferably one inch equals 40 feet). Said preliminary plan should
show sufficient information about the subdivision to form a clear basis
for discussion of its problems and for the preparation of the definitive
plan, and shall show:
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend,
and title "preliminary plan."
(1)
Name and address of the record owner, applicant, registered
engineer, and registered surveyor.
(2)
(3) Names of all abutters from the most recent tax list.
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and any
public or common areas within the subdivision in a general manner.
(4)
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner.
(5)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate
areas and dimensions.
(6)
Location, names, and widths of adjacent streets approaching or
near the subdivision.
(7)
(8) Topography of the land in a general manner. [Added 4-27-1987]
C.
Field trip. In order to facilitate field inspection and review of the site
of the proposed subdivision, it is desirable that there be temporary
staking along the center line of all proposed roads in the subdivision,
or if that is impractical, some alternative method of enabling on-site
review.
D.
Approval. Within 45 days after the date of submission of a preliminary
plan, the Board shall notify the applicant and the Town Clerk either that
the plan has been approved, or that the plan has been approved with
modifications suggested by the Board or agreed upon by the person
submitting the plan, or that the plan has been disapproved, and in the
case of disapproval, the Board shall state in detail its reasons therefor.
Such approval does not constitute approval of a subdivision but does
facilitate the procedure in securing final approval of the definitive plan.
[Amended 4-27-1987]
E.
Other plans. [Added 4-27-1987]
Any plan submitted by the applicant to the Board in advance of the
definitive plan, which does not conform to the requirements hereof
pertaining to a "preliminary plan," shall not be so designated nor
shall such a plan be given approval by the Board.
(1)
F.
§ 301-7 LANCASTER CODE § 301-7
1:278
§ 301-8. Definitive plan.
Moreover, the submission of a preliminary plan for examination by
the Board shall not be deemed a submission of a definitive plan of
a subdivision of land for approval by the Board under MGL c. 41,
§ 81U, and the action of the Board on such preliminary plan shall
not prejudice the action on the definitive plan. The plan shall be
clearly marked "preliminary plan."
(2)
Submittals. Any person who desires approval of a definitive plan of a
subdivision shall:
Submit four full-size (32 inches by 24 inches) copies and one
reduced copy (11 inches by 17) inches of the following to the
Planning Board: [Amended 6-13-2011]
The definitive plan, as described at Subsection B. The original
definitive plan drawing will only be needed if and when actual
signing of the plan takes place.
(a)
Street plans and profiles of every proposed street, as described
at Subsection C.
(b)
At the same scale as the definitive plan, a development plan,
showing existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour
intervals, distinction between upland and wetland, indication
of annual high-water mark, location of tree cover, outstanding
individual trees, existing structures including fences and walls,
and proposed streets, drainage facilities, and lot lines. If
located within the Floodplain District, the location of the base
flood elevation (one-hundred-year flood) shall be indicated.
If approved prior to submittal, the Board may authorize
topography at five-foot intervals if adequate to cover some or
all areas. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(c)
A drainage plan and calculations, including description of the
effects of two-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year
storms. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(d)
An overlay at the same scale as the definitive plan showing
the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
interpretation for suitability for on-site sewage effluent
disposal or showing United States Geological Survey (USGS)
surficial geology, or both, except for areas proposed to be
served by Town sewerage.
(e)
Test pit logs for locations approved by the Planning Board with
not more than one pit required per four proposed lots, selected
to reveal general patterns of subsurface characteristics, after
consultation with the Board of Health and the Conservation
Commission. Locations shall be indicated on the development
plan.
(f)
(1)
A.
§ 301-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-8
1:279
Where connection to the public water system is not proposed,
information indicating why such connection is not feasible,
description of provisions to be made for water for firefighting,
and information adequate to allow determination of
compliance with requirements regarding potable water quality
and quantity.
(g)
An erosion control plan, indicating the erosion control
measures to be employed, including description of locations
of temporary stockpiles, spoil areas, temporary drainage
systems, slope stabilization techniques, and sediment bins, and
narrative description of how erosion from individual lots onto
streets and into drainage systems is proposed to be controlled.
(h)
A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its street configuration
in relation to surrounding streets and to zoning district
boundaries, at one inch equals 1,000 feet.
(i)
Six sets of prints, 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches, showing an outline
of the subdivision, all ways and lots, street names, and lot
numbers. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(j)
(k) The environmental analysis, if required.
Construction details and specifications, and road cross
sections for each cross-section variant at all critical locations,
except that where the proposed cross sections are identical
with those shown in this regulation, annotation to that effect
may be placed on the definitive plan and the cross-section
drawing may be omitted. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(l)
Submit the following to the Planning Board:
If requested, traverse notes, evidence of ownership, language
of any easements, covenants or deed restrictions applying or
proposed to apply to the area being subdivided, rights and
easements obtained for utilities or drainage outside of the
subdivision. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(a)
(b) Two copies of properly executed application Form C.47
An administrative fee as established from time to time by the
Planning Board,48 to be payable to the Town of Lancaster, to
cover the Planning Board's expenses for notices, engineering
and other consulting expenses, but not in lieu of charges which
may be made by other Town agencies or the Lancaster Sewer
District in connection with their review and other services.
[Amended 4-27-1987]
(c)
(2)
47.Editor's Note: Said form is included at the end of this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Fees and Deposits at the end of this chapter.
§ 301-8 LANCASTER CODE § 301-8
1:280
A list of names and mailing addresses for all abutters as they
appear on the most recent local tax list, including property
owners on the opposite side of any streets abutting the
subdivision.
(d)
A description of the land and the proposal, suitable for
advertising.
(e)
If the development plan [Subsection A(1)(c)] is on more than
one sheet, a single copy of that plan with all sheets matched
and joined. [Added 4-27-1987]
(f)
Submit to the Town Clerk by delivery or registered or certified
mail:
A notice stating the date of the definitive plan submission to
the Planning Board; and
(a)
(b) A copy of the completed application Form C.
(3)
File one copy of each of the following with the Board of Health:
(a) Definitive plan.
(b) Street plans and profiles.
(c) The development plan. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(d) Environmental analysis, if any.
(4)
Definitive plan contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a
registered engineer and registered land surveyor and shall be clearly
and legibly drawn in black India ink upon tracing cloth or Mylar. The
plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, or such other
scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly and adequately.
Sheet sizes shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. If multiple sheets are
used, they shall show each lot in its entirety on one sheet, and shall
be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at a
scale of one inch equals 200 feet. The definitive plan shall contain the
following information:
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, legend, date, scale,
and indication of zoning districts.
(1)
Name and address of record owner, subdivider, registered
engineer, and registered surveyor, their stamps, and the names
(and stamps, if appropriate) of any other professionals engaged in
the design.
(2)
Names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent certified
tax list.
(3)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements, and
public or common areas within the subdivision. The proposed
(4)
B.
§ 301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-8
1:281
names of proposed streets shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board. [Amended 6-13-2011]
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction, and length of
every street and way line, lot line, easement, and boundary line,
and to establish those lines on the ground.
(5)
Location of all permanent monuments, properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed.
(6)
Lot numbers enclosed in a circle, lot area in square feet; total lot
frontage in feet. [Amended 4-27-1987; 6-13-2011]
(7)
Location, names, and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching, or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision
sufficient to analyze traffic flow.
(8)
On each sheet of the definitive plan, suitable space to record the
action of the Board and the signatures of the members of the
Board, and the Town Clerk's certification.
(9)
Certification by the preparers of the plan that the plan and
supporting materials were prepared under their direction, and
have been designed in compliance with all applicable zoning and
subdivision regulations. [Added 4-27-1987]
(10)
Certification by an attorney that submittal of the plan by the
applicant has been agreed to by owners of all the land included in
the plan. [Added 4-27-1987]
(11)
Street plans and profiles. For each street there shall be a separate
plan at one inch equals 40 feet, and profile at one inch equals 40 feet
horizontal, one inch equals four feet vertical, showing the following
data:
Exterior lines of the way, with sufficient data to determine their
location, direction, and length.
(1)
Existing center-line profile to be shown as a fine, continuous line.
Existing center-line profile for intersecting streets to be shown
for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of street center
lines. Existing right sideline shall be shown as a light dashed black
line, left sideline as black dots. Elevations shall be based on USGS
datum. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(2)
Proposed center-line profile to be heavy, continuous line, with
elevations shown every 50 feet (25 feet on vertical curves).
(3)
(4) Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, and wetlands.
(5) Road center-line stationing.
C.
§ 301-8 LANCASTER CODE § 301-8
1:282
All sewer and drainage facilities to be shown on the profiles
indicating proposed pipe sizes, slopes, and rim and invert
elevations; and on the street plans, showing pipe sizes.
(6)
Plan location and size of existing and proposed water mains,
hydrants, and main gate valves. Profile location and size of existing
and proposed water mains and hydrant supply lines, only when
they are crossed by sewer and drainage facilities. [Amended
4-27-1987]
(7)
(8) Location of proposed streetlights.
Location of the following, unless waived by the Board: existing and
proposed street paving, sidewalks, and curbs.
(9)
Environmental analysis. A comparative environmental analysis shall be
submitted for any subdivision creating frontage potentially allowing
eight (8) or more dwelling units, and in other cases where the Board
determines it appropriate in light of special circumstances. The scope
of such analysis, including development alternatives to be compared
and consequences to be studied, shall be as agreed to by the Planning
Board and may be required to include up to two major alternatives
to the plan proposed, with as much of the following information as
determined by the Planning Board to be necessary for plan evaluation.
The analysis shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team to include a
civil engineer and an architect or landscape architect, unless otherwise
agreed to by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may direct that
the team also include a wetlands scientist where there are wetlands
on or abutting the proposed property, and either a wildlife biologist
or an ecologist, qualified in wildlife habitat evaluation. The analysis
shall indicate differences among alternatives regarding: [Amended
6-13-2011]
Impact upon ground- and surface water quality and level including
estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and
surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, and other activities
within the development. For subdivisions located in whole or in
part within Water Resource Districts as established in Chapter 220,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, this shall include
analysis of open and closed drainage system alternatives,
examining effects upon the basin water budget and upon the speed
of transport of contaminants;
(1)
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and outstanding landscape features or historic
environs; [Amended 6-13-2011]
(2)
Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed erosion control
efforts to support proposed development without danger of erosion,
silting, or other instability;
(3)
D.
§ 301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-8
1:283
Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A (the
Wetlands Protection Act) and to the Massachusetts Environmental
Policy Act (MEPA); [Amended 6-13-2011]
(4)
Inclusion of natural landscaping that minimizes the need for water/
irrigation usage; [Amended 6-13-2011]
(5)
Impact upon the existing water supply system and well capacity of
the Town;
(6)
Road layout, building siting, and lot shape for solar energy
potential;
(7)
Ability of streets providing access to the subdivision to safely
provide such access, including measurement of sight distances at
each intersection with proposed streets, impact of development
traffic on the traffic level of service, gap acceptance analysis, and
analysis of hazards owing to limited sight distances, alignment, or
other characteristics of access roads. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(8)
Performance guarantee.
Form of guarantee. Before the Planning Board endorses its
approval of a definitive plan, the developer shall agree to complete
without cost to the Town all improvements required by this
regulation, and shall provide security that he will do so, either by
convenanting not to sell or build upon any lots until completion
of the improvements (which covenant must be referred to on the
plan and registered or recorded with it), or by posting bond or
other security which the Town can utilize in the event that the
improvements are not completed within two years, or by some
combination of these. Such security shall be provided so that no
structure shall be occupied until streets or ways serving such
structures have been surfaced with at least the binder course.
(1)
Security amount. If completion is secured by bond or deposit, the
amount shall be determined by the Board to cover:
(a) The cost for the Town to install the required improvements;
(b) Maintenance for one year;
(c) Inflation over the time allowed for completion of work; and
(d) Ten-percent contingency.
(2)
Release of guarantee. The Board may grant partial release from
such security for partial completion of improvements, if it
determines that the completed portion provides a reasonable
system for circulation and utilities pending completion of the rest.
The Board may release the developer from the covenant upon
receipt of an agreement executed by the applicant and by the
holder of a first mortgage on the premises providing for retention
(3)
E.
§ 301-8 LANCASTER CODE § 301-8
1:284
of funds and their availability to the Town upon default. (See MGL
c. 41, § 81U, 11th paragraph.) Full security shall not be released
until the integrity of road pavement, drainage, shoulders, and
grading has been verified following a full winter of use, and until
trees and other vegetation have been established.
Review by Board of Health. The Board of Health shall report to the
Planning Board in writing its approval or disapproval of the plan, and
in the event of disapproval, shall make specific findings as to which,
if any, areas shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites
without injury to the public health and include specific findings and
the reasons therefore in such report and, where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustment thereof. Such Health Board or
Officer shall send a copy of such report, if any, to the person who
submitted said plan. Any approval of the plan by the Planning Board
shall then only be given on condition that no building or structure shall
be built or placed upon the areas designated without written consent
of the Board of Health and shall endorse on the plan such condition,
specifying the lots or land to which said condition applies.
F.
Public hearing.
Before approval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing
shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of such hearing shall
be given by the Board by advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication being not less than 14 days before the day of such
hearing. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the applicant,
and via registered mail, to all owners of land abutting upon the
subdivision as appearing in the most recent tax list.
(1)
It is essential that the applicant either be present at the public
hearing or be represented by an agent authorized to make an
appearance, speak on the applicant's behalf, provide necessary
information, and make necessary commitments. [Added
4-27-1987]
(2)
G.
Decision.
After the public hearing the Board in due course will approve,
modify and approve, or disapprove the definitive subdivision plan
submitted. Criteria for action by the Board shall be the following:
(a) Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions;
Determination that development at this location does not entail
unwarranted hazard to safety, health and convenience of future
residents of the development or of others because of possible
natural disasters, traffic hazard, or other environmental
degradation;
(b)
(c) Conformity with the requirements of Article IV;
(1)
H.
§ 301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-8
1:285
Determination, based upon the environmental analysis (where
submitted), that the subdivision as designed will not cause
substantial and irreversible damage to the environment, which
damage could be avoided or ameliorated through an
alternative development plan; [Amended 4-27-1987]
(d)
(e) Access adequacy as provided at § 301-6;
(f) Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements;
Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control
Law.49
(g)
Notice of such action, or of an agreed extension of the time for
such action, must be provided by the Planning Board to the Town
Clerk within 90 days following the date of submission of the plan
if it follows action on (or failure to timefully act on) a preliminary
plan, or 135 days following the date of submission in cases where
no preliminary plan was submitted. [Added 4-27-1987]
(2)
Certificate of approval. The action of the Board in respect to such a
plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall be certified and filed with
the applicant. If the Board modifies such plan, it shall state in its vote
the reasons for its action. In the event of disapproval, the Planning
Board shall state in detail wherein the plan does not conform to the
rules and regulations of the Planning Board or the recommendations of
the Health Board Officer, and shall revoke its disapproval and approve
a plan which, as amended conforms to such rules and regulations or
recommendation, provided that an amended plan is submitted to the
Planning Board, in the same manner as the definitive plan, within seven
months from the date on which the definitive plan was disapproved.
Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing of
the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority of the Board, but not
until the statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the
filing of the certificate of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk,
and said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed.
After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed, the applicant
shall furnish the Board with two prints thereof. Final approval of the
definitive plan does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the
Town of streets within a subdivision. [Amended 4-27-1987]
I.
49.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 301-8 LANCASTER CODE § 301-8
1:286
ARTICLE IV
Design and Construction Requirements
§ 301-9. General.
Design guidelines. All subdivisions shall be designed and improvements
made by the developer consistent with the requirements of Article IV.
Design and construction shall do the following:
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible:
(a) Volume of cut and fill;
Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed;
especially if within 200 feet of a river, pond, or stream, or
having a slope of more than 15%;
(b)
(c) Number of mature trees removed;
(d) Extent of waterways altered or relocated;
Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary for
safety or orientation;
(e)
(f) Erosion and siltation;
(g) Flood damage;
(h) Number of driveways exiting onto existing streets;
Disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and scenic or historic environs.
(i)
(1)
Increase, to the extent reasonably possible:
Vehicular use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets
providing house frontages;
(a)
(b) Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape;
(c) Legal and physical protection of views from public ways;
(d) Street layout facilitating south orientation of houses;
Use of curvilinear (consisting of or bounded by curved lines)
street patterns.
(e)
(2)
A.
Conformance with Master Plan. The street layout and utilities in all
plans shall conform to the proposals of the Lancaster Master Plan,
where applicable.
B.
Standards of construction. Standards of construction not otherwise
specified hereunder shall be according to the "Standard Specifications
for Highways and Bridges of the Massachusetts Department of Public
Works" (latest edition with amendments in effect at that time).
C.
§ 301-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-9
1:287
§ 301-10. Streets.
Typical cross sections. Design and construction shall conform to the
typical cross sections.50
D.
Location.
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that they will
provide safe vehicular travel. Due consideration shall also be given
to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the
maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision.
(1)
Streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets
as far as is practicable.
(2)
If adjoining property is not subdivided, proper provision for
extending streets shall be made.
(3)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
will not be permitted except where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, such strips are in the public interest.
(4)
A.
Alignment.
Streets shall intersect at 90° when possible, and at not less than
60° in other cases.
(1)
The minimum center-line radius of any curve shall be 100 feet on a
lane, 150 feet on a minor street, and 200 feet on a collector street
or where gradient exceeds 5%. The Planning Board may require a
greater radius where deemed necessary for the public safety.
(2)
All intersections and approaches to intersections shall be cleared of
any obstructions to the motorist's view and maintained clear. Street
lines at intersections shall be cut back to provide for pavement
radii of not less than 25 feet.
(3)
Sight distances of at least 225 feet in each direction shall be
provided at intersections, except that 400 feet sight distance shall
be provided at intersections with collector streets, state-numbered
highways, and other streets having high-speed traffic. At
intersections involving such streets, intersection designs shall
allow for longer turning radii, and safe acceleration and
deceleration, potentially involving increased street width,
increased curb radii, and use of traffic islands for channelization.
Between intersections, minimum sight distance shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-27-1987]
(a) Collector street: 400 feet.
(b) Minor street: 225 feet.
(4)
B.
50.Editor's Note: The typical cross sections are on file in the Planning Board office.
§ 301-9 LANCASTER CODE § 301-10
1:288
(c) Lane: 125 feet.
Center-line offsets for intersecting streets shall not be less than
150 feet.
(5)
Dead-end streets.
Only lanes may be permitted to be dead-end streets, unless, in the
opinion of the Board, such dead-end streets are necessitated in
other cases by topography or other local conditions.
(1)
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a culde-
sac having pavement diameter of 120 feet and property line
diameter of 160 feet, or an alternative turnaround designed for
a vehicle of thirty-foot length, eight-foot width, and having an
outside turning radius of 57 feet. Islands in the cul-de-sac are not
recommended. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(2)
C.
Width.
Minimum street width shall be as follows: [Amended 4-27-1987;
6-13-2011]
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement
(feet)
Collector street 60 30
Minor street 50 24
Lane 40 24
A divided boulevard shall be 12 feet on each side. [Added
6-13-2011]
(1)
The center line of the paved surface shall normally coincide with
the right-of-way center line.
(2)
The Planning Board may require slope easements where retention
cannot be adequately handled within the required right-of-way.
(3)
D.
Grades.
(1) Grades of all streets shall not be less than 1.0%.
The maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:
(a) Collector street: 8%.
(b) Minor street: 10%.
(c) Lane: 11%.
(2)
(3) Grades shall not exceed 4% within 30 feet of an intersecting street.
E.
§ 301-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-10
1:289
All changes in grade exceeding 1% shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient length to afford a passing sight distance of at
least the following, unless drainage considerations for sag vertical
curves dictates otherwise:
(a) Collector street: 275 feet.
(b) Minor street: 175 feet.
(c) Lane: 125 feet.
(4)
The street surface shall have a cross slope of 3/8 inch per foot on
each side of the center line.
(5)
Center-line profile shall normally be at least three feet above the
grade of adjacent, nonbordering vegetative as well as bordering
vegetative, wetlands. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(6)
F. Construction.
Surface preparation. Clearing and grubbing shall be performed to
remove stumps, brush, roots, boulders, and like material from the
area of the traveled way, shoulders, sidewalks, utility trenches, but
elsewhere, wherever feasible, existing vegetation shall be protected.
G.
Forming the subgrade. All topsoil, subsoil, rocks, ledge and other
unsuitable material shall be excavated to a depth of at least 16 inches
within the traveled way, 12 inches for shoulders, and 10 inches for
sidewalks. Unless a permit is granted by the Town for the removal
of loam and topsoil, said material shall be stockpiled on the premises
for final landscaping of roadway shoulders and adjacent house lots.
The depth of excavation may be reduced by written authorization of
the Planning Board or its agent if the existing base is clean gravel
suitable for roadway foundation. A greater depth of excavation may be
required in any area where the subgrade material (clay, peat, etc.) will
not support the roadway, or drainage conditions require more gravel
to establish a firm foundation. Prior to placement of the gravel base
course, the entire subgrade surface shall be thoroughly compacted
by means of a three-wheel roller weighing not less than 10 tons or
equivalent pneumatic tired or vibratory compactors. After compacting,
the surface shall show no deviation in excess of two inches from the
grades indicated on the drawings. No gravel base course shall be
placed in any subgrade area until said area has been inspected and
approved by the Planning Board or its agent. [Amended 6-13-2011]
H.
Placing and compacting base course materials. Base course gravel
shall be placed in maximum lifts of eight inches to provide a twelveinch
compacted base depth within the traveled way. Each lift is to
be thoroughly compacted with a three-wheel roller weighing not less
than 10 tons, or equivalent pneumatic tired or vibratory compactors.
The final lift is to be a finer gradation with no stones larger than
three inches in diameter. The base course gravel shall be placed not
I.
§ 301-10 LANCASTER CODE § 301-10
1:290
less than two months prior to surfacing. All drainage and utilities are
to be installed prior to placing base course gravel. The base course
gravel, once approved, is not to be disturbed by digging without written
authorization of the Planning Board or its agent. [Amended
6-13-2011]
Conditioning of base course prior to surfacing:
The surface of the base course will be inspected and tested for
tolerances by the Department of Public Works or its agent. Any
deviations in excess of the required tolerances shall be corrected
by the subdivider as directed. Any ruts or soft yielding areas in the
base course shall be corrected by removing unsuitable material,
adding suitable material, reshaping and recompacting as directed.
The base course, immediately before surfacing, shall be finegraded
to three inches below final grade as shown on the profiles
of the definitive plan, with the grades of the street surface properly
marked on grade stakes set no further apart than 50 feet. Grading
shall be by means of a self-propelled road grader and such hand
labor as may be required. Compaction will be by an approved-type
roller weighing not less than eight tons. The surface shall show no
deviation in excess of 1/4 inch from the grades indicated on the
definitive plan. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(1)
J.
Application of permanent surface. A pavement of Class I bituminous
concrete, Type I-1, shall be placed in strict accordance with the
Massachusetts DPW Standard Specifications (Sections 460.0 through
460.62, or later revisions). Said pavement shall be laid in two courses,
consisting of 2 1/2 inches compacted thickness of binder course and
1 1/2 inches of wear course. The completed pavement shall have a
uniform compacted thickness of four inches. No permanent surface
shall be applied after November 1 unless authorized in writing by the
Planning Board or its agent. Utilities, road base, drainage system and
binder course shall be placed before any building permits are issued
within that project phase. [Amended 6-13-2011]
K.
Berms and curbs. Bituminous concrete berms shall be installed on
both sides of all roadways in conformity with the typical cross section
appended hereto,51 except where waived by the Board where open
drainage systems are being relied upon. [Amended 4-27-1987]
L.
Driveways. All driveways extending from the completed road surface to
the lot line must have a topping of at least three inches of bituminous
concrete. All driveway slopes must end at the street right-of-way, then
continue forward to the completed road surface in the same grade as
the sidewalk strip and/or shoulder in order to allow proper drainage
of surface water. See the Lancaster Zoning Bylaws for curb cut design
standards.52 For driveways in excess of 1,000 feet, refer to the Required
M.
51.Editor's Note: The typical cross sections are on file in the Planning office.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 301-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-10
1:291
§ 301-11. Stormwater management. [Amended 6-13-2011]
Refer to the Lancaster Stormwater Management Bylaw that was adopted in
October 2007 for the process of securing a local stormwater management
permit.54
Off-Street Parking section in the Lancaster Zoning Bylaws.53
[Amended 6-13-2011]
Access through another municipality. In instances where access to
a subdivision is proposed to cross land in another municipality, the
applicant shall provide the Board with certification from appropriate
authorities in that municipality that such access is in accordance with
the subdivision regulations of such municipality, and with its master
plan if applicable, and that a legally adequate performance bond has
been duly posted, or that such access is already adequately improved
to handle prospective traffic. [Amended 4-27-1987]
N.
General approach. Storm drains, culverts, swales, detention basins, and
related facilities shall be designed to permit the unimpeded flow of all
natural watercourses, to endure adequate drainage at all low points
along the streets, to control erosion, and to intercept stormwater runoff
along streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade
of the areas being drained. Where determined to be appropriate by
the Planning Board, stormwater shall be carried on the ground surface
and recharged ("open system") rather than piped to surface water
("closed system"). Peak storm flows and runoff at the boundaries of the
development in a twenty-five-year frequency storm shall be no higher
following development than prior to development, unless an increase
is authorized by the Planning Board, following consultation with the
Conservation Commission and consideration of the ability of receiving
wetlands or water bodies to absorb the increase and the consequences
of providing detention capacity. In the Floodplain District, adequate
drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Drainage systems shall be designed based on a twenty-five-year
frequency storm, except that culverts shall be based on a fifty-year
storm, detention basins shall be based on a one-hundred-year storm,
and in a one-hundred-year storm streets shall remain passable and
drainage shall not enter buildings. [Amended 4-27-1987]
A.
Storm drains.
Except where drainage swales are used, catch basins will generally
be required on both sides of the roadway on continuous grades at
intervals of not more than 300 feet. Storm drains and culverts shall
be no less than 12 inches inside diameter and shall be of greater
size if required by design considerations. All drains shall have a
(1)
B.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Art. VI, Required Off-Street Parking.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Stormwater Control. See also Ch. 305, Stormwater
Management Rules and Regulations.
§ 301-10 LANCASTER CODE § 301-11
1:292
§ 301-12. Utilities.
minimum of three-foot cover, except where reinforced concrete
pipe is used and there the minimum cover shall be two feet. A
catch basin to manhole configuration shall be used. [Amended
4-27-1987]
Proper connections shall be made with any existing drains in
adjacent streets or easements where they may exist and prove
adequate to accommodate the drainage flow from the subdivision.
If the surface water drains will discharge into adjacent existing
streets, or onto adjacent properties not under the control of the
applicant, the latter shall clearly indicate what course the
discharge will take, and shall present to the Board evidence from
the owner of the adjacent property that such discharge is
permitted. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(2)
Subdrains or interceptor drains are required where necessary to
preclude flowage of groundwater threatening to the integrity of the
road surface.
(3)
Drainage calculations shall normally assume all tributary area to
be developed as zoned. Water velocities shall be between two and
10 feet per second in pipes, and not over five feet per second in
swales.
(4)
Catch basins. Catch basins shall be provided with grates installed and
approved as to design by the Board. Manholes shall be provided at
changes in direction, and wherever there is a change in size of pipe.
Not more than two catch basins may be connected in series rather
than to manholes. Catch basins and manholes shall be constructed
with standard concrete blocks, with brick and mortar or, if required by
depth, of reinforced concrete. Catch basins shall have a three-foot deep
sump.
C.
Detention basins. [Added 6-13-2011]
An operations and maintenance plan must be submitted as part
of the stormwater management permit application. This plan shall
outline a maintenance schedule for all drainage structures,
including swales and detention basins. The Planning Board may
require that a maintenance bond, or other such instrument, be
posted to insure that the ongoing maintenance is addressed.
(1)
Invasive aquatic weeds must be removed from all new detention
basins and stormwater channels for a period of one full year.
(2)
D.
Water Resource Districts. Within Water Resource Districts as
established in Chapter 220, Zoning, of the Code of the Town of
Lancaster, provisions for contaminant removal shall be made employing
detention basins with subsurface drains or perforated risers, oil and
grit separator catch basins, or other devices where appropriate.
E.
§ 301-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-12
1:293
Installation. All sewers, gas lines, water pipes, telephone, electricity,
and CATV cable shall be installed underground before roadway base
course installation. [Amended 6-13-2011]
A.
Water.
Whenever feasible, the water supply shall be from a public water
supply system. In such cases, the water supply system will be
considered adequate only if it is capable of providing gravity
service to each proposed fire hydrant with a flow of 750 gpm
(gallons per minute) at 20 psi (pounds per square inch) residual
pressure within single-family detached residential developments,
or meeting Insurance Safety Office (ISO) requirements for other
developments, and only if capable of providing gravity service to
each proposed lot with static pressure of 40 psi at street grade.
Where any part of any lot is at elevation 450 feet msl (mean sea
level) or higher, the applicant shall submit engineering analysis
documenting system adequacy. [Amended 4-27-1987;
6-13-2011]
(1)
If connection to a public water system is proposed but it is
determined by the Board that the above standards will not be met
in part or all of the subdivision for reasons beyond the reasonable
responsibility of the developer, the Board may nevertheless
approve the plan subject to a condition that any lot not adequately
served shall not be built upon until service has been made adequate
or, if sooner, 24 months have elapsed from the date of plan approval
in order to allow time to remedy system deficiencies.
(2)
Water system materials and construction shall meet the
specifications of the Lancaster Board of Water Commissioners.
(3)
Permanent dead-end water mains shall not normally be allowed.
Easements shall be provided where necessary to allow for
extension or looping of mains through subsequent development.
(4)
Individual water meters shall be installed for each house. [Added
6-13-2011]
(5)
A waterline stub shall be installed at the time the foundation is
constructed. [Added 6-13-2011]
(6)
Where connection to an adequate public water system is infeasible,
the Planning Board shall approve a subdivision only upon its
determination, following consultation with the Fire Department,
that reserved access to a fire pond or other provisions will
adequately provide for fire safety, and upon its determination,
following consultation with the Board of Health, that wells on
each lot are likely to be able to provide a sustained yield of five
gallons per minute with water quality meeting the Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering's "Drinking Water Regulations
of Massachusetts," as amended from time to time. One test well
(7)
B.
§ 301-12 LANCASTER CODE § 301-12
1:294
§ 301-13. Other improvements.
may be required of the applicant per 10 potential lots, or the
Planning Board's determination may be based upon the written
statement of a hydrogeologist following his analysis of well records
on nearby premises, subsurface conditions, and the effects of this
subdivision and other potential sources of contamination.
Upon recommendation of the Fire Department, the Planning
Board may require the installation of a cistern(s) as a source
of water for fire suppression. Such requirement may specify the
number, size and type of cistern to be installed for each
subdivision plan, and may also specify the location and distance
from the nearest water line. Maintenance of the cistern(s) will
be the responsibility of the developer or the homeowners'
association, until such time that the road is accepted by the Town.
[Added 6-13-2011]
Sewerage. [Amended 4-27-1987]
Provisions shall be made for Lancaster Sewer District sewerage
to serve all subdivisions that both lie within the district and can
feasibly be serviced by the district system. Service will be
determined to be infeasible only if requiring of the developer as
much or more off-site expenditure to make connection as required
for on-site system development, including house connections, or
if requiring unobtainable easements, or for other extraordinary
reason. The expense of such connection shall be borne by the
applicant according to the Rules and Regulations of the Lancaster
Sewer District Commissioners.
(1)
Design and construction of a district public sewage collection
system(s), along with fees for engineering/legal review, shall be
as required by the Rules and Regulations of the Lancaster Sewer
District Commissioners.
(2)
No subdivision that shows connection to district public sewerage
shall be approved by the Planning Board unless the lots shown to
be so connected lie within the Lancaster Sewer District, or were
voted into the district according to the Rules and Regulations of the
Lancaster Sewer District Commissioners, prior to such approval.
(3)
C.
Floodplain District. In the Floodplain District, all public utilities and
facilities such as gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
D.
Sidewalks.
The Planning Board may require sidewalks on one or both sides of
the street if it is felt that the public safety will be served by their
installation. Normally, no sidewalk will be required on lanes.
(1)
A.
§ 301-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-13
1:295
All materials shall be removed for the full width of the sidewalk to a
subgrade 10 inches below the finished grade as shown on the cross
section; and all soft spots and other undesirable material below
such subgrade shall be replaced with a good binding material
and rolled. This excavated area then shall be filled with eight
inches of good quality gravel and rolled with a pitch toward the
curb of 3/8 inch to the foot. Two inches of compacted bituminous
concrete shall be placed; provided, however, that if a granolithic
surface is desired and/or specified by the Board, specifications of
the Massachusetts Department of Public Works shall be complied
with.
(2)
Wheelchair ramps shall be provided at all intersections of
sidewalks and streets, and elsewhere as appropriate.
(3)
Shoulders. Shoulders shall be at least three feet wide, pitched towards
the curb or swale at between 3/8 inch and two inches per foot. The
shoulder shall have an eight-inch gravel foundation, and four inches of
topsoil (after rolling).
B.
Lighting. [Added 6-13-2011]
Streetlights shall be installed at every major intersection in the
subdivision plan. Refer to the Lighting Section in the Lancaster
Zoning Bylaws55 for design standards for streetlights and
illumination.
(1)
The Planning Board may also require that individual pole lights be
installed at each house site.
(2)
C.
Plantings.
Unpaved areas within the right-of-way which have been stripped
by the construction shall be graded to meet the adjoining property
with a slope of not more than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal
in cut or one foot vertical to three feet horizontal in fill. Those areas
shall be covered with at least five inches of good quality topsoil and
thickly seeded with perennial grasses or other planting materials
approved by the Board.
(1)
Suitable existing trees within the right-of-way, if larger than a fourinch
caliper and located outside the shoulders, shall be preserved.
Trees to be retained shall not have grade changed over their root
areas more than 12 inches. Where suitable trees do not exist at
intervals of less than 40 feet on each side of the street, they shall
be provided by the developer.
(2)
Trees to be planted shall be well-branched, nursery-grown stock at
least 2.5 inches trunk diameter at four feet above the ground, and
shall be free of injury, harmful insects, and diseases. Such species
(3)
D.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 301-13 LANCASTER CODE § 301-13
1:296
§ 301-14. Other requirements.
will be native to the region and in no instance shall be an exotic or
invasive species. [Amended 6-13-2011]
New plantings shall be guaranteed by the developer for a period of
two growing seasons, and the subdivision security shall reflect this
requirement. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(4)
Street signs. As soon as a street is paved, street signs conforming to
those placed by the Town shall be erected at each end of the street.
The word "Private" shall be lettered on a separate sign placed under
the street sign. This separate sign shall be removed when the street is
accepted by the Town.
E.
Monuments.
Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections; at all
points of change in direction of curvature of the streets; at each lot
corner along the street; and as necessary to locate any easements
to be deeded to the Town.
(1)
Monuments must be granite or reinforced concrete and set to a
depth of not less than four feet below finished grade and flush with
finished grade. Reference points are to be drilled in the top of each
monument.
(2)
A certified monument plan must be submitted prior to the issuance
of a building permit. [Added 6-13-2011]
(3)
F.
Guardrails. Guardrails of a type approved by the Board shall be
installed wherever grade falls more than five feet below center-line
grade within 20 feet of the paved area of any street, or in other cases
where the Planning Board determines that safety warrants installation.
[Amended 4-27-1987]
G.
Open space.
The Planning Board may require the plan to show a potential park
or parks suitably located for recreational purposes or for providing
light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in
relation to the land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of
the land, normally not exceeding 5% of plan area. It shall connect
to abutting public open space, if possible. [Amended 6-13-2011]
(1)
The Board may by appropriate endorsement on the plan require
that no building be erected upon such park or parks for a period
of not more than three years without its approval. This land shall
be made available for purchase by the Town. Failure to purchase
within three years shall free the owners from restrictions.
(2)
The Planning Board may request the plan to show potential open
space for the recreational enjoyment and nature appreciation for
(3)
A.
§ 301-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-14
1:297
Town residents and to protect natural landscape features, plans
and wildlife. Where possible, the proposed open space should
connect to other conservation land and take into consideration
natural features unique to the landscape. Open space should
consist of upland habitat and not consist of the non-buildable
wetlands portion of the property. [Added 6-13-2011]
An alternative method to appropriating open space can be found
in the Flexible Development Section56 of the Lancaster Zoning
Bylaws. A forty-percent requirement for open space is mandated in
this type of development model. [Added 6-13-2011]
(4)
In lieu of the above open space options, the Planning Board may
accept a contribution towards the funding of off-site recreational or
open space opportunities for the enjoyment of the Town's citizens.
[Added 6-13-2011]
(5)
Earth removal. Any area within the subdivision used for the extraction
of gravel or borrow shall be regraded, loamed, and in sod before
final release is granted by the Planning Board. Where earth removal
is associated with the construction of the subdivision, the developer
shall provide the amount of earth to be removed and disposition of
such earth, the method of removal, and the means proposed to prevent
erosion and sedimentation to protect adjacent areas. [Amended
6-13-2011]
B.
Steep slopes. [Added 6-13-2011]
The purposes of this subsection shall be to preserve and enhance
the landscape by encouraging the maximum retention of natural
topographic features, such as natural drainage swales, streams,
slopes, ridgelines, rock outcroppings, vistas, natural plant
formation and trees; to minimize the effects of grading to insure
that the natural character of steep slopes is retained; to minimize
water runoff and soil erosion problems incurred in grading of steep
slopes; and to encourage innovative architectural, landscaping,
circulation and site design. For the purposes of this subsection,
the term "natural" shall be defined as the condition of the ground
surface as it exists at the time a subdivision or development is
proposed, including any man-made alterations such as grading,
excavation or filling which may have occurred prior to the time
such subdivision or development is submitted. No land intended for
subdivision or development may be altered so as to circumvent this
regulation.
(1)
The slope of land at any point, stated as a percentage, shall be
defined as the change in elevation over a horizontal distance
measured perpendicular to the contours divided by the distance
over which the change occurs multiplied by one hundred.
(2)
C.
56.Editor's Note: See § 220-15, Flexible development.
§ 301-14 LANCASTER CODE § 301-14
1:298
Slope = (Change in elevation/horizontal distance measured
perpendicular to contours) x 100
All natural slopes exceeding 35% over a horizontal distance of 10
feet as measured perpendicular to the contour on a tract or parcel
of land intended or proposed for subdivision or on a building lot are
protected and shall remain undisturbed.
(3)
The Planning Board may grant a waiver from the provisions of
this subsection if, in the Board's opinion, the proposal satisfies the
purposes set forth above.
(4)
Maintenance. The entire area within the right-of-way shall be properly
maintained by the developer until accepted by the Town. Immediately
prior to such acceptance, all catch basins shall be cleaned, streets
swept, and the remainder of the right-of-way and any other areas to
be deeded to the Town shall be cleared, mowed, or otherwise put in
first-class order. Snow removal and sanding of the streets shall be
the responsibility of the developer until such acceptance. Any fences
erected in the common area or the right-of-way shall be maintained by
the developer or the homeowners' association in perpetuity. [Amended
6-13-2011]
D.
Cleaning up. Before sale of a lot, the subdivider shall clean up any
debris thereon caused by construction of public improvements.
E.
Easements.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear of side lot
lines shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
(1)
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to conform substantially
to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream
and to provide for construction or other necessary purposes (such
as maintenance).
(2)
F.
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all natural
features such as large trees, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots,
and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
G.
Record plans. Upon completion of construction, and before release of
the performance guarantee, the subdivider shall have prepared and
submitted record plans at one inch equals 40 feet, which shall indicate
the actual location of all of the following:
(1) Street lines;
(2) Traveled way edges;
H.
§ 301-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-14
1:299
§ 301-15. Release of performance guarantee.
(3) Path locations;
(4) Permanent monuments;
(5) Locations, slopes, and inverts of the required utilities and drainage;
Locations of any other underground utilities, such as electricity,
telephone lines, and streetlighting.
(6)
Certification. A professional civil engineer retained by the developer
shall certify that all construction was executed in conformance with
the subdivision regulations and with all requirements agreed upon as a
condition to plan approval.
I.
Special studies. If warranted by unusual conditions of location,
services, geology, or design, studies beyond those required under
§ 301-8, Definitive plan, Subsection A, Submittals, may be necessary in
order to make sound decisions regarding approval or modification of
the definitive plan. In such cases, such studies shall be prepared by a
consultant agency or firm agreed to by the applicant and the Planning
Board, retained at the expense of the applicant. [Added 4-27-1987]
J.
Request for release. Upon completion of the foregoing requirements,
security for the performance of which was given by bond, deposit, or
covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant, with respect to any
lot, the applicant may request and agree on terms of release with said
Planning Board.
A.
Completion requirements. To assist in determining whether satisfactory
completion has been made, the Planning Board shall receive properly
completed inspection forms (Forms H and I)57 from the subdivider.
The required improvements will not be considered complete until:
[Amended 6-13-2011]
The subdivider has filed with the Planning Board a record plan as
required at § 301-14H. [Amended 4-27-1987]
(1)
The areas to be accepted by the Town have gone through a winter
and succeeding spring without substantial deterioration.
(2)
B.
57.Editor's Note: Said forms are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 301-14 LANCASTER CODE § 301-15
1:300
ARTICLE V
Administration
§ 301-16. Inspections.
At least one week prior to commencement of street construction, the
Department of Public Works shall be notified by certified mail of the
intended commencement. The Department of Public Works shall, upon
receipt of such notification, appoint an agent and instruct said agent to
make continuing inspections of the work to insure that the requirements
listed below are adhered to. The wages of said agent shall be determined
by the Board of Public Works in accordance with the accepted Town Pay
Schedule and paid to the Town by the developer. The inspecting agent
shall furnish the subdivider with a checklist (Form I)58 of steps to be
completed. The subdivider shall not proceed with any steps until all prior
steps have been signed by the inspector as satisfactorily completed. The
completed checklist is to be returned to the Planning Board. Failure to
submit a completed checklist may be deemed sufficient cause for the Board
to withhold final approval of the roadway construction.
§ 301-17. Variation. [Amended 4-27-1987; 6-13-2011]
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may
be waived when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is
in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control
Law.59 Because this standard, by which the Board is to determine whether
in any case it will decline to apply the regulations, makes granting of a
request for such action uncertain, the applicant is encouraged to submit
requests for waiver from strict compliance of any regulation(s) with the
preliminary plan or at least 90 days prior to submitting the definitive
plan, to avoid disapproval of a definitive plan that does not comply with
applicable regulations. The applicant shall state, in his written request, why
he believes that the regulation(s) should not apply to the particular land
under application, and why he believes that granting such waiver(s) would
be in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of
the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 301-18. One residential structure per lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for dwelling purposes
shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
a subdivision or elsewhere within the Town without the consent of the
Planning Board. Consent shall be granted only for structures in compliance
with zoning restrictions, and only upon the Board finding that adequate
ways servicing such site for each building have been provided in the same
manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
58.Editor's Note: Said form is included at the end of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 301-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-19
1:301
§ 301-19. Reference to statute.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive.
§ 301-19 LANCASTER CODE § 301-19
1:302
Chapter 302
BOARD OF APPEALS RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 301-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 301-19
1:303

ARTICLE I
Organization and Meetings
§ 302-1. Adoption and repeal.
These rules and regulations are established pursuant to Massachusetts
General Laws Chapters 40A and 40B (MGL c. 40A, §§ 9 and 12, and MGL c.
40B, § 21) and § 220-61A of the Town of Lancaster Zoning Bylaws ("Zoning
Bylaw"), as amended.60 These rules and regulations, appendix of approved
forms and fee schedules, were approved by vote of the Lancaster Board of
Appeals at a public meeting and shall supersede all previous regulations of
the Board of Appeals, which are hereby repealed.
§ 302-2. Interpretation.
These rules shall be interpreted and applied so as to implement the
requirements of MGL c. 40A and 40B, and the Zoning Bylaw. In the event
that any provision hereof is deemed to be in conflict with these statutes or
the Zoning Bylaw, the latter shall govern.
§ 302-3. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals ("Board") shall have the power to hear and decide the
following categories of appeals, applications or petitions:
§ 302-4. Membership and officers.
The Board shall consist of five members and three associate members
(also sometimes referred to herein as "regular members" and "alternate
members"). All members are appointed by the Select Board.
Special permits. Applications for special permits in accordance with
MGL c. 40A, § 9, and the Zoning Bylaw, and requests submitted for
findings in accordance with requests for permits to expand or alter
nonconforming use or structures pursuant to MGL c. 40A, Section 6
where the Board is designated in the Zoning Bylaw as the Permit
Granting Authority or Special Permit Granting Authority;
A.
Variances. Petitions for variance from the provisions of the Zoning
Bylaw pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 10;
B.
Comprehensive permits. Applications for comprehensive permits
pursuant to MGL c. 40B;
C.
Administrative appeals. Appeals by any person aggrieved by reason
of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any
applicable zoning officer or building official pursuant to MGL c. 40A,
§ 8.
D.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning, of this Code.
§ 302-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-5
1:305
§ 302-5. Election of officers.
At the first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect, by majority vote,
a Chairman and Clerk who shall serve until the remainder of the year or
until a successor is elected. Associate members shall not participate in the
vote unless designated to sit and vote thereon in the absence of a regular
member.
§ 302-6. Chairman powers and duties.
The Chairman shall vote and be recorded on all matters before the Board.
The Chairman shall call and preside over all meetings and hearings and
shall be responsible for submitting all reports, decisions, minutes and other
official business of the Board as required, including but not limited to the
power and duty to:
§ 302-7. Clerk powers and duties.
The Clerk shall have such duties as the Chairman shall designate including
the supervision of all clerical functions of the Board, preparation of dockets,
agendas, minutes of Board meetings and hearings, decisions, notices of
decisions of the Board, reports and other communications and records. The
Board may hire a clerical secretary to assist the Chairman and Clerk in the
performance of their duties.
§ 302-8. Associate members.
Associate members shall attend all meetings and hearings of the Board, and
shall perform the duties of a regular member when so designated by the
Chairman.
A. Sign all communications, correspondence and decisions of the Board;
Endorse all purchase orders, vouchers, and expense authorizations as
required;
B.
C. Supervise the performance of duties by other officers and members;
Designate a Member or Associate to Chair meetings or hearings in the
event of his absence or inability to act upon matters before the Board;
D.
Communicate with applicants, appellants or petitioners, their agents or
attorneys in connection with any matter pending before the Board;
E.
F. Request opinions and advice of Town Counsel;
Appoint Associate Members to act upon Board matters in the absence
or due to the inability to act of a regular Member;
G.
To request the production of testimonial or documentary evidence
which the Board deems relevant to any matter pending before it; and
in furtherance thereof, to issues subpoenas in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Act.
H.
§ 302-5 LANCASTER CODE § 302-9
1:306
§ 302-9. Quorum.
A quorum for any meeting or hearing of the Board shall consist of at least
four members. In the event that fewer than four members are present
and qualified to vote at the commencement of any meeting or hearing, the
Chairman shall adjourn until such time as a quorum shall be present.
§ 302-10. Manner of convening.
Meetings shall be held at a time and place to be designated by the
Chairman, shall be posted and conducted in accordance with the Open
Meeting Law,61 and shall not be held on Sundays, legal holidays or days on
which state or municipal elections, caucuses, primaries or Town Meetings
are held. Views of property, which the Board desires to take, may be
conducted at the convenience of the Board and shall not be deemed to be
meetings.
§ 302-11. Votes.
The vote of each member designated to sit on any matter shall be
recorded by the Clerk. No member shall vote on a matter, which is
required by law to be decided after public hearing, unless the member
attended all but one of the sessions of the public hearing.
A.
Decisions of the Board shall be by majority vote unless otherwise
required by law. A vote of at least four members shall be required
to grant a special permit or variance, or to reverse any decision of a
zoning or building official upon any administrative appeal.
B.
61.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 302-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-11
1:307

ARTICLE II
Applications, Petitions and Appeals
§ 302-12. Form for appeal.
All applications, petitions and appeals to the Board shall be made on a form
approved by the Board. (See Appendix.) Any communication purporting
to be an application may be deemed to be incomplete and treated as a
mere notice of intention to seek relief, until such time as it is submitted
on the approved form, and is accompanied by all required fees, lists and
other information required by these rules. The Board reserves the right to
reject any application that is incomplete. The fact that an application is
discussed at a scheduled meeting shall not be deemed to be acceptance of
an application.
§ 302-13. Manner of filing.
§ 302-14. Certified list of parties in interest.
The original of all application forms as are hereinafter specified for
each particular type of relief sought, including site plans, required
attachments, briefs to the Board, and other documents attached to the
application, if any, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk by handdelivery
or by mail. Ten copies of the complete application package
shall be forthwith delivered to the Board, either by mail or by delivery
to the Town Clerk in care of the Board, which shall contain the date
and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk. Filing fees, advertising
and mailing fees or other fees or information required in the application
forms should be included with the original documents filed with the
Town Clerk.
A.
Filing fees shall be made payable to the Town of Lancaster and shall be
in the amount specified in the schedule of fees approved by the Board.
(See Appendix.)
B.
A list of parties in interest shall be attached to the original application,
petition or appeal. Said list shall include the name and address of
petitioner, owner of the land affected if petitioner is not the owner,
abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any public or private
way or street, and abutters to abutters whose property is located
within 300 feet of the property line of the land which is the subject
of an application or appeal. The names and addresses of owners shall
be determined by reference to the most recent applicable tax list,
including owners in adjoining towns.
A.
The list of parties in interest shall also include the Planning Boards
of Lancaster, Sterling, Clinton, Bolton, Harvard, Leominster and
Lunenburg.
B.
C. The list shall be certified by the Town Assessor.
§ 302-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-15
1:309
§ 302-15. Filing period.
Any administrative appeal must be filed with the Town Clerk within 30 days
of the date of the order or decision being appealed from, specifying the
grounds for appeal and containing a copy of the order or decision appealed
from.
§ 302-16. Findings of fact.
§ 302-17. Site plan.
Each application, petition or appeal which seeks a permit for new
construction shall be accompanied by a site plan of at least 8.5 inches by 11
inches, drawn to scale, containing the following information:
Each application, petition or appeal shall be accompanied by a Form
B, Request for Findings of Fact, which shall be tailored to the specific
facts of the case. The request for findings of fact may be supplemented
by, or consolidated with, a brief to the board containing any relevant
arguments, facts, legal issues, or reference to exhibits or other
evidence which the applicant, appellant or petitioner, or other party in
interest wishes the Board to consider.
A.
All parties in interest should carefully consult the Zoning Bylaw, the
Zoning Act62 and other pertinent laws or regulations as to the facts
necessary and legal criteria required by the Board to render its decision
and, where appropriate, seek assistance from counsel or other
consultants.
B.
A. Property lines and boundaries;
B. Name and address of record owner;
C. Names and location of adjacent streets;
D. North arrow and scale;
E. Zoning district and any zone lines in vicinity;
Existing and proposed buildings or additions including number of
stories and height of all structures;
F.
G. Paved areas, existing and proposed parking or loading spaces;
H. Existing utility lines including septic and underground structures;
I. Locations of structures on adjoining property;
Lot area and dimensions, including setbacks where new construction or
additions are proposed;
J.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning, of this Code. See MGL c. 40, § 1 et seq., the Zoning
Act.
§ 302-15 LANCASTER CODE § 302-17
1:310
§ 302-18. Review fees.
Other information as required in the Zoning Bylaw unique to the type of
relief being sought (e.g. special permits, variances, uses requiring site
plan review, comprehensive permits may require additional plans and
data).
K.
If the Board determines upon review of any application for a permit,
special permit, comprehensive permit or variance that it requires
technical assistance or professional advice, the Board may employ such
consultants as the Board shall deem reasonably necessary or desirable.
A.
Whenever possible, the Board shall work cooperatively with the
applicant to identify appropriate consultants and to obtain applicant's
agreement to reimburse the fees and expenses of the consultant. The
Board may obtain deposits from the applicant to be used as retainers
for services.
B.
Alternatively the Board may, by majority vote, require the applicant to
pay a reasonable review fee to employ consultants to be chosen by the
Board alone.
C.
Review fees shall only be imposed to review plans and studies prepared
on behalf of the applicant in connection with the applicant's specific
project or proposal.
D.
All written results and reports of outside consultants shall be made part
of the record of the Board's proceedings.
E.
In imposing review fees, the Board shall comply with the provisions of
MGL c. 30B, §§ 1 to 19. Any invitation for bids or request for proposals
shall indicate that award of the contract is contingent upon payment
of the review fee. If the applicant fails to either pay the review fee
or appeal the selection of a consultant in writing within 10 days of
receiving written notification of selection of a consultant, the Board
may deny the permit being applied for.
F.
The applicant may appeal the selection of a consultant to the Select
Board solely upon the grounds that the consultant selected has a
conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required
qualifications (i.e., either an educational degree in or related to the field
at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a
related field).
G.
In the event that no decision is made by the Select Board within 30
days from filing the appeal, the appeal shall be deemed denied. Failure
to pay the review fee within five days after the appeal has been denied
by the Select Board's decision or inaction shall result in denial of the
requested permit.
H.
The required time limits for action upon the application shall be
extended by a period of time equal to the duration of the appeal.
I.
§ 302-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-18
1:311
§ 302-19. Amendments to applications, petitions, appeals.
The Board shall vote only upon the specific application, petition or appeal
which is the subject of the relief contained in the documents as filed and
described in the notice of public hearing. Any proposed modifications or
amendments must be presented at a public meeting or hearing on the
matter. The Board shall determine whether the proposed amendments are
reasonably within the scope of the original application and, if determined
to exceed the scope of the public notice, shall require that the applicant
request an extension of time to permit a new notice to parties in interest
to be mailed, published and posted at applicant's expense. Normally,
modifications or amendments to plans or proposed uses or structures which
constitute a decrease in degree or extent of a use or proposed construction
shall not require a new notice. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit
a Board from imposing conditions upon the grant of a permit, which may
require alterations or amendments to plans.
§ 302-20. Waiver of rules and regulations.
The Board may, in its sole discretion, waive strict compliance with any
provision of these rules and regulations where such waiver is consistent
with public interest and the proper performance of its duties, except in such
cases where the requirements sought to be waived are required by either a
statute or the Zoning Bylaw.
§ 302-21. Board requests for information.
The Board may request further information, studies, plans or other evidence
which it deems reasonably necessary in order to properly decide the matter
pending before it. In cases where the Board is required to render a decision
within specific time limits it may also require extensions of the time period
within which it must render and file its decision upon the matter. Failure to
furnish such information as is reasonably requested by the Board in a timely
fashion may constitute grounds for denial of the relief sought.
Review fees shall be deposited into a special account established by the
Town Treasurer pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G, and shall be expended
only for the purposes described above. Any unused excess in the
account, plus accrued interest, shall be returned to the applicant within
30 days of completion of the project or written withdrawal of the
proposal or application.
J.
§ 302-18 LANCASTER CODE § 302-21
1:312
ARTICLE III
Hearings
§ 302-22. Notice.
§ 302-23. Hearings open to public.
All hearings shall be open to the public. No person shall be excluded unless
he or she is deemed to constitute a hindrance to the proper performance of
the duties of the Board.
§ 302-24. Representation.
An applicant may appear personally and/or with representation by a duly
authorized attorney or agent. In the event of the unexcused absence of the
applicant or his representative at any hearing upon the matter, the Board
may issue a decision upon the matter based upon all information submitted
and available to it.
§ 302-25. Order of business and conduct of hearing.
Notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in Lancaster once a week for two consecutive weeks. The
first publication shall not be less than 14 days before the day of the
hearing. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in Town Hall for a period of not less than 14 days
before the day of the hearing. A copy of the notice shall also be sent by
mail, postage prepaid, at least 14 days before the hearing to all parties
in interest.
A.
The public hearing notice shall contain the name of the applicant,
appellant or petitioner; a description of the land affected with street
address or other means of identification of the property affected; the
date, time and place of the public hearing; the subject matter of the
hearing; and the nature of the permit or relief requested.
B.
The Chairman shall call the hearing to order and read the notice of
hearing as published.
A.
The Chairman may request interested parties to register their
attendance on a log or attendance sheet.
B.
The applicant, appellant or petitioner shall present its case to the
Board, including the submission of documentary evidence, oral
evidence or other matters which it desires the Board to consider,
including exhibits, documents, charts, plans, models, displays, video
or photographic presentations, etc. Normally, the proponent will be
allowed to complete its presentation before the Board will entertain
public comment or evidence from other parties. The Chairman may
alter the order of presentation where the interests of clarity or
circumstances warrant.
C.
§ 302-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-25
1:313
§ 302-26. Withdrawal.
Any appeal, application or petition may be withdrawn without prejudice
at any time prior to the publication and mailing of notice of the hearing.
Thereafter, the Board may, by majority vote, upon the proponent's request,
Members of the Board may direct appropriate questions to any party,
witness or speaker during the hearing.
D.
Representatives of any department, board or agency of the Town shall
be afforded an opportunity to be heard.
E.
F. Parties in interest shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard.
G. The proponent may rebut matters raised by any opponent.
The Chairman shall have the right to limit the length of oral
presentations, to limit or exclude repetitive or immaterial argument
or evidence and shall require that any questions addressed to the
proponent be directed through the Chairman.
H.
All exhibits submitted for consideration shall be retained by the Board
and may be appropriately marked or numbered.
I.
Board members may request additional information and the Board may,
by majority vote, continue a hearing to a date certain to enable a
proponent or party in interest to present further evidence.
J.
In the event of adjournment of any session of a public hearing to a date
and time announced at the time of adjournment, no further notice other
than posting of the meeting pursuant to the Open Meeting Law63 shall
be required.
K.
L. The length of each session shall be determined by the Chairman.
Upon the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and argument by
the applicant and other interested parties, the hearing shall be declared
closed. The Board shall publicly deliberate and render a decision by
vote at a public meeting on or before the deadline for such decision as
required by law. If requested the Chairman shall announce the date by
which its decision must be rendered and filed with the Town Clerk.
M.
During deliberations the Board may request additional information
or clarification of evidence from interested parties or Town officials,
including opinions from Town Counsel.
N.
The Board may individually or collectively conduct any view or
inspection of the premises, which it deems necessary or desirable prior
to rendering its decision. Views shall be conducted in the presence of or
upon agreement of the property owner if presence on privately owned
property is required for conduct of the view.
O.
63.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 302-25 LANCASTER CODE § 302-26
1:314
grant leave to withdraw without prejudice at any time prior to a final,
unfavorable decision upon the matter.
§ 302-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-26
1:315

ARTICLE IV
Disposition by the Board
§ 302-27. Voting requirements.
§ 302-28. Reconsideration.
Once a matter has been voted upon and the meeting adjourned, there shall
be no reconsideration of a decision of the Board except in accordance with
MGL c. 40A, § 16.
§ 302-29. Amendment of findings and decisions.
The Board may clarify any order or decision or amend a decision by adding
supplementary findings and statements of reasons, provided that such
action is approved by majority vote of the Board at public meeting, and such
supplementary matters are filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 302-30. Effective date.
§ 302-31. Notice of decision.
Super majority. A vote of at least four members of the Board shall be
required to:
(1) Grant a variance;
(2) Grant a special permit;
Reverse any order decision of an administrative official under the
Zoning Bylaw.
(3)
A.
Majority. The concurring vote of at least three members of the Board
shall be required to approve an application for a comprehensive permit.
B.
Decisions of the Board upon any application, petition or appeal shall
not take effect until the Board's written decision is filed with the Town
Clerk and the time for appeals has expired. Construction of structures
or uses of property pursuant to special permits or variances may not
lawfully commence until the Board's written decision, together with any
plans referred to therein, containing the Town Clerk's certification that
no appeals have been filed and that the decision is final, is recorded.
(See § 302-35 below).
A.
Decisions of the Board upon comprehensive permits shall be final when
rendered by vote of the Board.
B.
In all cases decided under the provisions of the Zoning Act, a written
notice of decision shall be mailed to the applicant, petitioner or
appellant; to the parties in interest; and to persons present at the
hearing who request a copy and provide the Board with their address.
A.
§ 302-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-31
1:317
§ 302-32. Written decision.
Decisions of the Board shall be in writing and signed by the Chairman
and/or the Clerk. A copy of the decision and any plans referred to therein
shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. A copy shall be
provided to the owner and applicant. The written decision shall contain the
following:
§ 302-33. Detailed record.
The Board shall make a detailed record of its proceedings and file a copy of
the record in the office of the Town Clerk within 14 days after the date of
the decision.
§ 302-34. Town Clerk certification.
Upon the expiration of 20 days following filing of the decision, applicant
shall request the Town Clerk to certify on a copy of the decision that no
appeal has been filed and that the decision is final. In the event that appeal
is filed, and upon certification by the Clerk of the applicable court that any
appeal has been dismissed or denied, the Town Clerk will issue a certificate
that the decision is final.
Notices of decision shall specify that appeals, if any, shall be made
pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, and notice of such appeal shall be filed in
the Town Clerk's office within 20 days following the filing of the Board's
decision.
B.
A. Case number;
B. Date decision rendered;
C. Name and address of applicant and owner of land;
D. Time, date and place of public hearing;
E. Dates and manner of notice;
F. Statement that parties in interest were notified;
Statement that decision and plans have been filed with Town Clerk and
Planning Board;
G.
H. Summarized account of the hearing;
I. Identification of land affected;
Reasons for decision and factors establishing compliance with statutory
and/or Zoning Bylaw requirements;
J.
K. Recitation of any conditions imposed upon permit.
§ 302-31 LANCASTER CODE § 302-35
1:318
§ 302-35. Recording.
Decisions shall not take effect until a certified copy has been obtained from
the Town Clerk and has been recorded in the applicable Registry of Deeds
and is indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record
or noted on the owner's certificate of title.
§ 302-36. Duration and lapse of permits.
Special permits and variances shall lapse unless rights granted thereunder
are exercised and, in the case of permits for construction, unless
construction commences within certain defined time limits as set forth in
the Zoning Bylaw, the Zoning Act and the State Building Code.64 Variances
must be exercised within one year, and special permits must be exercised
within two years.
§ 302-37. Extensions and renewal of variances and special permits.
Variance extension/renewal. Variances may be extended for one sixmonth
period, if the petitioner files a written request for extension with
the Board in compliance with MGL c. 40A, § 10. Such requests must be
filed at least 30 days prior to the lapse date and may be acted upon by
the Board without a public hearing. If rights granted under a variance
expire due to failure to exercise such rights or failure to extend for
six months, then variances shall be null and void unless renewed by
the filing of a new petition in conformity with all requirements for new
petitions. The fact that a variance has been previously granted shall not
entitle a petitioner to any renewal.
A.
Special permit extension/renewal. Special permits may be extended
by the Board for good cause upon written request by the applicant.
Requests to extend special permits for good cause may be granted by
the Board without public hearing. Special permits, which have lapsed
due to the failure to exercise the rights granted thereunder, or failure to
establish good cause for an extension, shall only be reestablished upon
reapplication in the same manner as an original application.
B.
Renewal of permits with limited duration.
Certain variances and special permits may be granted upon
conditions limiting their duration and/or imposing other conditions
and limitations. In such cases the duration of the permit shall be
set forth in the decision. Renewals of such permits may be granted
for successive periods by the Board, provided that a written
application for renewal is made to the Board at least 90 days prior
to the expiration date accompanied by the applicable forms and
fees as required for an original application. (See Appendix.) Notice
and publication of hearing shall be made and shall state that the
(1)
C.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning, of this Code; MGL c. 40, § 1 et seq., the Zoning Act;
and MGL c. 143, § 3A, respectively.
§ 302-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-37
1:319
renewal may be granted automatically unless a written objection
is received by the Board on or before the date set for hearing. If
no written objection is received, the Board may renew the permit
automatically. If an objection is received, or if the Board determines
that a permit should not automatically be renewed, it shall so notify
the applicant, and the matter shall be heard and decided as in the
case of a hearing upon an original application. Renewals may be
made upon the same conditions or with additional conditions. The
Board may, in appropriate cases, delete or modify the conditions as
to time or use, and renewals may be denied. Grounds for denial,
modification or limitation of rights previously granted may include:
Noncompliance with conditions imposed by the Board or with
the applicant's representations in plans, applications, etc.
(e.g., failure to properly maintain the premises, failure to
maintain privacy or buffer areas, exceeding scope of relief
originally granted, etc.);
(a)
Failure of applicant to meet the requirements for the type of
relief being renewed (e.g., causing detrimental effect on the
neighborhood or abutting owners);
(b)
(c) Failure to produce evidence of recording;
Failure to maintain structures, improvements and uses in
conformity with applicable building, health and other
regulations;
(d)
Failure to comply with MGL c. 40, § 57, and the bylaws of
the Town of Lancaster regarding payment of taxes, fees,
assessments or municipal charges.
(e)
Decisions granting renewal shall be filed and recorded in the same
manner as original applications. Decisions denying renewal shall
also be filed with the Building Inspector.
(2)
Failure of a holder of a permit or variance of limited duration
to seek renewal in accordance with these rules shall be deemed
abandonment of the rights granted. Permits of limited duration
which were granted before the adoption of these rules or permits
which were required to be annually renewed by the Board of
Selectmen shall be hereinafter renewed only in accordance with
these rules.
(3)
§ 302-37 LANCASTER CODE § 302-37
1:320
ARTICLE V
Comprehensive Permits
§ 302-38. Purpose and authority.
The rules contained in this article govern procedures to be followed in
connection with applications for the grant of comprehensive permits
governed by MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23. These rules shall be implemented
in conformity with the regulations of the Housing Appeals Committee (760
CMR 30.00 and 31.00), and with the Guidelines for Local Review of
Comprehensive Permits, published by the Executive Office of Communities
and Development.
§ 302-39. Local official defined.
When used herein the term "local official" means the Housing Partnership,
Planning Board, Board of Health, Select Board, Conservation Commission,
Sewer District Commission, Department of Public Works, Historical
Commission, Fire Department, Police Department, School Committee,
Building Inspector or other local official or board.
§ 302-40. Application.
Applications for a comprehensive permit shall be made on a form approved
by the Board, and shall be filed, together with 10 additional copies of the
application (10 sets) with the Town Clerk, together with the applicable filing
fee, publication and administrative fees and certified abutter lists as set
forth in Article II. The application and each copy shall have annexed thereto
the following plans, reports and information, which shall be arranged in
sections in the order herein specified:
Preliminary site development plans showing the locations and outlines
of proposed buildings; the proposed locations, dimensions and
materials specifications for streets, drives, parking areas, walks and
paved areas; proposed landscaping improvements, open space and
recreational areas proposed; locations of septic systems and
appurtenant structures; zoning districts and boundaries; wetlands and
water bodies, including intermittent creeks, streams and drainage
swales and detention areas.
A.
A report describing existing site conditions as well as a report of
existing site conditions in the surrounding areas containing as a
minimum:
(1) Location of existing buildings and utilities;
(2) Traffic patterns and character of open areas;
(3) Topographical features both existing and proposed;
Existence and location of any existing features of historical or
archaeological significance.
(4)
B.
§ 302-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-40
1:321
Preliminary architectural drawings, drawn to scale, signed by a
registered architect, containing at least the following information as
to each proposed building: typical floor plans; typical elevations and
sections; construction type; exterior finish. The matters required in
Subsections A and B may be combined in any plans submitted, provided
that existing and proposed conditions are clearly distinguished. All
plans proposing five or more housing units shall be prepared on plans
which are stamped by a registered professional engineer and/or
registered architect.
C.
A tabulation of proposed buildings by type, size, number of bedrooms,
floor area and ground coverage, percentage of lot coverage by
structures and paved/parking areas, and percentage of unoccupied
open space.
D.
If the land is proposed to be subdivided, a preliminary plan of
subdivision in conformity with the requirements of the rules and
regulations of the Lancaster Planning Board as to the contents thereof.
E.
A utilities plan showing the proposed location and types of proposed
sewage treatment facilities, services for domestic water supply and
fire protection water supply (including location of hydrants), proposed
structures and facilities for surface drainage and stormwater runoff.
F.
Documents evidencing that the applicant meets the jurisdictional
requirements of 760 CMR 31.01 sufficient to establish:
That applicant is a public agency, a nonprofit organization or a
limited dividend organization;
(1)
That the project is eligible for funding under a low- and moderateincome
housing program (site approval letter from a qualifying
subsidizing agency); and
(2)
(3) Evidence that applicant has interest in and control over the site.
G.
A complete list of requested exceptions to local codes, bylaws and
regulations containing a specific reference to each code, bylaw or
regulation section which the applicant seeks to have the Board grant
exception from. General statements or plan references will not be
sufficient. In addition, the list of requested exceptions should refer
the Board to applicable locations on the plans where local regulations
will not be adhered to. For purposes of this section, "local codes,
bylaws or regulations" shall include but not be limited to the Lancaster
Zoning Bylaw, the Subdivision Control Regulations, Board of Health
Regulations and the General Bylaws of Lancaster.65
H.
A copy of the most recent deed and plan of record of the site and all
documents demonstrating applicant's interest in the site. If the site is
I.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning; Ch. 301, Subdivision Rules and Regulations; Ch. 303,
Board of Health Regulations; and Part I of the Code of the Town of Lancaster, respectively.
§ 302-40 LANCASTER CODE § 302-40
1:322
§ 302-41. Notice to local officials.
Within seven days after filing of the application, the Board shall notify
each local official of the application, shall send such official a copy of
the complete application and attachments thereto upon request and shall
request said officials to review and comment upon the plans and shall invite
the participation and comment of the local officials at the public hearing.
§ 302-42. Public hearing and decision.
The Board shall hold a public hearing on the application within 30 days
of its receipt and shall render a decision based upon a majority vote of
the Board within 40 days after termination of the public hearing, unless
such time is extended by written agreement between the applicant and the
Board. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner and subject
to the same rules applicable to other applications, petitions and appeals
before the Board, including the employment of consultants and assessment
to applicant of review fees.
§ 302-43. Board action.
In acting upon an application, the Board may:
subject to any options to purchase, a complete copy of said agreement
shall be provided.
Evidence of local need for the type and number of housing units
proposed by the applicant.
J.
Other documents which the applicant may wish the Board to consider in
support of its application either with the above or at the public hearing,
such as traffic counts and circulation plans and studies; drainage and
hydrological studies detailing methods proposed to mitigate and
decrease off-site, adverse drainage impacts; proposed signage plans
and details; landscaping plans; subsurface test data, geological data
and studies; percolation data; housing preference to be afforded to
local residents; management plans describing proposed maintenance
of community facilities and common areas, including memberships;
methods proposed to insure completion of roads and improvements
including surety and bonding; mechanisms proposed to ensure the
continued affordability of housing units; construction timetables and
sequences; all state and local permits, approvals and fee schedules
which the applicant will not seek exceptions from and which will be
required to complete the development.
K.
Grant a comprehensive permit upon the terms and conditions contained
in the application;
A.
Deny a comprehensive permit on the grounds that such permit is not
consistent with local needs;
B.
§ 302-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-43
1:323
§ 302-44. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by the Board's action upon an application for a
comprehensive permit may appeal to the appropriate court or agency as set
forth in MGL c. 40B, § 22.
Approve a comprehensive permit upon such terms and conditions that
shall make the grant of the permit consistent with local needs and that
shall not make the proposed construction or operation of the housing
units uneconomic.
C.
§ 302-43 LANCASTER CODE § 302-44
1:324
ARTICLE VI
Amendment
§ 302-45. Vote; when effective.
These rules and regulations may be amended, revised, or repealed from
time to time by majority vote of the Board. Any such amendment, revision
or repeal shall become effective upon filing in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 302-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 302-45
1:325
Chapter 303
BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health organization — See Ch. 98.
§ 302-45 LANCASTER CODE § 302-45
1:326
ARTICLE I
Nashoba Associated Boards of Health (NABH) District
§ 303-1. Purpose.
Lancaster is a member of the NAHB District. The Nashoba Associated
Boards of Health is an association framed under the provisions of MGL c.
111, § 27A, for the purpose of promoting a higher standard of public health
in the towns of the Nashoba District by a group effort. The Association
consists of the Boards of Health of the Towns of Ashburnham, Ashby, Ayer,
Berlin, Bolton, Boxboro, Dunstable, Groton, Harvard, Lancaster, Littleton,
Lunenburg, Shirley, Pepperell and Townsend.
§ 303-2. Matters pertaining to individual towns.
In matters pertaining to an individual town, the Association shall have no
voice. Such matters shall be handled as strictly local problems between the
local board of health concerned and the individual Director of Public Health
acting to his official capacity as the Board's employee. Every member town
shall pay its share of the services of the Nashoba program whether or not it
makes full use of all of said services.
§ 303-3. Town agent.
The Director of Public Health shall be the agent of the Boards of Health
of the member towns. He and the employed personnel shall perform such
duties and receive such compensation as the Association shall determine
and, insofar as their duties in any given town are concerned, shall be the
employees of and responsible of the Board of Health of said town.
§ 303-4. Nursing service.
Nashoba Nursing Service and Hospice is a subdivision of the Association
and includes the provision of skilled nursing services and other therapeutic
services to those towns, which are members of the Association for these
services.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-4
1:327

ARTICLE II
General Sanitation and Housing Codes
§ 303-5. Sanitary conditions.
Any person or persons owning or having control of any building or premises
shall keep the same in a clean condition, and any such person having control
of any building or premises, in or upon which there is any substance or
material, or any condition which is or may become a source of danger to
the public health or a nuisance, shall, when ordered by the Board of Health
in writing, remove or abate the same within the time specified within the
order.
§ 303-6. Nuisance in private way.
Any person or persons owning or having control of any premises abutting
on a private way, and having the right to use such private way, shall, when
ordered by the Board of Health in writing, remove or abate from that part
of said private way adjoining such premises, any substance, material or
condition which is, or may become, a menace to the public health or a
nuisance, and such removal or abatement shall take place within the time
specified in said order.
§ 303-7. State Sanitary Code.
The Town of Lancaster operates under the requirements of the State
Sanitary Code (105 CMR 410.000), entitled "Minimum Standard of Fitness
for Human Habitation."
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-7
1:329

ARTICLE III
Sewage Disposal Systems Regulations
§ 303-8. Authorization.
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Environment Code, Title 5,
shall be considered a minimum standard for the design and installation
of sewage disposal systems. In addition, as authorized by MGL c. 111,
§§ 31 and 127, the Lancaster Board of Health has enacted the following
supplementary regulations. Previous issues of Lancaster Board of Health
regulations controlling the subsurface disposal of sewage are rescinded and
superseded hereby.
§ 303-9. Definitions.
The definitions in 310 CMR 15.002 shall apply except as modified or added
to in this section:
AGENT — See "NABH."
AS-BUILT PLAN — A drawing as described in § 303-11, of General
requirements, Subsection C, prepared, signed, and stamped by a registered
professional engineer, or registered sanitarian, showing the system as
constructed.
BOARD — LBOH or Lancaster Board of Health.
LBOH — Lancaster Board of Health.
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The maximum (highest) level
that the groundwater table (top surface of zone of water-saturated soil) is
likely to reach during the life of the system. Groundwater levels measured
and witnessed by the Board's agent from March 1 through April 30 or as
specified by the Board are assumed to be maximum levels or as indicated
by soil mottling. Maximum groundwater elevation encountered on the lot is
the design-basis groundwater level.
NABH — The Nashoba Associated Boards of Health; hereinafter referred
to as the board's agent. A regional health district, of which Lancaster is a
member, which acts as agent for the Lancaster Board of Health in matters
including those pertaining to the implementation and enforcement of the
provisions of 310 CMR 15.001 through 15.505 and MGL c. 111, § 27A.
§ 303-10. Administration.
The Board reserves the right to exercise all authority and perform all
functions assigned to, and normally exercised by, its agent.
§ 303-11. General requirements.
Application for a disposal works construction permit. An application for
a disposal works construction permit for all installations and repairs
of systems (hereinafter referred to as "permit") shall be filed with the
A.
§ 303-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-11
1:331
Board's agent. A fee shall be paid to the Board's agent at the time of
application.
Application for lot inspection. An application for lot inspection shall be
made by the Board's agent, and any fee required shall be paid to the
Board's agent at that time. All field tests to be used as design basis
for a system shall be conducted by a registered sanitarian, professional
engineer or soil evaluator and shall be witnessed by the Board's agent.
Inspection required during construction of a system shall be made by
the Board's agent.
B.
Plans. The following information, in addition to that required by 310
CMR 15.220, shall be provided on all plans and as-built plans. Plans
for the construction of systems shall be prepared by a professional
engineer or registered sanitarian and shall be submitted to the Board's
agent and the Board.
Any permit for a subsurface sewage disposal system must be
accompanied by a locus map showing all proposed and existing
wells and proposed and existing subsurface sewage disposal
systems on the lot within 200 feet of the proposed well and the
proposed subsurface sewage disposal system.
(1)
If a proposed project contains more than four lots, the Board
of Health requests that two master plans be submitted showing
the lot lines, topography, proposed septic system, well and house
locations, wetlands, surface water, drains, easements and
floodplain information. These plans must be submitted prior to the
submission of individual lot plans for approval. A site visit may also
be required.
(2)
No systems shall have sewage disposal lines more than 100 feet
long between the cellar wall and leaching area. The groundwater,
soil, and bedrock conditions along proposed route of pipe, type of
pipe and joints, locations and details of clean-outs and manholes
will be required on the plan if a variance is applied for.
(3)
In situations where the 1978 Environmental Code, Title 5, applies,
the Lancaster regulations in effect prior to March 31, 1995, must
be met.
(4)
C.
Fill easement. No certificate of compliance shall be issued if fill
associated with any component of the system extends onto an adjacent
lot, or if the plan requires that fill associated with the reserve area
extend into an adjacent lot, unless an appropriate easement is duly
executed by the owner of said lot and recorded and a copy of said
easement is submitted to the Board's agent and the Board. The permit
for a system requiring a fill easement shall state that requirement.
D.
Issuance of disposal works construction permit. After reviewing a plan,
the Board's agent shall prepare a permit and shall forward the permit to
the Board. If the Board's agent approves the plan, the agent shall initial
E.
§ 303-11 LANCASTER CODE § 303-11
1:332
the permit. If the Board's agent does not approve the plan, the agent
shall submit to the Board, with the permit, a written summary of the
reasons for not approving the plan. At a scheduled meeting, the Board
shall review the plan, the permit, and any other applicable documents
and shall issue the permit by signing it or shall deny the permit and
provide the applicant or the applicant's representative the reasons for
the denial.
Alterations. Alterations to wells, septic tanks, seepage pits, leaching
trenches or other means of subsurface disposal shall not be constructed
or installed until a permit has been first obtained from the Board of
Health.
F.
Revocation. The Board reserves the right to revoke any approval,
permit, or certificate of compliance which is found to be based on
incorrect, incomplete, or misleading information. If unanticipated
conditions encountered during the construction necessitate deviations
from the approved plan, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to request prior approval for such deviations from the Board's agent or
the Board.
G.
Connection to a common sanitary sewer. Individual sewage disposal
systems or other means of on-site sewage disposal shall not be
approved where connection to a common sanitary sewer is feasible on
the property to be served and where permission to enter such a sewer
can be obtained from the authority having jurisdiction over it.
H.
Water treatment plants. The Lancaster Board of Health will not issue
applications for permits for non-municipality-owned sewage collection,
treatment and disposal systems, to serve two or more detached singlefamily
residences.
I.
Field tests. The results of all field tests performed in the vicinity of a
proposed or existing system, including the reserve leaching area, shall
be provided to the Board's agent and the Board on the plan or on sheets
referenced to and attached to the plan and certified by the engineer.
J.
Deep hole tests. At least two deep test holes shall be located within the
proposed primary leaching area, and at least two deep test holes shall
be located within the proposed reserve leaching area. The number and
location of deep test holes shall provide reasonable assurance of the
range of soil conditions. The Board's agent may require additional test
holes.
K.
Maximum groundwater elevation. At least one maximum groundwaterlevel
determination shall be made in the primary leaching area and at
least one shall be made in the reserve area. The number and locations
of the determinations shall provide a reasonable basis for assessing
groundwater conditions in the area of the system. The Board's agent
or the Board may require determinations on addition to the minimum
number herein. Groundwater observations shall be made in deep test
holes. Offset between groundwater elevations or mottling as
L.
§ 303-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-11
1:333
determined by soil evaluation and bottom of leaching system shall be
five feet.
Fill limitation. Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be
constructed in fill which is to be placed directly on or near ledge,
hardpan, or other impervious materials or in any area where peat
is present or when the groundwater level is two feet or less below
natural grade surface. A depth of at least four feet of pervious material
(determined by a percolation test) in natural soil shall be maintained
below the bottom of the leaching area. Soils will be observed to a depth
of at least four feet below the bottom of the proposed leaching and
expansion areas to prepare a soils log of the soils.
M.
Percolation tests.
At least one percolation test shall be located within the primary
leaching area, and at least one percolation tests shall be located
within the reserve area. Additional percolation tests may be
required by the Board's agent to determine the vertical and/or
lateral variations in soil conditions. Percolation tests shall not be
performed in deep test holes. The results of all percolation tests
performed on a lot, in or near the area of the system, shall be
presented in the plan.
(1)
A leaching facility shall not be closer than 25 feet to a failing
percolation test unless a passing percolation test has been proven
between the leaching facility and the failing percolation test.
(2)
N.
Restoration. Deep test holes and holes for percolation tests shall be
filled in immediately after completion of lot inspection by the Board's
agent.
O.
System design criteria. All information related to and necessary for the
design or repair of a system shall be included on the plan.
P.
Perimeter drain. Perimeter drains shall be gravity flow only; no pumped
drain system shall be allowed. The effectiveness of a perimeter drain
system in lowering the maximum groundwater elevation shall be
determined by deep test holes or monitoring wells as described in
Subsections K and L.
Q.
Distances. The locations of the disposal facilities shall be such as to
provide between it and the components listed in the following table not
less than the distances stated:
R.
§ 303-11 LANCASTER CODE § 303-11
1:334
Component
Septic Tank
(feet)
Leaching
Works
(feet)
Wells
(feet)
Well or suction line 100 100 ---
Leaching facility in soils
with a percolation test of 2
minutes/inch or less
--- --- 150
Dwelling with basement/
foundation drain
25 25 ---
Property line 10 10 50
Center of streets and
roads
35 35 50
Open or subsurface drains
which do not discharge to
surface waters supplies or
tributaries thereto and do
not intercept seasonal
high groundwater table
25 25 ---
Wetland and bordering
vegetated wetland and
surface water of any type
as defined in Title 5,
15.002
100 100 100
Distance between
adjoining walls of the
primary and expansion/
reserve area
--- 10 ---
Horizontal offset to ledge 25 25 ---
Reserve area. A reserve area between trenches is not allowed unless
the offset required in Subsection R, is met. The reserve area must be
accessible by gravity if the primary area is served by gravity.
S.
Ledge. Decayed ledge or decayed shale topsoil and topsoil will not be
considered pervious material. Depth of pervious material (not including
top and subsoil) above ledge must be five feet. Horizontal offset to ledge
must be 25 feet.
T.
Garbage disposal units/grinders. Garbage disposal units are not
allowed in any dwelling where a septic tank or individual sewage
system is installed, unless specifically included in the design of the
subsurface sewage disposal system.
U.
Office and industrial buildings. Sewage disposal design must be based
on the square footage of the building rather than the number of
employees.
V.
§ 303-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-11
1:335
Hydraulic overloading of the effluent on groundwater.
The maximum amount of effluent that may be discharged is 440
gallons per acre per day.
(1)
The minimum distance between septic systems servicing separate
facilities shall be 100 feet.
(2)
W.
Shared systems.
An individual sewage disposal system and all connecting sewer
lines shall be installed on the same lot as the facility(ies)
discharging sewage into said system.
(1)
Shared systems will only be approved if each individual lot
proposed to use such systems can support a subsurface sewage
disposal system which can meet the requirements of Title 5 and
local regulations without variance. The area proposed which could
support a subsurface sewage disposal system on each lot shall not
be used for any other purpose.
(2)
X.
Alternative systems.
The Board of Health may establish any special conditions necessary
to ensure adequate protection of public health and safety and the
environment, and to ensure appropriate evaluation inspections,
maintenance repairs and replacement. Such conditions may
include, without limitation:
(a) Specification of site effluent characteristics.
(b) Flow limitations.
(c) Monitoring.
(d) Inspection maintenance.
(e) Testing.
Reporting requirements; a requirement that a certified
operator operate the system.
(f)
(g) Financial assurance mechanisms.
(1)
The Board of Health may also specify changes or modification of
requirements otherwise applicable to conventional systems and
that are appropriate for use of alternative systems. Prior to the
approval of an alternative system for new construction, the
applicant must demonstrate that the lot can support a subsurface
sewage disposal system meeting Title 5 and Lancaster Board of
Health regulations without a variance. The area proposed which
could support a subsurface sewage disposal system on each lot
shall not be used for any other purpose.
(2)
Y.
§ 303-11 LANCASTER CODE § 303-11
1:336
ARTICLE IV
Wells
§ 303-12. Purpose and authority.
These regulations are intended to promote the health and general welfare
by ensuring that private wells are constructed in a manner which will
protect the quality of the groundwater derived from wells. These
regulations are adopted by the authority of MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 303-13. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall be defined and
interpreted as follows.
ABANDONED WATER WELL — A private well that has not been used for a
water supply for a period of one year or more and which the owner does not
intend to use again.
AQUIFER — A water-bearing geologic formation that contains water in
sufficient quantities to potentially supply a well for drinking water or other
purposes.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, company, association, trust, or
partnership.
POTABLE WATER — Water that is satisfactory for drinking and for culinary
and domestic purposes.
PRIVATE WELL — A water supply well which will not server either a number
of service connections or a number of individuals sufficient to qualify as a
public water system as defined in 310 CMR 22.02.
PUMPS AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or materials used
or intended for use in withdrawing or obtaining groundwater, including,
without limitation, seals and tanks, together with fittings and controls.
REGULATING AGENCY — The Lancaster Board of Health through its agent,
the Nashoba Associated Boards of Health.
WELL — An excavation of opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of providing a water
supply for any purpose, including but not limited to industrial, commercial,
irrigation, and drinking.
WELL DRILLER AND/OR DIGGER — Any person who is licensed by the
Water Resource Commission (as defined by Chapter 620 of the Acts of 1956,
as amended) to construct wells.
WELL SEAL — An approved arrangement or device used to cap a well or
establish and maintain a junction between the casing or curbing of a well
and the piping or equipment installed therein, the purpose or function of
which is to prevent pollutants from entering the well at the upper terminal.
§ 303-14. Requirements for private wells.
§ 303-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-14
1:337
§ 303-15. Well construction or destruction permits.
No private well shall be deemed a source of potable water unless it
is constructed in accordance with these regulations. No well shall be
destroyed except in accordance with these regulations.
A.
For each private well constructed after the effective date of these
regulations, there shall be:
(1) A well construction permit application.
(2) A well construction permit.
(3) A water quality analysis.
(4) A certificate of compliance with the terms of the permit.
(5) A well driller's or digger's report.
B.
For each private well destroyed after the effective date of these
regulations, there shall be:
(1) A well destruction permit application.
(2) A statement of well abandonment from the owner.
(3) A well destruction permit.
A well driller's or digger's report or contractor's report of
destruction.
(4)
C.
The Board of Health or its agent shall investigate violations of these
regulations or any permit issued and may take such actions as it may
deem necessary for the protection of the public health and to restrain
violations of these regulations.
D.
Whosoever violates these regulations shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $500 to, and for the use of, the Town in which the well is
located.
E.
No person shall engage in the business of constructing or destroying
a private well within the Town of Lancaster under these regulations
unless registered as a well driller/digger with the Water Resources
Commission, pursuant to 313 CMR 3.00.
A.
An application for a well construction or destruction permit shall be
submitted by the property owner, the well driller/digger or his agent to
the Board's agent on a form furnished by the Board's agent.
B.
A well construction or destruction permit shall be obtained from the
Board's agent prior to the construction or destruction of a private well.
The Board's agent shall charge a fee for each well construction or
destruction permit and said fee shall be paid to the Board's agent.
C.
§ 303-14 LANCASTER CODE § 303-15
1:338
§ 303-16. Well construction permit requirements.
§ 303-17. Well location requirements.
All well construction permit applications, regardless of the intended use
of the well, must be submitted to the Board for approval before a permit
will be issued by the Board's agent.
D.
The following information shall be submitted by the property owner
or the well driller/digger or its agent with the well construction
application, prior to the issuance of a permit:
General location of the proposed well, to include the location of a
least one road intersection for reference.
(1)
A sketch of the expected construction of the well, to include an
approximation of the expected well depth.
(2)
A description of any possible source(s) of contamination within
1,000 feet of the proposed well location. See § 303-17.
(3)
The well driller's/digger's name and certification number as it
appears on the Water Resources Commission certificate.
(4)
Description of the prior/current land use in the vicinity of the
proposed well location (i.e., agricultural, industrial, etc.).
(5)
A.
For emergency repair, alteration, or replacement of an existing well,
the Board of Health or its agent may waive the requirements of these
regulations for dwellings, which were in existence prior to the effective
date of this regulation.
B.
In establishing the location of a well, the well owner and/or the driller/
digger shall identify any and all sources of potential contamination
(agricultural fields, animal feed lots, beauty salon, dry cleaner, funeral
home, furniture stripper/refinisher, gasoline/service station, fuel depot,
automotive junkyard, railroad line or yard, etc.) which exist within
1,000 feet of the proposed well site. The following minimum lateral
distances from contamination shall apply with the granting of a
variance under special conditions:
Source of Contamination
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Leaching facility (310 CMR 15.000) 100
Leaching facility in soils with a
percolation test of 2 minutes/inch or
less
150
Cesspool 100
Septic tank 100
A.
§ 303-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-17
1:339
§ 303-18. Well construction standards.
Source of Contamination
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Sewer line 50
Property line 50
Public or private way, common drive,
easement
50
Active or closed landfill 1,000
Hazardous waste spill site 1,000
Any type of surface water 100
Municipal well 1,000
Where, in the opinion of the LBOH or its agent, adverse conditions
exist, the above minimum distances may be increased or special means
of protection may be required. These special requirements shall be
added to the well construction permit by the Board's agent.
B.
The well shall be upgradient of sources of contamination whenever
possible. The top of the well shall be higher than any surface of
contamination and above any conditions of flooding by drainage or
runoff from the surrounding land, unless otherwise adequately
protected.
C.
Wells shall be constructed in compliance with the recommendations
of the latest edition of the Manual of Individual Water Supply, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPS), Water Supply Division
(Exception: Springs shall not be used for the purpose of a potable water
supply.).
A.
The annular space between the protective well casing and the wall
of the drilled hole or the surface casing shall be effectively sealed.
The seal is to protect against contamination by surface and/or shallow,
subsurface waters.
B.
The well casing shall be capped or covered with a sanitary well seal.
Casings shall extend a minimum of 24 inches above the highest known
flood level or 18 inches above the ground surface in areas which are not
subject to flooding.
C.
When well screens are used, the screen length and opening size should
be selected to ensure that the water supply would be free from silts and
sands and other suspended solids.
D.
Well pumps and water storage equipment shall be selected to ensure
that the water supply is to be adequate (A minimum of five gallons per
minute (GPM) is recommended over a sustained period of pumping.).
NOTE: The proper selection of the pump is important to protect against
E.
§ 303-17 LANCASTER CODE § 303-18
1:340
§ 303-19. Disinfection and other sanitary requirements.
All private wells shall be disinfected following construction, rehabilitation
and well or pump repair, before the well is placed into service. The well shall
be pumped to waste (not to the septic system) until the water is as clear
as possible. Thereafter, the well and pumping equipment (and plumbing, if
installed) shall be disinfected with a solution containing at least 50 parts
per million (PPM) of chlorine. The well shall remain in contact with the
chlorine solution for a minimum of 24 hours before the well is pumped to
waste (not the septic system) and the water is found to be clear of chlorine.
Information and instructions for the disinfection procedure are available
from the NAHB.
§ 303-20. Water sampling procedure.
unnecessary wear on the equipment and to maintain a safe and
adequate supply of water.
Pump suction lines (if used) shall not be closer than 100 feet to
subsurface sewerage leaching facilities of 50 feet to a septic tank (310
CMR 15.211).
F.
Well pits to house the pumping equipment or to permit accessibility to
the top of a well shall not be permitted.
G.
Water samples shall be collected by the Board's agent. All water
samples shall be collected in an appropriate manner so as to maintain
the integrity of the sample collected. Collection of the sample(s) shall
occur following the well development and the disinfection process for
that well (see § 303-23). The water sample may be taken to a laboratory
of the Board's agent's choice unless the owner selects a specific
laboratory, at which time the sample container may be sealed with a
custody tag and be delivered to the owner-selected testing laboratory
by him-/herself. The laboratory shall be required to notify the Board's
agent should the sample be received with a broken custody seal.
A.
A representative water sample for laboratory analysis shall be collected
at the pump discharge or from a tap in the pump discharge line. A
representative sample shall constitute a sample collected after the
removal of at least three standing volumes of water from the well or a
minimum of 10 to 15 minutes of pumping from the well.
B.
The sample(s) shall be analyzed for the following parameters at a
minimum: coliform bacteria, arsenic, lead, sodium, iron, manganese,
color, sulfate, turbidity, alkalinity, chlorine, chloride, hardness,
ammonia, nitrate, pH, conductivity, odor and potassium. All analyses
shall be performed in accordance with U.S. EPA methods or other
approved methods for drinking water analysis.
C.
Analytical tests such as volatile organics (VOCs), pesticides, PCBs and
inorganics (metals) other than those specified above can be added or
D.
§ 303-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-20
1:341
§ 303-21. Water quality.
§ 303-22. Well completion requirements.
deleted as public knowledge increases or at the request of Board or
its agent, when conditions may indicate the need (i.e., prior land use)
for such testing. Samples, which are to be analyzed for volatile organic
compounds, shall not contain air bubbles of any size.
All analytical results shall be reviewed by the Board's agent and an
assessment of the suitability of that well for drinking water will be
made. The Board's agent will adhere to the current and applicable
drinking water standards as detailed by the U.S. EPA and the State
of Massachusetts, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
Approval of the results, by the Board's agent, must be obtained in
writing before the well shall be placed into service as a drinking water
supply.
A.
The water sample(s) shall be analyzed by a laboratory certified to
perform drinking water analysis by the DEP for each parameter
analyzed. A copy of the results shall be sent to both the Board and
its agent. All fees for the water testing are the responsibility of the
applicant, and all fees shall be paid in full prior to the approval of the
well permit.
B.
As stated above in § 303-20, the Board or its agent may require that
additional chemical analysis be performed on the well water. Any
additional requirement shall specify which chemical constituents or
chemical fractions (pesticide/PCB, extractables, etc.) shall be tested for.
C.
No result shall exceed the current and applicable drinking water
standards for a public water supply, as detailed by the U.S. EPA and/
or DEP (40 CFR 141 and 310 CMR 22). Coliform results shall be
zero colonies per 100 milliliters of sample or upon a positive result
be followed by two successive zero coliform results. The Board or its
agent may also use professional judgment when assessing the results
of the water prior to approval of that well. When the results indicate
a potential health hazard (i.e., possible gasoline contamination) the
Board or its agent may at its discretion disapprove the well for use as a
water supply.
D.
Within 30 days after the completion of the construction of any well, the
well driller/digger shall submit to the Board's agent a report containing
the following information:
(1) The name and owner of the well.
The address of the property served and/or the lot number as
assigned by the Assessor's office.
(2)
(3) The depth, size and method of construction of the well.
A.
§ 303-20 LANCASTER CODE § 303-22
1:342
§ 303-23. Well destruction.
A well that is abandoned shall be destroyed to protect the groundwater
supply and to eliminate potential physical hazards. Wells shall be sealed
with nonhazardous, impervious materials, which shall be permanently in
place. All exposed casing materials, pumping equipment, and distribution
lines shall be removed. The excavation shall be returned to the existing
grade of the surrounding land. A record of abandonment shall be kept in
accordance with these regulations.
§ 303-24. Well destruction requirements.
§ 303-25. Proximity to municipal water supply.
The installation of any well shall be prohibited when the dwelling, business
or structure is served by a municipal water supply.
(4) The static water level.
(5) The yield of the well after pumping.
(6) The well driller's/digger's log information.
The well driller's/digger's report shall be signed by an authorized
representative and shall constitute a statement of compliance will all
requirements of these regulations. This will satisfy the requirement of
the certificate of compliance.
B.
The following information shall be submitted with each well destruction
application, prior to the issuance of a permit:
(1) The specific location of the well to be destroyed.
(2) The design and construction of the well to be destroyed.
(3) A written statement from the owner that the well is abandoned.
A.
Within 30 days after the destruction of any well, the well driller/digger
or contractor shall submit to the Board's agent a report containing the
following:
(1) The name and owner of the well.
(2) The address of the property to be served.
(3) Method of sealing, including materials used.
Person or persons sealing the well and date of the sealing of the
well.
(4)
B.
The well driller's/digger's report shall be signed by an authorized
representative and shall constitute a statement of compliance with all
requirements of these regulations. This will satisfy the requirement of
the certificate of compliance.
C.
§ 303-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-26
1:343
§ 303-26. Variances.
§ 303-27. Substantive procedures.
Substantive procedures shall be performed as specified in 105 CMR
400.000.
Variances may be granted only as follows: The Board may vary the
application of these regulations with respect to any particular case
when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice, and the applicant has proven that the same degree of public
health and environmental protection required under these regulations
can be achieved without strict application of a particular provision(s).
A.
Variance requests shall be in writing to the Board and include all
information/reasons and proposed measures necessary to ensure the
protection of the public health and environment. The Board shall grant,
modify, or deny a variance in writing, and state the reasons for any
denial.
B.
§ 303-26 LANCASTER CODE § 303-27
1:344
ARTICLE V
Manure Handling
§ 303-28. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall be defined and
interpreted as follows:
WATERCOURSE — Includes any natural or man-made streams, ponds,
lakes, rivers, open and subsurface drains and swamps.
OPERATOR — Person(s) legally responsible for a farm operation.
§ 303-29. Manure as a soil amendment for crops.
The stockpiling of manure shall be done in a manner consistent with
generally accepted farming procedures and cultivation operations.
Implicit in such procedures and operations is the notion that minimizing
the duration and extent of odor associated with the spreading of
manure promotes good neighbor relations and hence promotes the
interest of farming.
A.
A recommendation as to whether a practice conforms to generally
accepted farming procedures and cultivation operations will be made
by an agricultural subcommittee established by the Board of Health.
This subcommittee will consist of not less than three farm operators
from the Town of Lancaster, and may include other agricultural
specialists at the Board's discretion. The subcommittee will inspect the
site of any complaints and report its recommendations to the Board for
further action.
B.
The stockpiling, storage and spreading of manure shall be done in a
manner that does not pose a public health hazard.
C.
Manure delivered to any site shall be reasonably free of animal
carcasses, and the operator shall be responsible for the disposal of any
carcasses that are discovered.
D.
Manure stockpiled on agricultural property shall be stored at least 100
feet from the boundary line of an abutting lot not in common ownership.
E.
Manure stockpiled on agricultural property shall be maintained at least
100 feet from any waterway.
F.
Manure shall be stockpiled in a manner that will prevent contamination
of waterways and nutrient-rich runoff.
G.
§ 303-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-29
1:345

ARTICLE VI
Trash Haulers
§ 303-30. Permit required; fee.
No person shall collect and remove or transport garbage, offal, or
other offensive substance through the streets of Lancaster without first
obtaining a permit from the Lancaster Board of Health. The Board
will consider and act upon applications for such permits at regularly
scheduled meetings. The Board reserves the right to reject applications
or revoke permits based on inaccurate information, failure to comply
with the regulations, or for any reason that would indicate the Town's
interests would not be served by the issuance of a permit. The Board
may also impose restrictions and conditions on the granting of a permit,
including the right to restrict collection to certain types of refuse.
A.
Persons desiring to obtain a permit shall submit an application
containing the following information:
(1) Name.
(2) Corporate officers (if applicable).
(3) Address.
(4) Daytime telephone number.
(5) Emergency twenty-four-hour telephone number.
(6) Pickup schedule (which streets on which days).
(7) Fee schedules (rates charged consumers).
Disposal facility/facilities (landfill, incinerator, etc.), name address,
and telephone number.
(8)
(9) Truck registration numbers.
Three municipal references, including name, address and
telephone number.
(10)
Identification of the refuse types (household, recyclables,
commercial, hazardous, waste, etc.) which will be collected and
disposal method and location used for each waste type.
(11)
A certificate of liability coverage with a minimum value of
$1,000,000.
(12)
B.
An application fee of $150 for the first truck and $100 for each
additional truck being used to transport refuse in the Town of Lancaster
shall be submitted with the application. Denied applications will not
receive a refund.
C.
§ 303-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-31
1:347
§ 303-31. Regulations.
All persons collecting, removing, and transporting refuse, hereafter
referred to as "vendors," must comply with the following regulations:
A. Collection hours are restricted to 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Collection vehicles must not leak. Collection permits for all vehicles
owned or operated by a vendor permitted to collect refuse will be
automatically revoked if a vehicle owned or operated by a vendor is
found to be leaking. No permit application or renewal from that vendor
will be considered for one year from the time a vehicle is found to be
leaking.
B.
Collection vehicles shall prominently display a Lancaster collection
permit.
C.
Vehicle safety violations shall be cause for immediate revocation of a
collection permit. The Board will reconsider reinstatement after review
of such safety violations.
D.
A schedule of collection fees shall be provided to the Board of Health.
The Board shall be notified of changes to fees not less than two weeks
before such changes take effect.
E.
Improper disposal of waste shall be cause for immediate and permanent
revocation of a collection permit and prosecutions to the fullest extent
of the law.
F.
Vendors shall require their customers to put refuse in covered
containers to prevent littering by animals. In the event that refuse is not
in such containers and is littered, the vendor shall pick up such litter.
G.
Vendors shall maintain accurate up-to-date lists of customers in
Lancaster and shall provide such list within 24 hours of a request from
the Board.
H.
All storage bins/dumpsters provided to customers for storage of refuse
shall be covered. Containers used for disposal of putrescent waste shall
be emptied not less than once a week. Notwithstanding this, containers
which the Board deems to constitute a nuisance or health hazard shall
be emptied at a frequency determined by the Board. The Board may
also require such containers to be removed and cleaned at regular
intervals.
I.
Unless further restricted by the Board, a vendor shall collect only
the types of refuse identified by the vendor's application. The Board
reserves the right to restrict collection to specific refuse types as part
of the condition of granting a collection permit.
J.
§ 303-31 LANCASTER CODE § 303-31
1:348
ARTICLE VII
Sale of Tobacco Products and Nonnicotine Products Not Approved
by the FDA
[Amended 11-4-2015]
§ 303-32. Statement of purpose.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoke causes
cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes, and
irritations to the eyes, nose and throat; and whereas more than 80% of all
smokers begin smoking before the age of 18 years (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, "Youth Surveillance - United States 2000," 50
MMWR 1 (Nov. 2000); and whereas nationally in 2000, 69% of middleschool-
age-children who smoke at least once a month were not asked to
show proof of age when purchasing cigarettes (Id.); and whereas the United
States Department of Health and Human Services has concluded that
nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin; and whereas despite state
laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to minors, access by minors
to tobacco products is a major problem; and whereas the sale of tobacco
products is incompatible with the mission of health care institutions
because it is detrimental to the public health and undermines efforts to
educate patients on the safe and effective use of medication; and whereas
educational institutions sell tobacco products to a younger population,
which is particularly at risk for becoming smokers, and such sale of tobacco
products is incompatible with the mission of educational institutions that
educate a younger population about social, environmental and health risks
and harms; now, therefore it is the intention of the Town of Lancaster Board
of Health to regulate the access to tobacco products.
§ 303-33. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Town of Lancaster Board of Health by MGL c.111, § 31, that "Boards of
Health may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 303-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic nicotine delivery product composed of
a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that
provides a vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of
any liquid, or solid nicotine. This term shall include such devices whether
they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any other
product name.
§ 303-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-34
1:349
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, normal
school, professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or
other institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust
or other organized group of individuals, including the Town of Lancaster or
any agency thereof, which uses the services of one or more employees.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health
care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. "Health care
institution" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drugstores, doctor offices and dentist offices.
MINOR — Any individual who is under the age of 18.
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any article or product made wholly
or in part of a tobacco substitute or otherwise containing nicotine that is
expected or intended for human consumption, but not including a tobacco
substitute prescribed by a licensed physician or a product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco use cessation or harm-reduction product or for other medical
purposes and which is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose. "Nicotine delivery product" includes, but is not limited to, ecigarettes.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products directly to consumers who applies for and receives a
tobacco sales permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco
sales permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — An individual, employer, employee, retail store manager or
owner, or the owner or operator of any establishment engaged in the sale or
distribution of tobacco products directly to consumers.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product or a nicotine delivery product without assistance from an
employee or store personnel, excluding vending machines.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco,
bidis, snuff or tobacco in any of its forms.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses cigarettes, any other tobacco product or nicotine delivery
products.
§ 303-35. Tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales to minors
prohibited.
§ 303-34 LANCASTER CODE § 303-35
1:350
No person shall sell tobacco or nicotine delivery products or permit
tobacco or nicotine delivery products to be sold to a minor or, not being
the minor's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products to a minor.
A.
In conformance with and in addition to MGL, c. 270, § 7, a copy of
MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or other
person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to sell tobacco
products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and made available from the Town of
Lancaster Board of Health. The notice shall be at least 48 square inches
and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit holder in the retail
establishment or other place in such a manner so that it may be readily
seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. The
notice shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from
view or placed at a height of less than four feet or greater than nine
feet from the floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or
other place used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously
post any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health.
B.
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used
to sell nicotine delivery products at retail shall conspicuously post a
sign stating that "The sale of nicotine delivery products to minors
under 18 years of age is prohibited." The owner or other person in
charge of a shop or other place used to sell e-cigarettes at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The use of e-cigarettes at indoor
establishments may be prohibited by local law." The notices shall be no
smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted conspicuously
in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner so that they
may be readily seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash
register. These notices shall directly face the purchaser and shall not
be obstructed from view or placed at a height of less than four feet or
greater than nine feet from the floor.
C.
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco or nicotine
delivery products shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth that the purchaser is 18 years old or older. Verification is
required for any person under the age of 27.
D.
All retail sales of tobacco or nicotine delivery products must be face-toface
between the seller and the buyer.
E.
At any given time, there shall be no more than four tobacco sales
permits issued in the Town of Lancaster. New applicants for tobacco
sales permits that are applying at a time when the maximum number
of permits have been issued will be placed on a waiting list and will be
eligible for a permit on a first-come, first-served basis as permits are
either not renewed or returned to the Town.
F.
§ 303-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-36
1:351
§ 303-36. Tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco or nicotine delivery
products at retail within the Town of Lancaster without first obtaining
a tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit issued annually by
the Town of Lancaster Board of Health. Only owners of establishments
with a permanent, nonmobile location in the Town of Lancaster are
eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco products or nicotine
delivery products at the specified location in the Town of Lancaster.
A.
As part of the tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit
application process, the applicant will be provided with the Town of
Lancaster Board of Health regulation. Each applicant is required to
sign a statement declaring that the applicant has read said regulation
and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any and all
employees who will be responsible for tobacco and nicotine delivery
product sales regarding both state laws regarding the sale of tobacco
and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco is required to provide proof of a
current tobacco sales license issued by the Massachusetts Department
of Revenue before a tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit
can be issued.
C.
The fee for a tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit shall
be determined by the Town of Lancaster Board of Health annually. All
such permits shall be renewed annually by October 31.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco or nicotine delivery products.
E.
Each tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit shall be
displayed at the retail establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
No tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit holder shall
allow any employee to sell cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
nicotine delivery products until such employee reads this regulation
and state laws regarding the sale of tobacco and signs a statement, a
copy of which will be placed on file in the office of the employer, that
he/she has read the regulation and applicable state laws.
G.
A tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit is nontransferable.
A new owner of an establishment that sells tobacco or nicotine delivery
products must apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued
unless and until all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous
permit holder are satisfied in full.
H.
Issuance of a tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit shall
be conditioned on an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic
inspections of his/her retail establishment to ensure compliance with
this regulation.
I.
§ 303-36 LANCASTER CODE § 303-37
1:352
§ 303-37. Free distribution.
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of
tobacco products or nicotine delivery products.
§ 303-38. Out-of-package sales.
No person may sell or cause to be sold or distribute or cause to be
distributed any cigarette package that contains fewer than 20 cigarettes,
including single cigarettes.
§ 303-39. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products and/or nicotine delivery
products are prohibited. All humidors, including, but not limited to, walk-in
humidors, must be locked.
§ 303-40. Vending machines.
All tobacco and/or nicotine delivery product vending machines are
prohibited.
§ 303-41. Prohibition of the sale of tobacco products by health care
institutions.
No health care institution located in the Town of Lancaster shall sell or
cause to be sold tobacco products. No retail establishment that operates
or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy or drugstore,
shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products.
§ 303-42. Prohibition of the sale of tobacco products by educational
institutions.
No educational institution located in the Town of Lancaster shall sell or
cause to be sold tobacco products. This includes all educational institutions
as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property of an
educational institution.
§ 303-43. Violations.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and/or his or her
business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this regulation
pertaining to his or her distribution of tobacco and/or nicotine delivery
products. The violator shall receive:
For violations of § 303-35A:
(a) In the case of a first violation, a written warning.
In the case of a second violation within an eighteen-month
period of the date of the current violation, a fine of $100 and
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 303-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-43
1:353
the tobacco and nicotine delivery product sales permit shall be
suspended for seven consecutive business days.
In the case of a third violation within an eighteen-month
period, a fine of $200 and the tobacco and nicotine delivery
product sales permit shall be suspended for 30 consecutive
business days.
(c)
In the case of a fourth and subsequent violations within an
eighteen-month period, a fine of $300 and the tobacco and
nicotine delivery product sales permit shall be suspended for
one year, 365 consecutive business days.
(d)
All tobacco products and/or nicotine delivery products shall
be removed from public view for seven-day tobacco sales and
nicotine delivery product permit suspensions. All tobacco
products and/or nicotine delivery products shall be removed
from the premises for thirty-day or more tobacco sales and
nicotine delivery product permit suspensions. Failure to
remove all tobacco and/or nicotine delivery products shall
constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
(e)
Any permit holder who does not comply with any other part of
this regulation shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each violation
within an eighteen-month period.
(2)
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco sales permit for 30 consecutive
business days.
B.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco and/or nicotine delivery
products directly to a consumer while his or her permit is suspended
shall be subject to the suspension of all Board of Health issued permits
for 30 consecutive business days.
C.
The Lancaster Board of Health shall provide a violation notice of
suspension of the tobacco and nicotine delivery sales permit to the
permit holder. If the permit holder or its business agent is aggrieved
by a decision of any agent or employee of the Board or to whom a
violation notice or order has been served, he, she or it may petition for a
hearing before the Board. Such a petition must be filed in writing at the
main office of the Board within seven days after the violation notice or
order was served. Within 10 days of receiving a petition, the Board shall
inform the petitioner of the date, time, and place of the hearing and
their right to inspect and copy any records that the Board might have
concerning the matter to be heard. If the permit holder or its business
agent petitions for a hearing, the suspension issued will be temporarily
sustained until the outcome of the hearing has been determined. After
the hearing, the Board may affirm or reverse the decision of the agent
or employee in whole or part. The decision shall be in writing and
shall state the facts on which it is based. Any person aggrieved by the
D.
§ 303-43 LANCASTER CODE § 303-43
1:354
§ 303-43.1. Noncriminal disposition.
§ 303-43.2. Enforcement.
§ 303-43.3. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 303-43.4. Effective date.
This renamed and revised regulation was passed on December 2, 2010, and
shall take effect on February 1, 2011.
final decision of the Board with respect to any order issued under the
provisions of these regulations may seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction in the commonwealth.
Any permit holder who does not pay the assessed fine within 21 days
from fine issuance may be subject to criminal proceedings.
E.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D,
or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
A.
B. Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Town of Lancaster Board
of Health or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the Town of Lancaster Board of
Health or its designated agent(s), and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 303-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-43.4
1:355

ARTICLE VIII
Body Art
§ 303-44. Purpose.
Whereas body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the
commonwealth; and whereas knowledge and practice of universal
precautions, sanitation, personal hygiene, sterilization and aftercare
requirements on the part of the practitioner should be demonstrated to
prevent the transmission of disease or injury to the client and/or
practitioner; now, therefore the Board of Health of the Town of Lancaster
passes these rules and regulations for the practice of body art in the Town
of Lancaster as part of its mission to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
§ 303-45. Authority.
These regulations are promulgated under the authority granted to the
Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 303-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding
area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a
body art establishment permit or practitioner permit.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclave
for a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a
temperature of 270° F.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — OSHA guidelines contained
in 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne
Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health that has jurisdiction
in the community in which a body art establishment is located, including the
Board or officer having like powers and duties in towns where there is no
Board of Health.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
§ 303-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-46
1:357
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as
implants under the skin, which are prohibited procedures.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — The location, place,
or business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or
private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for
profit.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identified
individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art
in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with
presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry
or other adornment in the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the
earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured
exclusively for ear piercing.
BRAIDING — The cutting of strips of skin of a person, which strips are then
to be intertwined with one another and placed onto such person so as to
cause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin to heal in such
intertwined condition.
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually
becomes a scar.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment
used for the practice of body art.
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a
body art establishment.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000, Storage
and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII and/or 29 CFR 1910.1030,
infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood or other
potentially infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed;
items on which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material
and which are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps
and any wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as permanent cosmetics,
micropigment implantation or dermal pigmentation, means the
implantation of permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the
face and hair imitation.
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
§ 303-46 LANCASTER CODE § 303-46
1:358
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's
instruction.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks and all
other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucus
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, non-intact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially
infectious matter.
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature 110° F. to
130° F.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure.
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of
any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must
be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white
or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been
properly sterilized prior to use.
LIGHT-COLORED — A light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other facility therein, or concert, fair, party or other
event.
OPERATOR — Any person who individually or jointly or severally with
others owns, or controls, an establishment, but is not a body art
practitioner.
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either (1) operate a body art
establishment or (2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art
establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of
body art pursuant to these regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the
establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements
that may exist within the Board's jurisdiction.
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-46
1:359
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other non-governmental legal entity, including but not limited to
corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts
or unincorporated organizations.
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board
of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of
the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated
work area which may require sanitizing.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE — The application of a U.S. EPA-registered sanitizer on a cleaned
surface in accordance with the label instructions.
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling
the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result in
permanently raised wheals or bumps known as "keloids."
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited
to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is
labeled with the international biohazard symbol.
SINGLE USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but
not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel
blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to
puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa.
This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same meaning as
"mobile body art establishment."
THREE DIMENSIONAL "3D" BODY ART OR BEADING OR IMPLANTATION
— The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection or
insertion of an object, device or other thing made of matters such as steel,
titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials beneath the
surface of the skin of a person. This term does not include body piercing.
§ 303-46 LANCASTER CODE § 303-46
1:360
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physically
large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillations
transmitted through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers in
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38
No. S-6, and as Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-
Prone Invasive Procedures in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8.
This method of infection control requires the employer and the employee to
assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious
for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand
washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention; and
proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood
and body fluid-contaminated products.
§ 303-47. Exemptions.
§ 303-48. Restrictions.
Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2, who perform
body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations.
A.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these
regulations.
B.
No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall be
performed on a person under the age of 18.
A.
Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed on
a person under the age of 18, provided that the person is accompanied
by a properly identified parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian
who has signed a form consenting to such procedure. "Properly
identified" shall mean a valid photo identification of the adult and a
birth certificate of the minor.
B.
C. No body art shall be performed upon an animal.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited:
Piercing of the uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the
neck; piercing of the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae;
piercing of the web area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual
frenulum (tongue web); piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or
deep muscle piercings, excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus;
piercing of an eyelid, whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums;
(1)
D.
§ 303-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-48
1:361
§ 303-49. Operation of body art establishments.
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the
following minimum requirements.
§ 303-50. Physical plant.
piercing or skewering of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the
penis, meaning piercing through the shaft of the penis, or "transpenis"
piercing in any area from the corona glandis to the pubic
bone; so called "deep" piercing of the scrotum, meaning piercing
through the scrotum, or "transcrotal" piercing; so called "deep"
piercing of the vagina.
The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed by a
medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
E.
Tongue splitting; braiding; three-dimensional/beading/implementation,
tooth filing/ fracturing/ removal/ tattooing; cartilage modification;
amputation; genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquids.
F.
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth, durable,
free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, and in good repair.
Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean condition. All
procedure surfaces, including client chairs/benches, shall be of such
construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client.
A.
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall separate
the establishment's space from any other room used for human
habitation, any food establishment or room where food is prepared, any
hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity that may cause
potential contamination of work surfaces.
B.
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to ensure against
the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents within the
establishment.
C.
Each operator area shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor
space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an area
that may be screened from public view for clients requesting privacy.
Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a divider or partition at
a minimum.
D.
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three feet
off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be provided
at the level where the body art procedure is being performed, where
instruments and sharps are assembled and all cleaning areas.
E.
All electrical outlets in operator areas and cleaning areas shall be
equipped with approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles.
F.
§ 303-48 LANCASTER CODE § 303-50
1:362
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist-or foot-operated
controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable paper towels
stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible within the
establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand sink.
G.
There shall be a sharps container in each operator area and each
cleaning area.
H.
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toilet and
sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquid hand
soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. A body art
establishment permanently located within a retail shopping center,
or similar setting housing multiple operations within one enclosed
structure having shared entrance and exit points, shall not be required
to provide a separate toilet room within such body art establishment
if Board-approved toilet facilities are located in the retail shopping
center within 300 feet of the body art establishment so as to be readily
accessible to any client or practitioner.
I.
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall be
protected by a testable, reduced pressure back flow preventor installed
in accordance with 142 CMR 248, as amended from time to time.
J.
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be provided
in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator
area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be stored in covered,
leak-proof, rodent-resistant containers and shall be removed from the
premises at least weekly.
K.
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art
establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper disposal
of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of adequate size
equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure and permit
the cleaning of the establishment and any equipment used for cleaning.
L.
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered
containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area specifically
dedicated to the storage of all instruments and supplies.
M.
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area shall
have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other sterilization
unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from the required
ultrasonic cleaning unit.
N.
Every cleaning area shall have a sink used exclusively for the cleaning
of instruments. Every instrument sink shall be of adequate size and
equipped with hot and cold water under pressure so as to permit the
cleaning of instruments.
O.
§ 303-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-50
1:363
§ 303-51. Requirements for single-use items, including inks, dyes
and pigments.
§ 303-52. Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures.
The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive and
separate from any workstation, instrument storage area, cleaning area
or any other area in the establishment used for body art activity.
P.
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g., Seeing
Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting rooms and nonprocedural
areas.
Q.
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body art is
performed, with the exception of nonalcoholic fluids being offered to a
client during or after a body art procedure.
R.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any
reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately disposed of
in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR 480.000.
A.
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body art
stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single use and disposal.
B.
C. Hollow-bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid-core needles, and equipment shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall
be used according to manufacturer's instruction.
D.
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted with
water from an approved potable source. Immediately before a tattoo is
applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from
the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper cups or plastic cups.
Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use cups or caps and their
contents shall be discarded.
E.
All nondisposable instruments used for body art, including all reusable
solid-core needles, pins and stylets, shall be cleaned thoroughly after
each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap or disinfectant solution
and hot water (to remove blood and tissue residue), and shall be placed
in an ultrasonic unit sold for cleaning purposes under approval of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and operated in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions.
A.
After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for body art
shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently
sterilized in a steam autoclave sold for medical sterilization purposes
under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. All sterilizer
packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature
B.
§ 303-50 LANCASTER CODE § 303-52
1:364
§ 303-53. Posting requirements.
indicator. Sterilizer packs must be dated with an expiration date not to
exceed six months.
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to
manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended
procedures for the operation of the autoclave must be available for
inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall be located away from
workstations or areas frequented by the public.
C.
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining sterilization
by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified
through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued
or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability to destroy
spores is received by the Board. These test records shall be retained by
the operator for a period of three years and made available to the Board
upon request.
D.
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored in
sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art
procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body art
procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly
covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments.
E.
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been breached
or after the expiration date without first repackaging and resterilizing.
F.
If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposable
instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave shall
not be required.
G.
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized sterile techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves
are not contaminated.
H.
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and
mechanically dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored
in a dry, clean environment until used. Should such items become
contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the items shall
be washed in accordance with standards applicable to hospitals and
medical care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or a temperature of
120° F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
I.
The following shall be prominently displayed:
A disclosure statement, a model of which shall be available from
the Board. A disclosure statement shall also be given to each client,
advising him/her of the risks and possible consequences of body art
procedures.
(1)
A.
§ 303-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-53
1:365
§ 303-54. Establishment recordkeeping.
The establishment shall maintain the following records in a secure place for
a minimum of three years, and such records shall be made available to the
Board upon request.
The name, addresses and phone number of the Lancaster Board of
Health.
(2)
An emergency plan, including:
A plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency
medical services in the event of an emergency
(a)
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers.
(b)
(3)
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building
official.
(4)
(5) Current establishment's permit.
(6) Each practitioner's permit.
Note: A telephone in good working order shall be easily available and
accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of operation.
B.
Establishment information:
(1) Establishment name.
(2) Hours of operation.
(3) Owner's name and address.
(4) A complete description of all body art procedures performed.
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps, and all
inks used for any and all body art procedures, including names of
manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or
packing slips shall satisfy this requirement.
(5)
A material safety data sheet, when available, for each ink and dye
used by the establishment.
(6)
(7) Copies of waste hauler manifests.
(8) Copies of commercial biological monitoring tests.
(9) Exposure incident report (kept permanently).
(10)A copy of these regulations.
A.
Employee information:
(1) Full legal names and exact duties;
B.
§ 303-53 LANCASTER CODE § 303-54
1:366
§ 303-55. Exposure control plan.
§ 303-56. Standards of practice.
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health
standards:
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Home address;
(4) Home/work phone numbers;
(5) Identification photograph;
(6) Dates of employment;
(7) Hepatitis B vaccination status; and
(8) Training records.
Client information:
(1) Name;
(2) Age and valid photo identification;
(3) Address of the client;
(4) Date of the procedure;
(5) Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s);
Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on the
body;
(6)
A signed consent form as specified by § 303-57; and, if the client
is person under the age of 18, proof of parental or guardian
identification, presence and consent, including a copy of the
photographic identification of the parent or guardian.
(7)
C.
D. Client information shall be kept confidential at all times.
Each establishment shall create, update, and comply with an exposure
control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Board for review so as
to meet all of the requirements of OSHA regulations, to include, but not
limited to, 29 CFR 1910.1030, OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standards
et seq., as amended from time to time. A copy of the plan shall be
maintained at the body art establishment at all times and shall be made
available to the Board upon request.
A.
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art
establishment.
B.
§ 303-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-56
1:367
§ 303-57. Health history and client informed consent.
A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with
universal precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
A.
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
B.
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer's directions for use, and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear-piercing
system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear.
C.
Prior to performing a body art procedure on a client, the practitioner
shall inform the client, verbally and in writing that the following health
conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a body
art procedure:
(1) History of diabetes;
(2) History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soaps,
disinfectants etc.;
(3)
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other
sensitivities;
(4)
(5) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood
and/or interfere with blood clotting; and
(6)
(7) Any other conditions such as Hepatitis or HIV.
A.
The practitioner shall require that the client sign a form confirming
that the above information was provided, that the client does not have
a condition that prevents him/her from receiving body art, that the
client consents to the performance of the body art procedure and that
the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required by
Subsection K.
B.
A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes
when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art
procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his/her hands in
hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with
disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to
remove contaminants.
C.
Each body artist shall provide proof of having received the complete
series of Hepatitis B vaccinations and have a current adult diphtheria/
D.
§ 303-56 LANCASTER CODE § 303-57
1:368
tetanus series and booster(s). A record of the immunizations shall be
kept at the facility for review by the Board of Health.
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable
single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn,
or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or
objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded,
at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual
client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection C
before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall
a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of
disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for handwashing
procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program.
E.
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No
practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art
equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or
pathogenic organisms.
F.
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during
the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a
new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the
procedure resumes.
G.
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the
following:
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall
be free of rash or any visible infection.
(1)
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area
and the areas of skin surrounding where the body art procedure is
to be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved
surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use
disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall
be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable
holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following
shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use.
(2)
H.
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding or to
absorb blood shall be single-use, and discarded immediately after use
in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of in accordance with
105 CMR 480.00.
I.
Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body
art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent
J.
§ 303-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-57
1:369
§ 303-58. Exposure incident report.
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator
or gauze shall be used once and then discarded.
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written
instructions on the aftercare of the body art site. The instructions
provided to the client shall advise the client on the proper cleansing of
the area which received the body art to consult a health care provider
for unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of the body
art procedure, any rash, unexpected drainage at or from the site of
the body art procedure, or a fever within 24 hours of the body art
procedure, and include the address, and phone number of the
establishment.
K.
A model set of aftercare instructions shall be made available by the
Board.
L.
Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000, Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waster, State Sanitary
Code, Chapter VIII. A copy of a current contract with an infectious
waste hauler serving the body art establishment shall be provided to
the Board of Health.
M.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of the
business day during which an exposure has or might have taken place
by the involved or knowledgeable body art practitioner for every
exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art activity.
A.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity
completed by any client or minor client involved in the exposure
incident;
(1)
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion
of the body involved therein; instrument(s) or other equipment
implicated;
(2)
A copy of body art practitioner license of the involved body art
practitioner;
(3)
(4) Date and time of exposure;
A copy of any medical history released to the body art
establishment or body art practitioner;
(5)
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician
or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
(6)
B.
§ 303-57 LANCASTER CODE § 303-59
1:370
§ 303-59. Injury and/or complication reports.
A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as a result
of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection complication or
disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued the
permit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its
occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include:
§ 303-60. Complaints.
§ 303-61. Application for body art establishment permit.
A. The name of the affected client;
B. The name and location of the body art establishment involved;
C. The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease;
The name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if
any;
D.
E. Any other information considered relevant to the situation.
The Board shall investigate complaints received about an establishment
or practitioner's practices or acts, which may violate any provision of
the Board's regulations.
A.
If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the
alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,
then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the
reasons on which it is based.
B.
If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the alleged
act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Board
shall investigate; and if a finding is made that the act or practice
is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply
whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and
shall notify the complainant of its action in this manner.
C.
No person may operate a body art establishment except with a valid
permit from the Board.
A.
Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by and
available from the Board.
B.
An applicant shall submit all information required by the form and
accompanying instructions. The term "application" as used herein shall
include the original and renewal applications.
C.
An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and for
no longer than one year unless revoked sooner by the Board.
D.
The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, the
following information in order to be issued an establishment permit:
E.
§ 303-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-61
1:371
§ 303-62. Application for body art practitioner permit.
§ 303-63. Practitioner training and experience.
Name, address and telephone number of:
(a) The body art establishment;
(b) The operator of the establishment; and
(c) The body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment;
(1)
The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number,
where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment;
(2)
A signed and dated acknowledgement that the applicant has
received, read and understood the requirements of the Board's
body art regulations;
(3)
A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment to scale
for a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application
process;
(4)
(5) An exposure report plan;
(6) Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require.
A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one
place or person to another.
F.
No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedure
without first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board.
A.
B. A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age.
A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall
expire no later than one year from the date of issuance unless revoked
sooner by the Board.
C.
Application for a practitioner permit shall include:
(1) Name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Residence address;
(4) Mailing address;
(5) Phone number;
(6) Place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and
(7) Training and/or experience as set out below.
D.
§ 303-61 LANCASTER CODE § 303-63
1:372
§ 303-64. Grounds for suspension, denial, revocation, or refusal to
renew permit.
In reviewing an application for a practitioner permit, the Board may
consider experience, training and/or certification acquired in other
states that regulate body art.
A.
Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Board and, at a
minimum, shall include the following:
Bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent) which
includes infectious disease control; waste disposal; hand-washing
techniques; sterilization equipment operation and methods; and
sanitization, disinfection and sterilization methods and techniques;
and
(1)
Current certification in first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR).
(2)
B.
Examples of courses approved by the Board include Preventing Disease
Transmission (American Red Cross) and Bloodborne Pathogen Training
(U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided by professional body art
organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers may also
be submitted to the Board for approval.
C.
The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall provide
documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he completed a course
on anatomy and physiology with a grade of C or better at a college
accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, or
comparable accrediting entity. This course must include instruction on
the system of the integumentary system (skin).
D.
The applicant for a tattoo, branding or scarification practitioner permit
shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he
completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a grade of C
or better at a college accredited by the New England Association of
Schools and Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This course
must include instruction on the integumentary system (skin). Such
other course or program as the Board shall deem appropriate and
acceptable may be substituted for the anatomy course.
E.
The applicant for all practitioners shall submit evidence satisfactory to
the Board of at least two years' actual experience in the practice of
performing body art activities of the kind for which the applicant seeks
a body art practitioner permit to perform, whether such experience was
obtained within or outside of the commonwealth.
F.
A practitioner's permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
G.
The Board may suspend a permit, deny a permit, revoke a permit or
refuse to renew a permit on the following grounds, each of which, in
A.
§ 303-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-64
1:373
and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for suspension,
denial, revocation or refusal to renew:
Any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of the
public would be at risk;
(1)
Fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or its
renewal;
(2)
Criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such a
nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicant
unfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedings
resulting in a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or
an admission of sufficient facts;
(3)
Any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governing
the practice of body art;
(4)
Practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired by
alcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability;
(5)
Being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or a habitual user
of narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other
drugs having similar effects;
(6)
Knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person
to perform activities requiring a permit;
(7)
Continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended,
or revoked;
(8)
Having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by the
proper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same as
those set forth in the Board's regulations; and
(9)
Other just and sufficient cause, which the Board may determine,
would render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to
practice body art.
(10)
The Board shall notify an applicant, establishment or practitioner in
writing of any violation of the Board's regulations, for which the Board
intends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant,
establishment or practitioner shall have seven days after receipt of such
written notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations.
B.
The Board may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit, if the
applicant, establishment, or practitioner fails to comply after said seven
days subject to the procedure outlined in § 303-66.
C.
D. Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial.
§ 303-64 LANCASTER CODE § 303-65
1:374
§ 303-65. Grounds for suspension of permit.
The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on
the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence before
it, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is an
immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The
suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice of
such suspension by the Board.
§ 303-66. Procedure for hearings.
The owner of the establishment or practitioner shall be given written
notice of the Board's intent to hold a hearing for the purpose of
suspension, revocation, denial or refusal to renew a permit. This
written notice shall be served through a certified letter sent return
receipt requested or by constable. The notice shall include the date,
time and place of the hearing and the owner of the establishment or
practitioner's right to be heard. The Board shall hold the hearing no
later than 21 days from the date the written notice is received.
A.
In the case of a suspension of a permit as noted in § 303-64, a hearing
shall be scheduled no later than 21 days from the date of the
suspension.
B.
§ 303-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-66
1:375

ARTICLE IX
Portable Restrooms/Toilets Regulations
§ 303-67. Definition.
A portable restroom or toilet is any holding tank system that is delivered to
a property by a company that is a licensed hauler in the Town of Lancaster
and that is approved by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to provide
that service which is installed as restrooms at construction sites, special
events, parks, etc.
§ 303-68. Rules.
§ 303-69. Penalties.
§ 303-70. Permit applications.
Applications for permits are available from the office of the Board of Health.
All installations of portable toilets in the Town of Lancaster require a
permit.
A.
All portable restroom suppliers must be licensed haulers in the Town of
Lancaster.
B.
Notification that the units have been installed must be provided to the
LBOH within 24 hours
C.
Notification that the units have been uninstalled/removed must be
provided to the LBOH within 24 hours after the units have been
removed.
D.
No portable toilet shall be located closer than 25 feet from any property
line.
E.
Where a portable toilet is to be located on a property for more than four
consecutive days, the portable toilet shall be screened on three sides by
a wooden enclosure fence, consistent with neighborhood architectural
standards and sufficient to block view of the facility from neighboring
residential properties. In addition, disinfectants and deodorizers shall
be used as necessary to prevent odors from disturbing neighbors.
F.
Failure to provide installation and/or uninstallation notification within
the required time may result in termination of any permits issued.
A.
Failure to comply with the above regulations may result in a fine of
$500/day until the units have been removed.
B.
§ 303-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-70
1:377

ARTICLE X
Floor Drains
§ 303-71. Purpose of Regulation.
Whereas:
§ 303-72. Scope of authority.
The Town of Lancaster Board of Health adopts the following floor drain
regulation pursuant to authorization granted by MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 122.
The regulation shall apply, as specified herein, to all applicable facilities,
existing and new, within the Town of Lancaster.
§ 303-73. Definitions.
For the purposes of this regulation, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — A public or private
establishment where the principal use is the supply, storage, sale, and/or
manufacture of services, equipment, products, or information, including,
Floor drains in industrial and commercial facilities are often tied to a
system leading to a leaching structure (e.g., dry well, cesspool, leach
field) or a septic system; and
A.
Poor management practices and accidental and/or intentional
discharges may lead petroleum and other toxic or hazardous materials
into these drainage systems in facilities managing these products; and
B.
Improper maintenance or inappropriate use of these systems may allow
the passage of contaminants or pollutants entering the drain to
discharge from the leaching structure or septic system to the ground;
and
C.
Discharges of hazardous wastes and other pollutants to floor drains
leading to leaching structures and septic systems have repeatedly
threatened surface and ground water quality throughout
Massachusetts; and
D.
Surface and ground water resources in the Town of Lancaster
contribute to the Town's drinking water supplies; the Town of
Lancaster, Massachusetts adopts the following regulation, under its
authority as specified in § 303-72, as a preventative measure for the
purposes of:
Preserving and protecting the Town of Lancaster's drinking water
resources from discharges of pollutants to the ground via floor
drains, and
(1)
Minimizing the threat of economic losses to the Town due to such
discharges.
(2)
E.
§ 303-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-73
1:379
but not limited to: manufacturing, processing, or other industrial
operations; service or retail establishments; printing or publishing
establishments; research and development facilities; small- or largequantity
generators of hazardous waste; laboratories; hospitals. For the
purposes of this regulation, privately owned structures with over 2,000
square feet of gross floor area designated to an accessory use as described
above shall be considered a commercial and industrial facility.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISCHARGE — The accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of toxic or hazardous
material or waste upon or into any land or water so that such hazardous
waste or any constituent thereof may enter the land or waters of the
commonwealth. Discharge includes, without limitation, leakage of such
materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems and
disposal of such materials into any on-site leaching structure or sewage
disposal system.
FLOOR DRAIN — An intended drainage point on a floor constructed to be
otherwise impervious which serves as the point of entry into any subsurface
drainage, treatment, disposal, containment, or other plumbing system.
LEACHING STRUCTURE — Any subsurface structure through which a fluid
that is introduced will pass and enter the environment, including, but not
limited to, dry wells, leaching catch basins, cesspools, leach fields, and oil/
water separators that are not water-tight.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain petroleum-based oil or grease, flammable wastes as
well as sand and particles from normal wastes while permitting normal
sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
Other common names for such systems include MDC traps, gasoline and
sand traps, grit and oil separators, grease traps, and interceptors.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual,
or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if
such substance or mixture was discharged to land or water of the Town
of Lancaster. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as toxic or
hazardous under MGL c. 21C and 21E or Massachusetts hazardous waste
regulations (310 CMR 30.000), and also include such products as solvents,
thinners, and pesticides in quantities greater than normal household use.
USE OF TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — The handling, generation,
treatment, storage, or management of toxic or hazardous materials.
§ 303-73 LANCASTER CODE § 303-74
1:380
§ 303-74. Prohibitions.
With the exception of discharges that have received (or have applied and
will receive) a Department-issued permit prior to the effective date of this
regulation, no floor drain(s) shall be allowed to discharge, with or without
pretreatment (such as an oil/water separator), to the ground, a leaching
structure, or septic system in any industrial or commercial facility if such
floor drain is located in either:
§ 303-75. Requirements for existing facilities.
A. An industrial or commercial process area;
B. A petroleum, toxic, or hazardous materials and/or waste storage area.
The owner of a facility in operation prior to the effective date of this
regulation with a prohibited (as defined under § 303-74) floor drain
system shall:
Disconnect and plug all applicable inlets to and outlets from (where
possible) applicable leaching structures, oil/water separators, and/
or septic systems;
(1)
Remove all existing sludge in oil/water separators, septic systems,
and, where accessible, leaching structures. Any sludge determined
to be a hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
state hazardous waste regulations (310 CMR 30.000). Remedial
activity involving any excavation and/or soil or groundwater
sampling must be performed in accordance with appropriate
Department policies;
(2)
Alter the floor drain system so that the floor drain shall be either:
Connected to a holding tank that meets all applicable
requirements of Department policies and regulations, with
hauling records submitted to the Lancaster Board of Health at
the time of hauling;
(a)
Connected to a municipal sanitary sewer line, if available, with
all applicable Department and local permits; or permanently
sealed. Any facility sealing a drain shall be required to submit
for approval to the Board of Health a hazardous waste
management plan detailing the means of collecting, storing,
and disposing of any hazardous waste generated by the facility,
including any spill or other discharge of hazardous materials
or wastes.
(b)
(3)
A.
Any oil/water separator remaining in use shall be monitored weekly,
and restored to proper conditions after cleaning so as to ensure proper
functioning. Records of the hauling of the removed contents of the
separator shall be submitted to the Board of Health at the time of
hauling.
B.
§ 303-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-75
1:381
§ 303-76. Effective date for all facilities.
The effective date of this regulation is the date posted on the front page
of the regulation, which shall be identical to the date of adoption of the
regulation.66
§ 303-77. Penalties.
Failure to comply with provisions of this regulation will result in the levy of
fines of more than $1,000. Each day's failure to comply with the provisions
of this regulation shall constitute a separate violation.
Compliance with all provisions of this regulation must be accomplished
in a manner consistent with Massachusetts Plumbing, Building, and
Fire Code requirements.
C.
Upon complying with one of the options listed under Subsection A(3),
the owner/operator of the facility shall notify the Department of the
closure of said system by filing the Department's UIC notification form
(which may be obtained by calling 617/292-5770) with the Department,
and sending a copy to the Lancaster Board of Health.
D.
Existing facilities:
Owners/Operators of a facility affected by this regulation shall
comply with all of its provisions within 120 days of the effective
date;
(1)
All applicable discharges to the leaching structures and septic
systems shall be discontinued immediately through temporary
isolation or sealing of the floor drain.
(2)
A.
New facilities:
As of the effective date of the regulation, all new construction and/
or applicable change of use within the Town of Lancaster shall
comply with the provisions of this regulation.
(1)
Certification of conformance with the provisions of this regulation
by the Board of Health shall be required prior to issuance of
construction and occupancy permits.
(2)
The use of any new oil/water separator shall comply with the
same requirements as for existing systems, as specified above in
§ 303-75B.
(3)
B.
66.Editor's Note: These regulations were approved by the Board of Health 1-7-2010.
§ 303-75 LANCASTER CODE § 303-77
1:382
ARTICLE XI
Outdoor Hydronic Heaters
§ 303-78. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that the unit and installation
are in compliance with all local and state Building Codes, Zoning Bylaws,
Fire Prevention Regulations, and 310 CMR 7.26(50) through (54), Outdoor
Hydronic Heaters.
§ 303-79. Permitting.
All new installations of outdoor hydronic heaters as of October 2008 require
a permit to operate. This permit is issued by the Lancaster Board of Health.
The permit is valid for the lifetime of the installation.
§ 303-80. Permit process.
A. Obtain a permit application from the Lancaster Board of Health.
Complete the application by providing the following information:
(1) Applicant name.
(2) Owner (if different).
(3) Owner's address.
(4) Telephone.
Equipment location (including a site plan showing the location of
the OHH).
(5)
(6) Manufacturer.
(7) Model name.
(8) Serial number.
B.
The Lancaster Board of Health office will transfer the application to
its Sanitarian at the Nashoba Associated Boards of Health for review
and approval. The permit will then be acted upon at the next available
meeting of the Lancaster Board of Health.
C.
The issuance of the permit will require the final approval of the
Lancaster Board of Health.
D.
§ 303-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80
1:383

ARTICLE XIA
Unattended Collection Containers
[Added 8-28-2015]
§ 303-80.1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of these regulations is to manage unattended donation
containers within the Town of Lancaster. The procedures and requirements
of these regulations are intended to:
§ 303-80.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The property owner who is requesting a permit authorizing
placement of an unattended donation container(s).
LBOH — The Lancaster Board of Health or its designee(s).
OPERATOR — A person, entity, association or organization that places,
maintains or operates an unattended collection container(s) to solicit
donations of salvageable personal property.
PERMITTEE — The property owner who is issued a permit authorizing
placement of an unattended collection container(s).
PROPERTY OWNER — The person, entity, association or organization who
owns the real property where the unattended collection container(s) is/are
or is/are proposed to be located.
UNATTENDED COLLECTION CONTAINER — Any unattended container,
receptacle, or similar device that is located on any property within the Town
of Lancaster used for soliciting and collecting donations of clothing or other
salvageable personal property. This term does not include recycle bins for
the collection of recyclable materials governed or regulated by local code.
§ 303-80.3. Permits.
Promote the community's health, safety, and welfare by regulating
unattended collection containers.
A.
Ensure that unattended donation containers do not pose a health
hazard.
B.
Ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the
unattended donation containers.
C.
Establish criteria that avoids attracting vermin and creating a public
health hazard.
D.
Unless otherwise exempt, it shall be unlawful and a public nuisance
for any property owner or operator to place, operate, maintain or
allow unattended collection containers on real property in the Town of
A.
§ 303-80.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80.3
1:385
Lancaster unless the property owner first obtains a permit pursuant
to these regulations and the collection container is placed, operated
and maintained in accordance with the provisions of these and any
associated zoning regulations. Unattended collection containers shall
not be placed on any public property, including sidewalks, streets or
open space.
The permit application shall be made on a form provided by the LBOH
and shall include the following information:
The name, address, e-mail, website (if available) and telephone
number of the applicant.
(1)
The name, address, e-mail, website, and telephone number of the
operator of the unattended donation container.
(2)
A drawing sufficient to indicate the proposed location of the
unattended donation container on the owner's real property, as well
as the size of the proposed unattended donation container.
(3)
(4) The collection schedule.
B.
Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee and
submitted to the LBOH office.
C.
The application fee will be as documented within the LBOH Fee
Schedule.
D.
Applications will be reviewed at the next available scheduled meeting
of the LBOH following receipt of the application.
E.
The LBOH shall not issue a permit unless:
The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application
accompanied by the applicable fee.
(1)
The proposed location and placement of the unattended donation
container on the property owner's real property are in compliance
with all local zoning regulations and do not have the potential to
cause an issue to endanger public health or have the potential to
create a public health nuisance.
(2)
F.
If the LBOH denies an application, the LBOH shall state, in writing, the
specific reasons for denial.
G.
Permits issued hereunder shall be valid for one unattended donation
container. Multiple unattended donation containers shall have their
own individual permits.
H.
The term of the permit shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 of
the following year and renewable for one-year periods thereafter.
I.
No person or operator to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer,
assign, or convey such permit to another person or operator.
J.
§ 303-80.3 LANCASTER CODE § 303-80.3
1:386
§ 303-80.4. Requirements and maintenance.
§ 303-80.5. Violation; penalties; enforcement.
Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily cancel
the permit by notifying the Director in writing of the intent to cancel
the permit. The permit shall become void upon the Director's receipt of
a written notice of intent to cancel the permit. The applicant shall not
be entitled to a refund of any of the permit fee.
K.
A permittee shall operate and maintain or cause to be operated and
maintained all unattended donation containers located in the Town as
follows:
Unattended donation containers shall be maintained in good
condition and appearance with no structural damage or defects,
holes, or visible rust, and shall be free of graffiti.
(1)
Unattended donation containers shall be locked or otherwise
secured.
(2)
Unattended donation containers shall contain the following contact
information in two-inch type visible from the front of each
unattended donation container: the name, address, e-mail, and
phone number of both the permittee and the operator.
(3)
A.
Unattended collection containers approved by the LBOH shall be issued
a permit before placement on real property.
B.
Unattended donation containers shall be serviced and emptied as
needed, or within three business days of a request by the LBOH or its
designee.
C.
The permittee shall maintain or cause to be maintained the area
surrounding the unattended donation containers free of any junk,
garbage, trash, debris or other refuse material.
D.
The permittee and operator shall be individually and severally
responsible for abating and removing all rubbish, trash, garbage, junk,
debris and any other refuse material in the area surrounding the
unattended donation containers within 24 hours of written or verbal
notice from the Director or his/her designee.
E.
The permittee and operator shall be individually and severally
responsible for all costs for abating and removing any junk, garbage,
trash, debris and other refuse material from the area surrounding the
unattended donation containers. If, after notification, the permittee
fails to clean items outside the container and the Town of Lancaster is
required to clean and dispose of the items, the cost will be assessed to
the permittee.
F.
§ 303-80.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80.5
1:387
§ 303-80.6. Appeals to Lancaster Board of Health.
§ 303-80.7. Exemptions.
Unattended donation containers located entirely within the interior of a
building are exempt from the requirements of this article.
The LBOH shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder
if any of the grounds upon which it may refuse to issue an initial
permit exists. In addition, the failure of the operator or permittee to
comply with the provisions of this regulation or other provisions of this
regulation or other law shall also constitute grounds for revocation of
the permit.
A.
The LBOH shall provide a written notification to the permittee stating
the specific grounds for revocation. Upon revocation, the unattended
donation container shall be removed from the permittee's real property
within 15 calendar days; and if not removed within this time period,
the Town may remove, store and dispose of the unattended donation
container at the permittee's sole cost and expense.
B.
Upon revocation, a permittee shall be prohibited from applying for a
permit for a period of one year. Any violation of the provisions of this
regulation is considered a public nuisance according to MGL c. 111,
§ 122, and subject to abatement permitted by law.
C.
Any violation, in addition to remedies identified in these regulations,
which creates or as a result of which there is created any accumulation
of garbage, offal, solid waste, trash, refuse, filth, waste ban material or
junk on any real property is hereby declared a nuisance.
D.
Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the LBOH in
granting or denying an application for a permit under this article or in
revoking or refusing to renew a permit issued hereunder may appeal
the decision to the LBOH.
A.
The appeal shall be made by filing a written notice requesting a hearing
thereof not later than 10 calendar days after receiving notice of the
decision of the LBOH. The LBOH shall hold a hearing on the appeal
within 30 calendar days, and, notwithstanding other provisions, the
decision of the LBOH shall be final.
B.
§ 303-80.5 LANCASTER CODE § 303-80.7
1:388
ARTICLE XIB
Regulations for the Use of Recombinant DNA Molecule Technology
[Added 9-7-2016]
§ 303-80.8. Statutory authority; purpose.
The Lancaster Board of Health acting under the authority of MGL c. 31,
§ 111, and amendments and additions thereto, and by any other power
thereto enabling, has duly made and adopted the following rules and
regulations in the interest of and for the preservation of the public health.
§ 303-80.9. Applicability.
All activities associated with constructing recombinant DNA (RDNA)
molecules and organisms and viruses containing RDNA molecules within
the Town of Lancaster shall be performed in strict accordance with these
regulations and with the National Institute for Health (NIH) Guidelines
as defined in § 303-80.10 below. These regulations shall govern where
they differ from the Guidelines. These regulations do not apply to finished
products which contain RDNA molecules and which have been approved by
other government regulatory agencies for medical or other purposes.
§ 303-80.10. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following definitions are adopted:
GUIDELINES —
LARGE-SCALE — The use of more than 10 liters but less than 5,000 liters
of RDNA culture.
SIGNIFICANT DEVIATION — Any deviation that might have an adverse
effect on personal or public health.
§ 303-80.11. Lancaster Biosafety Committee (LBC).
NIH Guidelines for Research involving Recombinant or Synthetic
Nucleic Acid Molecules published in the Federal Register of April 2002,
and any subsequent federal amendment thereto approved by the Board
of Health.
A.
In the event that the National Institutes of Health shall discontinue
or abolish their guidelines, those guidelines in effect and approved by
the Board of Health at the time of such discontinuance shall remain in
effect.
B.
A Lancaster Biosafety Committee (LBC) shall be established for the
purpose of overseeing all use of RDNA in Lancaster and advising the
Board of Health.
A.
B. Specific responsibilities of the LBC shall include:
§ 303-80.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80.11
1:389
§ 303-80.12. Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC).
Establishing policies, procedures and criteria to aid in the
implementation of these regulations.
(1)
Reviewing all amendments to the Guidelines before submitting
their recommendations to the Board of Health for approval.
(2)
Reviewing all applications for permits for the use of RDNA in
Lancaster for compliance with the Guidelines and conformity with
such other regulations as the Board of Health may from time to
time promulgate.
(3)
Reviewing institutions' manuals, worker training programs, health
safety programs and monitoring procedures.
(4)
Determining the manner in which institutions and Institutional
Biosafety Committees make reports, applications or
recommendations to the LBC and the type of information required.
Reviewing such reports, applications and recommendations and
approving where appropriate.
(5)
(6) Carrying out site visits to institutional facilities.
(7) Approving the community members of the IBCs.
Developing a procedure for members of institutions to report to the
LBC violations of these regulations, the Guidelines, or any other
health regulations the Board of Health may promulgate.
(8)
The LBC shall be composed of the Chairman of the Board of Health or
his/her designee, a health agent from the Nashoba Associated Boards
of Health (NABH), and a minimum of three other members to be
appointed by the Selectboard and approved by the Board of Health.
Members appointed by the Selectboard shall serve three-year terms;
provided, however, that of the first three members appointed to the
Committee one shall serve for a term of one year, one shall serve for a
term of two years, and one shall serve for a term of three years.
C.
The Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), established by the
Guidelines, shall have as members, in addition to the corporate
representatives, one community representative, the Chairman of the
Board of Health or his/her designee, and the NABH Health Agent or his/
her designee. The community representative shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectman and approved by the LBC.
A.
The IBC shall meet on a regular basis. All minutes of the IBC meetings
must be forwarded to the Board of Health and the LBC.
B.
The community member of the IBC and the Health Agent, or his/
her designee, shall have no financial interest in the institution or any
other institution in competition therewith, and such representatives
shall be bound to the same provisions as to nondisclosure and nonuse
C.
§ 303-80.11 LANCASTER CODE § 303-80.12
1:390
§ 303-80.13. Permits.
of proprietary information and trade secrets as all other members
of the IBC, except to the extent necessary to alleviate any public
health hazard. As used in this regulation, proprietary information and
trade secrets shall be defined as set forth under the law of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
In accordance with the Guidelines, the IBC, acting on behalf of the
institution, reviews all RDNA use for compliance with the Guidelines
and approves those projects that conform to the Guidelines. A
description of each protocol approved by the IBC, including all
organisms and the containment to be used, and a statement certifying
that the experiment conforms to the Guidelines shall be filed with the
LBC and the Board of Health.
D.
The LBC shall retain a professional and competent person or agency to
perform an annual inspection and review of procedures and practices
of large-scale RDNA use and compliance with this article. The scope
of this inspection shall be mutually agreed upon by the institution and
the LBC. The institution shall reimburse the Town of Lancaster for the
expense of this inspection and review.
E.
All information sent to the Lancaster Board of Health and the LBC shall
have any propriety information and trade secrets removed therefrom.
The full test shall remain on file in the records of the institution for
inspection at all reasonable times by any member of the IBC.
F.
All institutions planning to use RDNA must obtain a permit from the
Board of Health with the prior approval of the LBC before commencing
said technology. All permits are issued for one year and may be revoked
for cause.
A.
Institutions seeking such a permit from the Board of Health must first
submit the following to the LBC:
A plot plan showing the proposed location of the facility and a floor
plan showing the internal layout of the facility.
(1)
A listing of all organisms, containment levels, and decontamination
procedures to be employed.
(2)
A plan for a screening process to ensure the purity of the strain
of host organisms used in the experiments and to test organisms
resulting from such experiments for their resistance to commonly
used therapeutic antibiotics. Host organisms obtained from
independent laboratories shall undergo the same screening
process.
(3)
A plan for systematic monitoring of waste to assure that surviving
RDNA organisms will not be released into the environment.
(4)
B.
§ 303-80.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80.13
1:391
§ 303-80.14. Inspection and review.
A plan for systematic pest control management in laboratories,
contiguous facilities and food service establishments in the same
building.
(5)
(6) A plan for systematic security of the premises.
The institution's health monitoring, health surveillance and safety
manuals, together with the plan for an appropriate medical
surveillance program as determined by the IBC for all persons
engaged in the use of RDNA. Such programs shall include, but shall
not necessarily be limited to:
(a) A preemployment medical examination for employees.
Prompt reporting to the IBC of employee illnesses that are
potentially related to RDNA use.
(b)
Retention of medical and health records for at least 10 years.
Medical or employee health records shall be made available for
inspection and may be used for public health studies.
(c)
A training program of safeguards and safety procedures for
personnel.
(d)
(7)
The name(s) of the principal investigator(s) who shall be
responsible for enforcing the policies of the IBC.
(8)
A plan for orienting representatives of the Lancaster Health, Fire
and Police Departments to the physical plant and to procedures to
be utilized in the event of an emergency.
(9)
Written agreement to allow inspection of facilities and pertinent
records by the LBC.
(10)
The LBC shall review the institution's application for a permit and
supporting documents and make its recommendation of the same to
the Board of Health. Copies of the application, supporting documents
and the LBC's recommendation shall be filed with the Board of Health
and the Planning Board within 45 days after the application is filed
with the LBC. The Board of Health shall take final action on the permit
application within 75 days after the application is filed with the LBC.
The period within which final action shall be taken may be extended
for a definite period by mutual consent of the Board of Health and the
applicant.
C.
The fee for a permit granted by the Board of Health, or annual renewal
thereof, shall be $500.
D.
All institutions involved in the use of RDNA shall allow inspection of
their facilities, procedures and practices in order to confirm compliance
with this article.
A.
§ 303-80.13 LANCASTER CODE § 303-80.14
1:392
§ 303-80.15. Restrictions.
§ 303-80.16. Violations and penalties.
The Board of Health shall retain a professionally competent person,
agency or institution to perform inspections and reviews. The results
shall be reported to the Board of Health, the LBC and the institution
involved. The institution shall reimburse the Town of Lancaster for the
expense of this inspection and review.
B.
The Board of Health, its employees, all members of the LBC and any
individual or institution employed to perform inspections shall maintain
the confidentiality of all proprietary information released to them by
reason of this article.
C.
RDNA use classified by the Guidelines as requiring any BL3 or BL4
physical containment measures as prescribed in Appendix G of the
Guidelines under Standard Microbiological Practices, Special
Practices, Containment Practices, Containment Equipment or
Laboratory Facilities shall not be permitted.
A.
Experiments for which containment levels are not prescribed in the
Guidelines shall be approved by the LBC before the experiment is
initiated.
B.
Large-scale RDNA use shall not be permitted without prior review and
approval by the LBC and approval of the Board of Health. Use of more
than 5,000 liters of RDNA culture shall not be permitted.
C.
There shall be no deliberate release into the environment, that is to
sewers, drains or the air, of any organism containing RDNA.
D.
The institution shall report within 24 hours to the Director of Health,
followed by a written report within 15 days to the LBC, any significant
deviations from the Guidelines and any significant accidents or illnesses
or releases related to the use of RDNA. An additional inspection of
facilities and procedures may be deemed necessary by the LBC based
upon its judgment of the nature and extent of the problem.
E.
Violation of the conditions of this article shall subject the violator to a
fine of $500 per day and, in addition, the facility in which the violation
occurs may be closed by the Board of Health. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A.
Once a permit has been issued it may be revoked by the Board of Health
upon determination, after due notice and hearing, that the institution
involved has materially failed to comply with these regulations, the
permit agreements or the Guidelines; or if in the opinion of the Board of
Health the RDNA use causes a nuisance or adversely affects the public
health, safety and welfare in Lancaster.
B.
§ 303-80.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-80.17
1:393
§ 303-80.17. Assessments.
The salaries and expenses paid by the Town of Lancaster for inspections,
reviews, staff and consultants for work directly related to carrying out
the requirements of these regulations shall be assessed to the institutions
holding permits under these regulations. An accounting of these costs will
be furnished annually to each institution.
§ 303-80.18. Variances.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case when, it its opinion, the
enforcements thereof would do manifest injustice, provided that the
decision of the Board of Health is not in conflict with the spirit of these
standards. Any variance granted by the Board of Health must be in writing
with a copy available to the public at all reasonable hours in the office of the
Town Clerk and in the office of the Board of Health.
§ 303-80.17 LANCASTER CODE § 303-80.18
1:394
ARTICLE XII
Statements of Penalty, Invalidity and Revocation
§ 303-81. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any
provision of these regulations shall be fined not less than $20 and not
more than $500 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during which violations occur or continue.
§ 303-82. Invalidity.
It is the intention of the Board of Health that these regulations, and every
provision thereof, shall be considered separable, and invalidity of any
section, clause, or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity
of any other portion of these regulations.
§ 303-83. Severability.
Each provision of this regulation shall be construed as separate to the end
that, if any provision, or sentence, clause or phrase thereof, shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections
shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 303-84. Revocation of other regulations.
All regulations and parts of regulations of the Board of Health, in conflict
herewith, are hereby revoked.
§ 303-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-84
1:395

ARTICLE XIII
Sale of Tobacco Products
[Added 5-9-2018]
§ 303-85. Statement of purpose.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoking causes
cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes,
irritations to the eyes, nose and throat67;
Whereas the United States Department of Health and Human Services
has concluded that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin68 and the
Surgeon General found that nicotine exposure during adolescence, a critical
window for brain development, may have lasting adverse consequences for
brain development,69 and that it is addiction to nicotine that keeps youth
smoking past adolescence70;
Whereas a Federal District Court found that Phillip Morris, RJ Reynolds and
other leading cigarette manufacturers "spent billions of dollars every year
on their marketing activities in order to encourage young people to try and
then continue purchasing their cigarette products in order to provide the
replacement smokers they need to survive" and that these companies were
likely to continue targeting underage smokers71;
Whereas more than 80% of all adult smokers begin smoking before the age
of 18, more than 90% do so before leaving their teens, and more than 3.5
million middle and high school students smoke72;
Whereas 18.1% of current smokers aged less than 18 years reported that
they usually directly purchased their cigarettes from stores (i.e.,
convenience store, supermarket, or discount store) or gas stations, and
among 11th grade males this rate was nearly 30%73;
Whereas the Institute of Medicine (IOM) concludes that raising the
minimum age of legal access to tobacco products to 21 will likely reduce
67.Center for Disease Control and Prevention, (CDC) (2012), Health Effects of Cigarette
Smoking Fact Sheet. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistice/
fact_sheets/health_effects/effects_cig_smoking/index.htm.
68.CDC (2010), How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for
Smoking-Attributable Disease. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/
sgr/2010/.
69.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of
Smoking - 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and
Health, p. 122. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-ofprogress/
full-report.pdf.
70.Id. at Executive Summary p. 13. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/50-years-of-progress/execsummary.pdf.
71.United States v. Phillip Morris, Inc., RJ Reypolds Tobacco Co. et al., 449 F.Supp.2d1
(D.D.C. 2006) at Par. 3301 and Pp. 1605-07.
72.SAMHSA, Calculated based on data in 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health and
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHA).
73.CDC (2013) Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2014: 63 (No SS-04)).
Retrieved from: www.cdc.gov.
§ 303-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-85
1:397
tobacco initiation, particularly among adolescents 15 to 17, which would
improve health across the lifespan and save lives74;
Whereas cigars and cigarillos can be sold in a single "dose;" enjoy a
relatively low tax as compared to cigarettes; are available in fruit, candy
and alcohol flavors; and are popular among youth75;
Whereas research shows that increased cigar prices significantly decreased
the probability of male adolescent cigar use and a 10% increase in cigar
prices would reduce use by 3.4%76;
Whereas 59% of high school smokers in Massachusetts have tried flavored
cigarettes or flavored cigars and 25.6% of them are current flavored
tobacco product users; 95.1% of 12 to 17 year olds who smoked cigars
reported smoking cigar brands that were flavored77;
Whereas the Surgeon General found that exposure to tobacco marketing in
stores and price discounting increase youth smoking78;
Whereas the federal Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act
(FSPTCA), enacted in 2009, prohibited candy- and fruit-flavored
cigarettes,79 largely because these flavored products were marketed to
youth and young adults,80 and younger smokers were more likely to have
tried these products than older smokers,81 neither federal nor
Massachusetts laws restrict sales of flavored non-cigarette tobacco
74.IOM (Institute of Medicine) 2015. Public Health Implications of Raising the Minimum Age
of Legal Access to Tobacco Products. Washington DC: The National Academies Press,
2015.
75.CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2010:59, 12, note 5).
Retrieved from: http:www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss5905.pdf.
76.Ringel, J., Wasserman, J., & Andreyeva, T. (2005) Effects of Public Policy on Adolescents'
Cigar Use: Evidence from the National Youth Tobacco Survey. American Journal of Public
Health, 95(6), 995-998, doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2003.030411 and cited in Cigar, Cigarillo and
Little Cigar Use among Canadian Youth: Are We Underestimating the Magnitude of this
Problem?, J. Prim. P. 2011, Aug: 32(3-4):161-70. Retrieved from: www.nebi.nim.gov/
pubmed/21809109.
77.Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2015 Massachusetts Youth Health Survey
(MYHS); Delneve CD et al., Tob Control, March 2014: Preference for flavored cigar brands
among youth, young adults and adults in the USA.
78.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among
Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p.
508-530, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/fullreport.
pdf.
79.21 U.S.C. § 387g.
80.Carpenter CM, Wayne GF, Pauly JL, et al. 2005. "New Cigarette Brands with Flavors that
Appeal to Youth: Tobacco Marketing Strategies." Health Affairs, 24(6):1601-1610; Lewis M
and Wackowski O. 2006. "Dealing with an Innovative Industry: A Look at Flavored
Cigarettes Promoted by Mainstream Brands." American Journal of Public Health. 96(2):
244-251; Connolly GN, 2004, "Sweet and Spicy Flavours: New Brands for Minorities and
Youth." Tobacco Control. 13(3):211-212; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 537, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf.
81.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among
Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p.
§ 303-85 LANCASTER CODE § 303-85
1:398
products, such as cigars, cigarillos, smokeless tobacco, hookah tobacco, and
electronic devices and the nicotine solutions used in these devices;
Whereas the United States Food and Drug Administration and the United
States Surgeon General have stated that flavored tobacco products are
considered to be "starter" products that help establish smoking habits that
can lead to long-term addiction82;
Whereas the United States Surgeon General recognized in his 2014 report
that a complementary strategy to assist in eradicating tobacco-related
death and disease is for local governments to ban categories of products
from retail sale83;
Whereas the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
has reported that the current use of electronic cigarettes, a product sold
in dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, among middle and high school
students tripled from 2013 to 201484;
Whereas 5.8% of Massachusetts youth currently use e-cigarettes and 15.9%
have tried them85;
Whereas the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection has
classified liquid nicotine in any amount as an "acutely hazardous waste"86;
Whereas in a lab analysis conducted by the FDA, electronic cigarette
cartridges that were labeled as containing no nicotine actually had low
levels of nicotine present in all cartridges tested, except for one87;
Whereas according to the CDC's youth risk behavior surveillance system,
the percentage of high school students in Massachusetts who reported the
use of cigars within the past 30 days is 10.8% in 201388;
Whereas data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey indicate that more
than 2/5 of United States middle and high school smokers report using
flavored little cigars or flavored cigarettes89;
539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/fullreport.
pdf.
82.Food and Drug Administration. 2011. Fact Sheet: Flavored Tobacco Products, www.fda.gov/
downloads/TobaccoProducts/ProtectingKidsfromTobacco/FlavoredTobacco/
UCM183214.pdf; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General, Atlanta:
U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.
83.See fn. 3 at p. 85.
84.Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. 2015. "Tobacco Use Among Middle and High
School Students — United States, 2011-2014," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
(MMWR) 64(14): 381-385;
85.Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2015 Massachusetts Youth Health Survey
(MYHS)
86.310 CMR 30.136.
87.Food and Drug Administration, Summary of Results: Laboratory Analysis of Electronic
Cigarettes Conducted by FDA, available at: http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/
publichealthfocus/ucm173146.htm.
88.See fn. 7.
§ 303-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-85
1:399
Whereas the sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission
of health care institutions because these products are detrimental to the
public health and their presence in health care institutions undermine
efforts to educate patients on the safe and effective use of medication,
including cessation medication;
Whereas educational institutions sell tobacco products to a younger
population, who is particularly at risk for becoming smokers, and such
sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of educational
institutions that educate a younger population about social, environmental
and health risks and harms;
Whereas the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that ". . .[t]he
right to engage in business must yield to the paramount right of government
to protect the public health by any rational means."90
Now, therefore it is the intention of the Lancaster Board of Health to
regulate the sale of tobacco products.
§ 303-86. Legislative authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Lancaster Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31, which states "boards of
health may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 303-87. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ADULT-ONLY RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not
required to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell
or offer for sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental,
and in which the entry of persons under the minimum legal sales age is
prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of
tobacco products as required to be issued by the Lancaster Board of Health.
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed
or intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers
regardless of any content.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or
89.King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, et al. 2013. "Flavored-Little-Cigar and Flavored-Cigarette
Use Among U.S. Middle and High School Students." Journal of Adolescent Health. [Article
in press], www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X%2813%2900415-1/abstract.
90.Druzik et al v. Board of Health of Haverhill, 324 Mass. 129 (1949).
§ 303-85 LANCASTER CODE § 303-87
1:400
detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or
component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or
flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the
product.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under MGL c. 64C, § 1, Paragraph 1.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
COUPON — Any card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket or other issue
distributed for commercial or promotional purposes to be later surrendered
by the bearer so as to receive an article, service or accommodation without
charge or at a discount price.
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, school,
professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other
institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one or more
employees.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health
care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
§ 303-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-87
1:401
pharmacies, drug stores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and
dentist offices.
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other vessel which contains
nicotine in liquid or gel form, whether or not combined with another
substance or substances, for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein.
The term does not include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge
that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined
herein, if the cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not
intended to be open by the consumer or retailer.
LISTED OR NONDISCOUNTED PRICE — The higher of the price listed
for a tobacco product on its package or the price listed on any related
shelving, posting, advertising or display at the place where the tobacco
product is sold or offered for sale plus all applicable taxes if such taxes are
not included in the state price, and before the application of any discounts
or coupons.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
NONRESIDENTIAL ROLL-YOUR-OWN (RYO) MACHINE — A mechanical
device made available for use (including to an individual who produces
cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own
tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that
is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. RYO
machines located in private homes used for solely personal consumption are
not nonresidential RYO machines.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales
permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco product sales
permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or
store personnel.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
§ 303-87 LANCASTER CODE § 303-87
1:402
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar
products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or
aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a
tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has
been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as
a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is
being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined
herein.
§ 303-88. Tobacco sales to persons under minimum legal sales age
prohibited.
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as
defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales
age; or not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco
products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales
age. The minimum legal sales age in Lancaster is age 21.
A.
Required signage:
In conformance with and in addition to MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy
of MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to
sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the Lancaster Board of Health. The notice shall be at least
48 square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit
holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner
so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the
floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post
any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or
other place used to sell hand rolled cigars must display a warning
about cigar consumption in a sign at least 50 square inches
pursuant to 940 CMR 22.06(2)(e).
(1)
B.
§ 303-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-88
1:403
§ 303-89. Tobacco product sales permit.
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post signage provided by the Lancaster Board of
Health that discloses current referral information about smoking
cessation.
(2)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used
to sell tobacco products that rely on vaporization or aerosolization,
as defined herein as "tobacco products," at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The sale of tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be
no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted
conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
(3)
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as
defined herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older. Verification is
required for any person under the age of 27.
C.
All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be faceto-
face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted
location.
D.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the Town of Lancaster without first obtaining a
tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the Lancaster Board
of Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, nonmobile
location in Lancaster are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco
products, as defined herein, at the specified location in Lancaster.
A.
As part of the first tobacco product sales permit application process,
the applicant will be provided with the Lancaster regulation. Each
applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant
has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for
instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco
product sales regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale
of tobacco and this regulation. This will not be required for the renewal
process.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
§ 303-88 LANCASTER CODE § 303-89
1:404
The fee for a tobacco product sales permit shall be determined by the
Lancaster Board of Health annually.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco products, as defined herein.
E.
Each tobacco product sales permit shall be displayed at the retail
establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of
an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must
apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until
all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are
satisfied in full.
G.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
H.
Issuance and holding of a tobacco product sales permit shall be
conditioned on an applicant's ongoing compliance with current
Massachusetts Department of Revenue requirements and policies,
including, but not limited to, minimum retail prices of tobacco products.
I.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines
has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding
permit suspensions.
J.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits.
At any given time, there shall be no more than six tobacco product
sales permits issued in Lancaster, reduced by the number of
permits not renewed pursuant to Subsection K(2) below. No permit
renewal will be denied based on the requirements of this
subsection, except any permit holder who has failed to renew his
or her permit within 30 days of expiration will be treated as a firsttime
permit applicant.
(1)
As of January 1, any permit not renewed either because a retailer
no longer sells tobacco products, as defined herein, or because a
retailer closes the retail business shall be returned to the Lancaster
Board of Health and shall be permanently retired by the Board of
Health, and the total allowable number of tobacco product sales
permits under Subsection K(1) shall be reduced by the number of
the retired permits.
(2)
A tobacco product sales permit shall not be issued to any new
applicant for a retail location within 500 feet of a public or private
elementary or secondary school as measured by a straight line from
the nearest point of the property line of the school to the nearest
(3)
K.
§ 303-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-89
1:405
§ 303-90. Cigar sales regulated.
§ 303-91. Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
flavored tobacco product, except in smoking bars and adult-only retail
tobacco stores.
§ 303-92. Sale of blunt wraps prohibited.
No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in Lancaster.
§ 303-93. Free distribution and coupon redemption.
No person shall:
point of the property line of the site of the applicant's business
premises.
Applicants who purchase an existing business that holds a current
tobacco product sales permit at the time of the sale of said business
must apply within 60 days of such sale for the permit held by
the seller if the buyer intends to sell tobacco products, as defined
herein.
(4)
As per our tobacco product definition, the use of tobacco, e-products,
e-cigarettes, vape, etc., is prohibited anywhere local regulation or MGL
c. 270, § 22, otherwise known as the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law,"
applies. This expands this use restriction to any and all e-products and
vapes, regardless of nicotine content.
L.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a
single cigar.
A.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
original factory-wrapped package of two or more cigars, unless such
package is priced for retail sale at $5 or more.
B.
This section shall not apply to:
The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of
$2.50 or more.
(1)
A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing
cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for
commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside
the boundaries of Lancaster.
(2)
C.
The Lancaster Board of Health may adjust from time to time the
amounts specified in this section to reflect changes in the applicable
Consumer Price Index by amendment of this regulation.
D.
§ 303-89 LANCASTER CODE § 303-93
1:406
§ 303-94. Out-of-package sales.
§ 303-95. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited. All humidors, including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors,
must be locked. The only self-service displays that are permissible pursuant
to United States FDA and Massachusetts Attorney General regulations are
displays that are located in retail tobacco stores that ensure that no person
younger than the MLSA is present, or permitted to enter, at any time.
Distribute or cause to be distributed any free samples of tobacco
products, as defined herein;
A.
Accept or redeem, offer to accept or redeem, or cause or hire any
person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem any coupon
that provides any tobacco product, as defined herein, without charge or
for less than the listed or nondiscounted price; or
B.
Sell a tobacco product, as defined herein, to consumers through any
multipack discounts (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or otherwise provide
or distribute to consumers any tobacco product, as defined herein,
without charge or for less than the listed or nondiscounted price in
exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product.
C.
Subsections B and C shall not apply to products, such as cigarettes,
for which there is a state law prohibiting them from being sold as loss
leaders and for which a minimum retail price is required by state law.
D.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited,
including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product, as
defined herein, for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold
or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that
contains fewer than 20 cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
A.
A retailer of liquid nicotine containers must comply with the provisions
of 310 CMR 30.000, and must provide the Lancaster Board of Health
with a written plan for disposal of said product, including disposal plans
for any breakage, spillage or expiration of the product.
B.
All retailers must comply with 940 CMR 21.05 which reads: "It shall be
an unfair or deceptive act or practice for any person to sell or distribute
nicotine in a liquid or gel substance in Massachusetts after March 15,
2016, unless the liquid or gel product is contained in a child-resistant
package that, at a minimum, meets the standards for special packaging
as set forth in 15 U.S.C. §§ 1471 through 1476 and 16 CFR § 1700 et
seq."
C.
§ 303-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-96
1:407
§ 303-96. Vending machines.
All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited.
§ 303-97. Nonresidential roll-your-own machines.
All nonresidential roll-your-own machines are prohibited.
§ 303-98. Sale of tobacco products by health care institutions
prohibited.
No health care institution located in Lancaster shall sell or cause to be sold
tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that operates
or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy, optician/
optometrist or drug store, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as
defined herein.
§ 303-99. Sale of tobacco products by educational institutions
prohibited.
No educational institution located in Lancaster shall sell or cause to be
sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational
institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property
of an educational institution.
§ 303-100. Incorporation of Attorney General regulation.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, must comply
with those provisions found at 940 CMR 21.00 ("Sale and Distribution of
Cigarettes, Smokeless Tobacco Products and Electronic Smoking Devices in
Massachusetts").
§ 303-101. Violations and penalties.
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or
his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation. The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a written warning.
In the case of a second violation within 36 months of the date of
the current violation, fine of at least $100, and the tobacco product
sales permit shall be suspended for seven consecutive business
days.
(2)
In the case of a third violation within 36 months of the date of the
current violation, a fine of at least $200, and the tobacco product
sales permit shall be suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
A.
§ 303-96 LANCASTER CODE § 303-101
1:408
§ 303-102. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, or by
filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
§ 303-103. Separate violations.
Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 303-104. Enforcement.
In the case of a fourth within a thirty-six-month period, a fine of
$300, and the tobacco product sales permit shall be suspended for
one year (365 consecutive business days).
(4)
In the case of four violations or repeated, egregious violations of
this regulation within a thirty-six-month period, the Board of Health
shall hold a hearing in accordance with Subsection D and may
permanently revoke a tobacco product sales permit.
(5)
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco product sales permit for 30
consecutive business days.
B.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her
permit is suspended shall be subject to the suspension of all Board of
Health issued permits for 30 consecutive business days.
C.
The Lancaster Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to
suspend or revoke a tobacco product sales permit, which notice shall
contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a
hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date
of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the
Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing. After
a hearing, the Lancaster Board of Health shall suspend or revoke
the tobacco product sales permit if the Board of Health finds that a
violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions
or revocations, the Board shall make the determination
notwithstanding any separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings
brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws
for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation
of the tobacco product sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco
products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this
regulation.
D.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Lancaster Board of
Health or its designated agent(s).
A.
§ 303-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-104
1:409
§ 303-105. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 303-106. Effective date.
This regulation was amended on May 9, 2018, and shall take effect on July
1, 2018.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the Lancaster Board of Health or its
designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 303-104 LANCASTER CODE § 303-106
1:410
Chapter 304
SELECT BOARD POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Other boards, committees and
commissions — See Ch. 17.
Town Meetings and Election — See Ch. 180.
§ 304-1. Purpose.
The Select Board of the Town of Lancaster, recognizing the need to codify
the traditional and accepted working relationships among the members of
the Board, between the Board and the Town Administrator, and between the
Board and other Town boards, committees, officials and citizens, and also
recognizing the need to systemize and reduce to writing the Town's public
policies and procedures, hereby undertakes to create operating procedures
for the Select Board.
§ 304-2. Nature of policies and procedures.
These policies and procedures shall contain items relating to topics that
cannot be addressed elsewhere. Subjects that would more appropriately be
addressed in a statute, bylaw or regulation shall not be addressed in this
format.
§ 304-3. Procedure for establishing policies and procedures.
§ 304-4. Authority.
The Select Board is an elected Board and derives its authority and
responsibilities from the statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
and the bylaws of the Town of Lancaster.
Draft policies and procedures shall be placed on the agenda for any
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. Drafts shall be in writing,
and may be introduced only by a member of the Board or the Town
Administrator. Upon receipt of a draft, the Board may choose to discuss
the policy immediately or schedule the discussion for a future meeting.
The Board may schedule any hearings or meetings it deems necessary
for discussion. The Board may distribute a draft for comment to
appropriate officials, as it deems necessary.
A.
The Board shall not vote on a policy at the same meeting that it is first
introduced. This rule may be waived if the Board unanimously votes
that prompt action is necessary. A unanimous vote of a three-member
Board or four votes of a five-member Board is necessary for adoption.
B.
The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
policies and procedures.
C.
§ 303-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-5
1:411
§ 304-5. Election and qualification.
The Board shall consist of three duly elected members. Before assuming
official duties, each newly elected member shall be sworn to faithful
performance of official responsibilities by the Town Clerk.
§ 304-6. Vacancies on Board.
When a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Select Board, the Board
or its remaining members shall call a Special Town Election to fill the
unexpired term or terms in accordance with the Massachusetts General
Laws.
§ 304-7. Role of Select Board.
§ 304-8. Role of Town Administrator.
§ 304-9. Board ethics.
The Board is responsible for policy development and review for
compliance. The Board works with the Town Administrator on policy
formulation.
A.
The Board is responsible for supervising the departments of the general
government that are not supervised by other elected officials. This
responsibility is delegated to the Town Administrator, and the Board
will refrain from involvement in day-to-day operations. Concerns and
questions about the operation of departments, and suggestions for
improvements should be addressed to the Town Administrator. The
responsibility for addressing these issues is thus carried out through
the Town Administrator. Select Board members may be called upon to
resolve disputes that are unable to be resolved on the staff level. The
Select Board may follow up on concerns or issues addressing these
approved policies.
B.
The Board appoints a Town Administrator who functions as the Town's
Chief Administrative Officer. The primary duties of the Town
Administrator shall be the day-to-day administration of the general
government as outlined in the position's job description. The Town
Administrator shall also assist and work under the direction of the
Select Board in the formulation of policy.
A.
The Town Administrator must maintain a close working relationship
with all members of the Board. He/she shall regularly brief the Board
on all important issues.
B.
In order to provide the Town with continuity of management and the
Town Administrator with job security, the Select Board are committed
to maintaining an employment agreement with the Town Administrator,
as permitted by statute.
C.
§ 304-5 LANCASTER CODE § 304-9
1:412
A member of the Select Board, in relation to his or her community
should:
Realize that his or her basic function is to make policy, with
administration delegated to the Town Administrator.
(1)
Realize that he or she is one of a team and should abide by, and
carry out, all Board decisions once they are made.
(2)
Be well informed concerning the duties of a Board member on both
local and state levels.
(3)
Remember that he or she represents the entire community at all
times.
(4)
Accept the office of Select Board as a means of unselfish service,
not to benefit personally or politically from his or her Board
activities.
(5)
In all appointments, avoid political patronage by judging all
candidates on merit, experience, and qualifications only.
(6)
Abide by the ethics established by the state and not use the position
to obtain inside information on matters that may benefit someone
personally.
(7)
A.
A member of the Select Board, in his or her relations with
administrative officers of the Town, should:
Endeavor to establish sound, clearly defined policies that will direct
and support the administration for the benefit of the people of the
community.
(1)
Recognize and support the administrative chain of command and
refuse to act on complaints as an individual outside the
administration.
(2)
Give the Town Administrator full responsibility for discharging his
or her disposition and solution.
(3)
B.
A member of the Select Board, in her or her relations with fellow Board
members, should:
Recognize that action at official legal meetings is binding and that
he or she alone cannot bind the Board outside of such meetings.
(1)
Not make statements or promises of how he or she will vote on
matters that will come before the Board until he or she has had an
opportunity to hear the pros and cons of the issue during a Board
meeting.
(2)
Uphold the intent of executive session and respect the privileged
communication that exists in executive session.
(3)
C.
§ 304-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-9
1:413
§ 304-10. Organization of Board.
The Chairman shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting
following the Annual Town Election. The Board at any time may remove the
Chairman. A majority vote shall constitute an election. Nominations require
no second. The immediate past Chairman shall preside as Chairman Pro
Tem until the Chairman is elected. If there is no immediate past Chairman,
the senior member in terms of current service shall serve as Chairman Pro
Tem. In the case of members with the same amount of seniority, the member
receiving more votes in the most recent election shall serve. If a vacancy
occurs in the office of Chairman, the Board shall elect a successor. The
Board shall further appoint a Clerk under the same provisions stated for the
Chairman.
§ 304-11. Responsibilities of Chairman.
The Chairman of the Board shall:
Make decisions only after all facts on a question have been
presented and discussed.
(4)
Treat with respect the rights of all members of the Board despite
differences of opinion.
(5)
Preside at all meetings of the Board. In doing so, he/she shall maintain
order in the meeting room, recognize speakers, call for votes and
preside over the discussion of agenda items.
A.
B. Sign official documents that require the signature of the Chairman.
C. Call special meetings in accordance with the Open Meeting Law.91
D. Prepare agendas with the Town Administrator.
E. Arrange orientation for new members.
Represent the Board at meetings, conferences and other gatherings
unless otherwise determined by the Board or delegated by the
Chairman.
F.
Serve as spokesman of the Board at Town Meetings and present the
Board's position unless otherwise determined by the Board or
delegated by the Chairman.
G.
Make liaison assignments and assign overview responsibilities for
project and tasks to Board members unless otherwise determined by
the Board.
H.
The Chairman shall have the same rights as other members to offer
motions and resolutions, to discuss questions and to vote thereon.
I.
91.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 304-9 LANCASTER CODE § 304-12
1:414
§ 304-12. Responsibilities of Clerk.
The Clerk of the Board shall act in the place of the Chairman during his/
her absence at meetings. Should the Chairman leave office, the Clerk shall
assume the duties of Chairman until the Board elects a new Chairman. The
Clerk is to sign approved meeting minutes.
§ 304-13. Regular Board meetings.
Regular Board Meetings are held the first and third Mondays of each month.
The Board shall not meet on days designated legal holidays.
§ 304-14. Special meetings.
A meeting called for any time other than the regular meetings shall be
known as a "special meeting." The same rules as those established for
regular meetings will apply. Special meetings may be called provided that a
majority of the members agree to meet and all Board members are notified.
§ 304-15. Working meetings.
The Board may conduct informal "working sessions" from time to time
as the situation warrants. At such meetings, which will be posted in
accordance with the Open Meeting Law,92 no official action will be taken.
A synopsis of transactions of informal meetings will be made a part of the
minutes of the following regular meeting.
§ 304-16. Meeting procedures.
Meetings are to be conducted in accordance with generally accepted
rules of parliamentary procedure and the Open Meeting Law. It is the
practice that application of such procedure is on a relatively informal
basis, due to the size of the group and the desirability of flexibility in
the expression of opinion. Robert's Rules of Order is used as a guide in
matters requiring clarification of definition.
A.
A quorum shall consist of two members of the Board. As a practical
courtesy, action on critical or controversial matters, the adoption of
policy or appointments shall be taken, whenever practicable, with the
full Board is in attendance. Actions and decisions shall be by motion,
second and vote. Split votes will be identified by name.
B.
The Town Administrator is expected to be in attendance at all meetings
of the Board. The Town Administrator shall attend in order to keep the
Board informed and advised and recommend in all matters that fall
within the jurisdiction of his office. He/she shall carry out the actions
of the Board as they relate to the conduct and administration of Town
affairs under his jurisdiction.
C.
92.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 304-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-17
1:415
§ 304-17. Executive session.
If practicable, executive sessions, other than a few minutes in duration,
will be scheduled only at the end of the open meeting. Only items clearly
allowed under the Open Meeting Law shall be included in executive session.
The mover must specify in the motion to enter executive session the reason
the session sought. A majority of the members present must vote to enter
executive session by roll call vote. The Chairman must state whether or not
the Board will reconvene into open session.
§ 304-18. Agenda procedures.
The responsibility for coordinating and planning the weekly agenda
is that of the Town Administrator. Each of the Board members and
the Town Administrator may place items on the agenda. The Town
Administrator, in consultation with the Chairman, shall schedule a
realistic time period for each appointment, interview, conference or
other scheduled item of business.
A.
All items for the agenda must be submitted to the Town Administrator
at least seven days preceding the meeting, or not later that 4:00 p.m.
on the Monday of the week preceding the meeting. Items of emergency
or strictly routine nature that develop after closing of the agenda may
be considered under "other business."
B.
Agenda items shall include:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Public comment period.
(3) Scheduled appearances and public hearings.
(4) Town Administrator's report.
(5) Approval of meeting minutes.
(6) Appointments and resignations.
(7) Administration, budget, and policy.
(8) Legal notices and publications.
(9) Licenses and permits.
(10)Communications.
(11)Other business.
(12)New business.
(13)Adjournment.
C.
Members of the Board, staff, Town Administrator or others who prepare
background material for the meeting should make an effort to have
D.
§ 304-17 LANCASTER CODE § 304-18
1:416
§ 304-19. Minutes.
§ 304-20. Appointments.
such material available for Tuesday afternoon. If background
information is insufficient or complicated or if complex memos or
motions are presented at the meeting which were not in the Board's
meeting packet, any member should feel free to request the tabling of
the item to allow careful study of the material presented or the motion
proposed.
The agenda shall be available to the public and the press at the Select
Board's office the Monday morning prior to the meeting date and
shall be posted at the Town Office bulletin board that same morning.
Copies of the minutes of the previous meeting and all important
correspondence, reports and other pertinent background materials
shall be forwarded with the agenda to Board members.
E.
The Board shall not begin discussion of or act on an agenda item after
10:00 p.m. of a regularly scheduled meeting. This rule may be waived
by a unanimous vote.
F.
The Executive Assistant shall take written notes during the meetings
and prepare typewritten minutes for the next meeting's agenda.
A.
Minutes circulated to members of the Board on or before any Friday
shall be in order for approval at the next regular meeting of the Board.
By unanimous consent, minor corrections may be made to the minutes
without advance circulation of such corrections.
B.
Minutes shall contain a full statement of all actions taken by the Board
and of the disposition of all proposals for action. Approved minutes
shall be recorded in a Minutes Book that shall be bound when filled
to capacity. Minutes of Executive Sessions shall be separately kept and
recorded in accordance with the above procedures. Minutes (other than
of executive sessions) are open for public inspection.
C.
The Board makes numerous appointments each year. Appointments
are generally made for one or three years in length. In no case shall
appointments be made for more than three years unless specifically
allowed by Town bylaw or state statute. Appointments generally are
made June 1 of each year. In the case of appointments, no second to the
nomination or motion will be required prior to Board action.
A.
Whenever possible the Board will seek variety in backgrounds,
interests, ages, sex and geographic areas of residents, so that a true
cross section of the community will be reflected. In order to attract
qualified and interested persons, vacancies will be made public as far in
advance of appointment as practicable. Vacancies could be advertised
in the local paper as well as on cable TV. Appointments should be based
on merit and qualifications rather than political merit.
B.
§ 304-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-20
1:417
Nepotism pertaining to service on boards and committees. Members of
an immediate family defined as: spouse, son, daughter, father, mother,
sister, brother, grandmother, grandfather, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew
and the following in-laws: son, daughter, brother, sister, mother and
father shall not serve together on the same board or committee.
C.
The Town Administrator will:
Provide by March 1 a list of the appointment vacancies to be filled
by the Board.
(1)
Notify the chairman of the appropriate board or committee
requesting recommendations regarding reappointment or the
filling of vacancies.
(2)
Notify incumbents and request their statements of availability
regarding reappointment.
(3)
D.
All candidates seeking appointment for the first time to a position shall
submit a short written statement or resume. This statement/resume
shall be included in the Board agenda packet mailed in advance of the
meeting. The Board may consider reappointments to positions at their
pleasure. A statement/resume will only be requested from a candidate
seeking reappointment by specific request of a member of the Board.
E.
The Board will interview candidates seeking an appointment for the
first time to the following positions as well as all elected positions being
filled due to a vacancy:
(1) Disability Commission.
(2) Historical Commission.
(3) Personnel Board.
(4) Board of Appeals.
(5) Conservation Commission.
(6) MRPC/MRTA/MJTC Positions.
(7) Recreation Committee.
(8) Forest Committee.
F.
Notice of candidates being interviewed shall be included in the agenda
mailed to the Board. The Board may request that candidates for a
position not listed above be interviewed. Those candidates not being
interviewed will be considered upon receipt of a resume/statement.
G.
Appointments will normally be made only when all members of the
Select Board are present. Appointments will be made by a majority vote
of the Select Board.
H.
§ 304-20 LANCASTER CODE § 304-21
1:418
§ 304-21. Advisory Committees of Select Board.
§ 304-22. Relations with other Town boards, committees and
commissions.
The Board may appoint standing or ad hoc advisory committees to aid
on matters under the Board's jurisdiction. The use of such advisory
committees provides greater expertise and more widespread citizen
participation in the operation of government.
A.
Charges to advisory committees shall be in writing and shall include
the work to be undertaken, the time in which it is to be accomplished
and the procedures for reporting to the Select Board. Each committee
must report in writing at least annually to the Select Board. The Select
Board's office shall be sent copies of all committee agendas and
minutes. The Board will discharge committees upon the completion
of their work. In addition, each committee shall be provided with a
Committee Handbook addressing issues such as conduct and law.
B.
The charges and membership of standing advisory committees shall
be reviewed periodically, at least annually, to assess the necessity and
desirability of continuing the committee. Reappointments will be based
on an evaluation of the member's contribution, the desirability of
widespread citizen involvement and the changing needs of the
committee and the Town.
C.
It is the policy of the Select Board to appoint qualified citizens
representing all sections of the Town to all such advisory committees.
The Board will normally appoint no individual to more than one
standing advisory committee at any one time.
D.
In order to attract qualified and interested persons, vacancies will be
made public as far in advance of an appointment as practicable.
E.
The Select Board is aware that coordination and cooperation is needed
among the Town's major boards, committees and commissions not only
in the day-to-day operations of government but also to:
(1) Set Town-wide goals and priorities,
Identify and anticipate major problems and working together
towards their resolution, and
(2)
(3) Develop a process for dealing with state and county government.
A.
Therefore, as the executive board historically responsible for the
overall leadership and coordination of Town affairs, the Select Board
will:
Regularly schedule meetings with the chairmen of major boards
and committees to carry out functions listed in Subsection A(1)
through (3) above. One meeting, shall, if possible, be held between
(1)
B.
§ 304-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-22
1:419
§ 304-23. Relations with citizens.
The Board recognizes that it represents and is accountable to all citizens
of the Town. It is the Board's policy to make every effort to strengthen
communications with citizens. Measures will be instituted to increase
citizen participation, encourage citizen input into governmental decisions
and to keep citizens informed of all actions contemplated or taken by the
Board and the Town Meeting that will affect them. To this end the following
steps will be taken:
the Annual Election and the start of Town Meeting for the purpose
of reviewing the Warrant and expediting Town Meeting.
Schedule periodic meetings of the Select Board, Finance
Committee and School Committee with Lancaster's State
Legislators to discuss legislative issues that affect the Town.
(2)
The Town Administrator is responsible for interoffice
communication in the day-to-day operations of government. The
Town Administrator shall develop a process for exchange of
information and the provision for advise and recommendations
among the boards, committees and commissions with common
interest, which shall include but not be limited to the exchange of
minutes, the establishment of a central repository for data, studies
and reports and the appointment of members or staff of boards,
committees or commissions as liaison with one another around
common projects.
(3)
Appoint certain members of the Select Board to act in the liaison
role defined above.
(4)
An individual citizen or group of citizens may request an appointment
before the Board by contacting the Town Administrator, stating
precisely the reason for the appearance and the action desired and
naming a spokesman for the group. Participants shall be given the
opportunity to make a reasonable presentation through the spokesman
and to express opinions and ask for pertinent information. Background
data shall be prepared by the boards and departments concerned prior
to the appointment insofar as possible, so that all parties involved
can have a reasonable understanding of the subject matter. Citizens
are encouraged to have written materials submitted for the Board's
meeting packet.
A.
Persons who will be directly affected by proposed Board discussion and/
or action will be notified by the Executive Assistant of the date and time
of meeting at which the matter will be discussed or acted upon by the
Board.
B.
If the Board in considering matters of citizen concern at a regular
meeting, the public will be allowed to ask questions or make statements
C.
§ 304-22 LANCASTER CODE § 304-23
1:420
§ 304-24. Employee grievances.
These are to be handled as delineated in Chapter 140, Personnel, of the
Code of the Town of Lancaster and policies and procedures. Under Chapter
140, Personnel, the Personnel Board formulates the personnel practices. If
employee grievances are brought to the attention of a Board member it shall
be Board policy to proceed as follows:
§ 304-25. Hearings before Select Board.
Hearings before the Select Board generally shall be conducted in
accordance with the following procedures. Variations may be necessary to
comply with statutory requirements applicable to particular matters. The
procedure for conducting dog and utility hearings are hereinafter outlined:
relative to the matter under consideration at the discretion of the
Chairman or upon request of any member of the Board.
All citizen questions and complaints are to be answered promptly. The
Chairman shall answer questions and concerns relating solely to the
office of Select Board promptly after consulting with the Board, or at
the discretion of the Chairman, the Town Administrator. Those needing
prompt attention by the Board should be referred to the Chairman for
inclusion in the next meeting agenda.
D.
All other questions and all complaints are to be referred to the Select
Board's office for action or recommendations. In those instances where
common sense dictates that the Board member receiving the compliant
deal directly with a department head, the Board member shall inform
the Town Administrator of the issue and its disposition.
E.
A. Select Board will not intercede or interfere with the process.
B. The employee will be shown the administrative process to be followed.
C. Any employee may request a meeting with the Board.
The Board may defer such meeting until other remedies have been
exhausted.
D.
Notice. The Executive Assistant will advertise the hearing and notify
interested persons, such as abutters, as required by statute or as
directed by the Chairman in the absence of statutory requirements.
A.
Hearings will be held in open session unless otherwise voted by the
Board in compliance with the Open Meeting Law.93
B.
The Chairman will announce the nature and purpose of the hearing,
identify the particular matter, and recite the notice given. Where
appropriate, the Chairman will outline the procedure to be followed. All
questions shall be addressed to the Chair.
C.
93.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 39, § 23B.
§ 304-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-25
1:421
§ 304-26. Town Meetings.
The order of presentation will be:
(1) Presentation by proponent.
(2) Receipt of recommendations from any Town agency or officer.
(3) Statements by proponents.
(4) Statements of opponents.
(5) Rebuttal statements by proponents and opponents.
Where appropriate, questions may be asked of any person making
a statement after the statement is finished. Questions will be
accepted first from members of the Board.
(6)
D.
The Board may permit persons not desiring to speak to record
themselves as in favor or against the proposal. In the discretion of the
Board a show of hands may be taken.
E.
At the conclusion of the hearing the Board may render its decision or
take the matter under advisement, announcing the intended date of
decision.
F.
Annual Town Meetings. The Town Meeting Warrant is, by statute, the
Select Board's Warrant. The Select Board may insert articles in the
Warrant on its own initiative or by written petition signed by 10
registered voters for the Annual Town Meeting. The Town bylaw94 sets
the date of the Annual Town Meeting for the first Monday in May. The
Select Board may, however, schedule the Annual Town Meeting for any
other date allowed by bylaw or Massachusetts General Law.
A.
Special Town Meetings.
The Select Board may call a Special Town Meeting when, in its
opinion, public necessity or municipal operations requires it. The
Select Board must call a Special Town Meeting if it receives a
written request, signed by 200 registered voters. It shall be the
practice of the Town of Lancaster to address major issues at the
Annual Town Meeting.
(1)
The Select Board may insert articles in the Warrant on their own
initiative or by written petition signed by 100 registered voters for
Special Town Meeting. The Select Board may also insert articles in
the Warrant upon request of another committee.
(2)
Notwithstanding the above, in the interest of economy of
operations and imposition on the voters the Select Board shall
strive to limit the calling of Special Town Meetings to the minimum
(3)
B.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Town Meetings and Elections.
§ 304-25 LANCASTER CODE § 304-26
1:422
Chapter 305
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Wetlands protection rules and
regulations — See Ch. 306.
§ 305-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these Stormwater Management Regulations is to protect,
maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general
welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control
the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff,
decreased groundwater recharge, and nonpoint source pollution associated
with new development, as more specifically addressed in the Stormwater
Management Bylaw of the Town of Lancaster.95
§ 305-2. Definitions.
The definitions of terms in § 170-3 of the Stormwater Management Bylaw
shall apply to terms used in these regulations.
§ 305-3. Authority.
necessary as is otherwise in the Town's best interest. In
determining whether to call a Special Town Meeting, the Select
Board may consult with other Town committees, officials, and staff
as appropriate. It is strongly recommended that the Moderator and
Town Clerk be consulted for each Town Meeting.
The regulations contained herein have been adopted by the Lancaster
Planning Board in accordance with the Town of Lancaster Stormwater
Bylaw.
A.
Nothing in these regulations is intended to replace or be in derogation
of the requirements of the Town of Lancaster Wetlands Protection
Bylaw or any rules and regulations adopted thereunder.96
B.
These stormwater regulations may be periodically amended by the
Lancaster Planning Board in accordance with the procedures outlined
in § 170-7 of the Town of Lancaster Stormwater Bylaw.
C.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Stormwater Control, Art. I, Stormwater Management.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Wetlands Protection, and Ch. 306, Wetlands Protection Rules
and Regulations.
§ 304-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-4
1:423
§ 305-4. Administration.
The Lancaster Planning Board, as the Stormwater Authority ("Authority"),
shall administer, implement and enforce these regulations.
§ 305-5. Jurisdiction.
These stormwater regulations apply to all activities in accordance with
§ 170-5, Jurisdiction, of the Town of Lancaster Stormwater Management
Bylaw.
§ 305-6. Permits and procedures.
Application.
Seven copies of a completed application for a stormwater
management permit shall be filed with the Planning Board. A
permit must be obtained prior to the commencement of any activity
that is subject to regulation under § 170-5 of the Stormwater
Management Bylaw.
(1)
A stormwater management plan (SMP), which meets the design
requirements of the bylaw, shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and submitted to the Planning Board. The
SMP shall be designed to ensure compliance with the bylaw and
the permit, and to ensure that the Massachusetts Surface Water
Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00, are met in all seasons and
throughout the life of the system.
(2)
The plan shall, at a minimum, be designed to provide sufficient
information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
affected areas, the potential impacts to the proposed development
on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of
measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff.
(3)
The Authority shall make the final decision on what stormwater
management option is appropriate in a given situation. The
Authority will consider natural features, proximity of site to water
bodies and wetland resource areas, extent of impervious surfaces,
size of the site, the types of stormwater management structures,
and potential need for ongoing maintenance activities when
making this decision. The SMP shall remain on file with the
Authority and shall be an ongoing requirement.
(4)
Projects involving the construction of a single-family home, an
addition and/or an accessory structure to a residential use
requiring the disturbance of one or more acres of land, but less
than two acres of land area, may, at the applicant's option, file a
letter of intent to be covered by a general stormwater management
permit issued by the Authority. This letter of intent will satisfy
the conditions of § 305-6A(1) through (4), and a public hearing
is not required under § 305-6C. Coverage under the permit will
(5)
A.
§ 305-4 LANCASTER CODE § 305-6
1:424
§ 305-7. Stormwater management plan.
The stormwater management plan contents shall be as follows:
commence upon receipt of the letter of intent by the Authority or its
agent and will expire within three years. A general permit may not
be applied to more than one contiguous property under common
ownership.
Standards. Projects shall meet the standards of the Massachusetts
Stormwater Management Policy, as are in effect at the time that the
application is filed.
B.
Public hearing.
The Authority shall hold a public hearing within 21 days of the
receipt of a complete application and shall take final action within
21 days from the time of the close of the hearing unless such time
is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Authority.
(1)
The applicant shall provide notice of the public hearing by
publication, posting and by first-class mailings to abutters within
300 feet of the subject property at least seven days prior to the
hearing. The Authority shall make the application available for
inspection by the public during business hours at the Town Hall.
(2)
C.
Information requests. The applicant shall submit all additional
information requested by the Authority to issue a decision on the
application.
D.
Action. The Authority may:
Approve the stormwater management permit application and issue
a permit if it finds that the proposed plan will protect water
resources and meets the objectives and requirements of the bylaw;
(1)
Approve the stormwater management permit application and issue
a permit with conditions, modifications or restrictions that the
Authority determines are required to ensure that the project will
protect water resources and meet the objectives and requirements
of the bylaw;
(2)
Disapprove the stormwater management permit application and
deny the permit if it finds that the proposed plan will not protect
water resources or fails to meet the objectives and requirements
of the bylaw, or if it finds that the applicant has failed to submit
sufficient information to show that the proposed plan will protect
water resources and meets the objectives and requirements of the
bylaw.
(3)
E.
The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for operation and
maintenance;
A.
§ 305-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-7
1:425
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and emergency
repairs;
B.
C. Locus map;
D. Drainage area map showing drainage area and stormwater flow paths;
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures, including swales
and ponds;
E.
A list of all existing and proposed easements with the purpose and
location of each;
F.
G. Location of existing and proposed utilities;
Location of all existing and proposed stormwater utilities, including
structures, pipes, swales and detention basins;
H.
I. Topographic survey showing existing and proposed contours;
Soils investigation, including borings or test pits, for areas where
construction of infiltration practices will occur;
J.
Description of all watercourses, impoundment, and wetlands on or
adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows;
K.
L. Delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains, if applicable;
Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwater elevation
(October to May) in areas to be used for stormwater retention,
detention or infiltration;
M.
Existing and proposed locations, cross sections and profiles of all
brooks, streams, drainage swells and the method of stabilization;
N.
Proposed improvements, including location of buildings or other
structures, impervious surfaces and storm drainage facilities, if
applicable;
O.
Structural detail for all components of the proposed drainage systems
and stormwater management facilities;
P.
An erosion and sediment control plan, as described in § 305-8 of these
regulations;
Q.
Timing schedules and sequences of development, including clearing,
stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading and vegetative
stabilization;
R.
An operation and maintenance plan, as described in § 305-9 of these
regulations;
S.
Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction
specifications and typicals; and
T.
§ 305-7 LANCASTER CODE § 305-7
1:426
§ 305-8. Erosion and sediment control plan.
An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted as part of the
application for a stormwater management permit. The plan shall contain
sufficient information to describe the nature and purpose of the proposed
development, pertinent conditions of the site and the adjacent areas, and
proposed erosion and sedimentation controls. The applicant shall submit
such material as is necessary to show that the proposed development will
comply with the design requirements listed in Subsection A below.
U. Location of areas to be cleared of more than 30% of the vegetation.
Design requirements. The design requirements of the erosion and
sediment control plan are:
(1) Minimize total area of disturbance;
(2) Sequence activities to minimize simultaneous areas of disturbance;
Minimize peak rate of runoff in accordance with the Massachusetts
Stormwater Policy;
(3)
Minimize soil erosion and control sedimentation during
construction, provided that prevention of erosion is preferred over
sedimentation control;
(4)
(5) Divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas;
(6) Maximize groundwater recharge;
Install and maintain all erosion and sediment control measures
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good
engineering practices;
(7)
(8) Prevent off-site transport of sediment;
Protect and manage on- and off-site material storage areas
(overburden and stockpiles of dirt, borrow areas, or other areas
used solely by the permitted project are considered a part of the
project);
(9)
Comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations, including waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic
system regulations, and air quality requirements, including dust
control;
(10)
Prevent significant alteration of habitats mapped by the
Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program
as endangered, threatened or of special concern, estimated
habitats of rare wildlife and certified vernal pools, and priority
habitats of rare species from the proposed activities;
(11)
Institute interim and permanent stabilization measures, which
shall be instituted on a disturbed area as soon as practicable but
(12)
A.
§ 305-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-8
1:427
no more than 14 days after construction activity has temporarily or
permanently ceased on that portion of the site;
(13)Properly manage on-site construction and waste materials; and
(14)Prevent off-site vehicle tracking of sediments.
Erosion and sediment control plan contents. The plan shall contain the
following information:
Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, applicant,
and person(s) or firm(s) preparing the plan;
(1)
Title, date, North arrow, names of abutters, scale, legend, and locus
map;
(2)
Location and description of natural features, including:
Watercourses and water bodies, wetland resource areas and all
floodplain information, including the one-hundred-year flood
elevation based upon the most recent Flood Insurance Rate
Map, or as calculated by a professional engineer for areas not
assessed on these maps;
(a)
Existing vegetation, including tree lines, canopy layer, shrub
layer, and ground cover, and trees with a caliper of 12 inches
or larger, noting specimen trees and forest communities; and
(b)
Habitats mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and
Endangered Species Program as endangered, threatened or
of special concern, estimated habitats of rare wildlife and
certified vernal pools, and priority habitats of rare species
within 500 feet of any construction activity.
(c)
(3)
Lines of existing abutting streets showing drainage and driveway
locations and curb cuts;
(4)
(5) Existing soils, volume and nature of imported soil materials;
Topographical features, including existing and proposed contours
at intervals no greater than two feet with spot elevations provided
when needed;
(6)
Surveyed property lines showing distances and monument
locations, all existing and proposed easements, rights-of-way, and
other encumbrances, the size of the entire parcel, and the
delineation and number of square feet of the land area to be
disturbed;
(7)
Drainage patterns and approximately slopes anticipated after
major grading activities (construction phase grading plans);
(8)
Location and details of erosion and sediment control measures
with a narrative of the construction sequencing/phasing of the
(9)
B.
§ 305-8 LANCASTER CODE § 305-8
1:428
§ 305-9. Operation and maintenance plan.
An operation and maintenance plan (OMP) is required at the time of
application for all projects. The OMP shall be designed to ensure
compliance with the permit, the bylaw and the Massachusetts Surface
Water Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00, and that they are met in all
seasons and throughout the life of the system. The Planning Board shall
make the final decision of what maintenance option is appropriate in a given
situation. The Planning Board will consider natural features, proximity of
site to water bodies and wetlands, extent of impervious surfaces, size of
the site, the types of stormwater management structures, and potential
need for ongoing maintenance activities when making this decision. The
OMP shall remain on file with the Planning Board and shall be an ongoing
requirement. The OMP shall include:
project, including both operation and maintenance for structural
and nonstructural measures, interim grading, and materials
stockpiling areas;
Path and mechanism to divert uncontaminated water around
disturbed areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
(10)
Location and description of industrial discharges, including
stormwater discharges from dedicated asphalt plans and dedicated
concrete plants, which are covered by this permit;
(11)
Stormwater runoff calculations in accordance with the Department
of Environmental Protection's Stormwater Management Policy;
(12)
Location and description of and implementation schedule for
temporary and permanent seeding, vegetative controls, and other
stabilization measures;
(13)
A description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site. The plan shall include a description of controls to
reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill
prevention and response;
(14)
A description of provisions for phasing the project where one acre
of area or greater is to be altered or disturbed;
(15)
Plans must be stamped and certified by a qualified professional
engineer registered in Massachusetts or a certified professional in
erosion and sediment control; and
(16)
(17)Such other information as is required by the Planning Board.
Operation and maintenance plan contents.
(1) The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
(2) Maintenance agreements that specify:
A.
§ 305-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-9
1:429
§ 305-10. Inspections and site supervision.
The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for
operation and maintenance.
(a)
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and
emergency repairs.
(b)
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures, including
swales and ponds.
(c)
(d) A list of easements with the purpose and location of each.
(e) The signature(s) of the owner(s).
Changes to operation and maintenance plans.
The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify
the Planning Board of changes in ownership or assignment of
financial responsibility.
(1)
The maintenance schedule in the maintenance agreement may
be amended to achieve the purposes of this bylaw by mutual
agreement of the Planning Board and the responsible parties.
Amendments must be in writing and signed by all responsible
parties. Responsible parties shall include owner(s), persons with
financial responsibility, and persons with operational responsibility.
(2)
B.
Pre-construction meeting. Prior to starting any clearing, excavation,
construction or land-disturbing activity, the applicant, the applicant's
technical representative, the general contractor or any other person
with authority to make changes to the project shall meet with the
Planning Board to review the permitted plans and their
implementation.
A.
Board inspection. The Planning Board, or its designated agent, shall
make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein
the work fails to comply with the stormwater management permit
as approved. The permit and associated plans for grading, stripping,
excavating and filling work, bearing the signature of approval of the
Planning Board, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of
the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the
Planning Board at least two working days before each of the following
events:
(1) Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized;
(2) Site clearing has been substantially completed;
(3) Rough grading has been substantially completed;
(4) Final grading has been substantially completed;
B.
§ 305-9 LANCASTER CODE § 305-10
1:430
§ 305-11. Extension.
A stormwater management permit shall be valid for three years from the
date the permit is issued (except that compliance with the operation and
maintenance plan shall be a continuing and ongoing requirement). The
Authority may grant extensions for additional time upon written request for
renewal no later than 30 days prior to expiration of the permit.
§ 305-12. Certificate of completion.
Upon the completion of the activities allowed under a stormwater
management permit (not including the continuing and ongoing requirement
of compliance with the operation and maintenance plan), the applicant
shall notify the Authority and request a final inspection and certificate
of completion. The applicant shall submit an as-built plan prepared by
a professional land surveyor along with certification from a registered
professional engineer that all construction has been done in accordance
with the approved SMP. The Authority may hire its own consultant to advise
on completion, at a cost to be received from the applicant before issuance
of the certificate of completion.
§ 305-13. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of these regulations is
held invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other
provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
(5) Close of the construction season; and
Final landscaping (permanent stabilization) and project final
completion.
(6)
Permittee inspections. The permittee or his/her agent shall conduct and
document inspections of all erosion and sediment control measures no
less than weekly or as specified in the permit and prior to and following
anticipated storm events. The purpose of these inspections will be to
determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for
maintenance or additional control measures. The permittee or his/her
agent shall submit monthly reports to the Planning Board or designated
agent in a format approved by the Planning Board.
C.
Access permission. To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized
by the owner or other party in control of the property, the Planning
Board, its agents, officers and employees may enter upon privately
owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this
bylaw and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys
or sampling as the Planning Board deems reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with the permit.
D.
§ 305-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-14
1:431
§ 305-14. When effective.
These regulations shall take effect upon approval of the Lancaster Planning
Board.
Chapter 306
WETLANDS PROTECTION RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 215.
§ 306-1. General provisions.
Authority and purpose: These regulations are promulgated by the Town
of Lancaster Conservation Commission to which authority is granted
under the Lancaster Wetlands Protection Bylaw97 (hereinafter called
the "bylaw"). These regulations complement the bylaw and provide
additional details in order to implement it. The purpose of the bylaw
is to protect the wetlands, wildlife, water resources, flood-prone areas,
and adjoining upland areas in the Town of Lancaster by controlling
activities deemed by the Conservation Commission to have a significant
or cumulative effect on resource area values, as outlined in § 215-1 of
the Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
A.
The definition of terms in § 215-3, Definitions, of the bylaw shall apply
to terms used in these regulations.
B.
These regulations apply to all activities in accordance with § 215-2,
Jurisdiction, of the bylaw.
C.
The Conservation Commission, in its judgment, may waive strict
compliance with the bylaw if, after an alternatives analysis shows that
there are no feasible alternatives that would allow the proposed activity
to proceed in compliance with said regulations, an unconstitutional
taking without compensation has occurred, or there is an overriding
public interest.
D.
The exemptions and exceptions that are listed in § 215-5 of the bylaw
shall apply in these regulations.
E.
In cases where a waiver is granted, the Conservation Commission may
request that the applicant provide mitigation to offset impacts to the
wetlands resource areas. Such mitigation must serve the interest of
the bylaw by maintaining or improving the natural functioning of the
resource area or its associated upland buffer zone or riverfront area.
F.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Wetlands Protection.
§ 305-14 LANCASTER CODE § 306-2
1:432
§ 306-2. Application and fees.
Written application shall be filed with the Conservation Commission to
perform activities affecting resource areas protected by the Lancaster
Wetlands Protection Bylaw98 (hereinafter "bylaw") and under which
these regulations are promulgated. The permit application shall include
such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on the
resource areas protected by the bylaw. No activities shall commence
without receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to the
bylaw.
A.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may accept as the application
and plans under this bylaw any application and plans filed under the
Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR
10.00), but the Commission is not obliged to do so.
B.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an
area is subject to the bylaw may in writing request a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination of applicability
(RDA) or abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD)
filed under the Act shall include information and plans as are deemed
necessary by the Commission.
C.
At the time of an application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee. The
fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act and
regulations.
D.
Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Commission may impose reasonable
fees upon applicants for the purpose of securing outside consultants,
including engineers, wetlands scientists, wildlife biologists or other
experts in order to aid in the review of proposed projects. Such funds
shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer, who shall create an account
specifically for this purpose. Additional consultant fees may be
requested where the requisite review is more expensive than originally
calculated or where new information requires additional consultant
services. Only costs relating to consultant work done in connection with
a project for which a consultant fee has been collected shall be paid
from this account, and expenditures may be made at the sole discretion
of the Commission.
E.
Any consultant hired under this provision shall be selected by, and
report exclusively to, the Commission. The Commission shall provide
applicants with written notice of the selection of a consultant,
identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the
applicant, and a request for payment of that fee. Notice shall be deemed
to have been given on the date it is mailed or delivered. The applicant
may withdraw the application or request within five business days of
the date notice is given without incurring any costs or expenses.
F.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Wetlands Protection.
§ 306-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-2
1:433
§ 306-3. Notice and hearings.
The entire fee must be received before the initiation of consulting
services. Failure by the applicant to pay the requested consultant fee
within 10 business days of the request for payment shall be cause for
the Commission to declare the application administratively incomplete
and deny the permit without prejudice, except in the case of an appeal.
The Commission shall inform the applicant and the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) of such a decision in writing.
G.
The applicant may appeal the selection of an outside consultant to
the Board of Selectmen, who may disqualify the consultant only on
the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or is not
properly qualified. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either
an educational degree or three or more years of practice in the field
at issue, or a related field. The applicant shall make such an appeal
in writing, which must be received within 10 business days of the
date that request for consultant fees was made by the Commission.
Such appeal shall extend the applicable time limits for action upon the
application.
H.
Any person filing a permit (notice of intent) with the Conservation
Commission shall at the time give written notice by certified mail
(return postage requested) or by hand delivery to all abutters at their
mailing addresses on the most recent applicable tax list of the
assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or
private street or way, and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the
property line of the applicant, including any in another municipality or
across a body of water. The notice shall state a brief description of the
project or other proposal and the date of any Commission hearing or
meeting date if known. The notice to abutters also shall include a copy
of the application or request, with plans, or shall state where copies
may be examined and obtained by abutters. An affidavit of the person
proving such notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall
be filed with the Commission.
A.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any permit
application, RDA or ANRAD with written notice given at the expense
of the applicant, at least five business days prior to the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed permit application, RDA or ANRAD unless
an extension is authorized by the applicant. The Commission shall
have authority to continue the hearing to a specific date announced at
the hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing, which may include the
need for additional information from the applicant or others as deemed
necessary by the Commission in its discretion, based on comments and
recommendations of the boards and officials listed in § 306-4.
C.
§ 306-2 LANCASTER CODE § 306-3
1:434
§ 306-4. Coordination with other boards.
Any person filing a permit application, RDA or ANRAD with the
Conservation Commission shall provide 10 copies thereof at the same time,
by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to the
Conservation Agent. The Agent will, in turn, distribute copies to the Board
of Selectmen, Planning Board, Board of Appeals, Board of Health and
Building Commissioner. A copy shall be provided in the same manner to the
Conservation Commission of the adjoining municipality, if the application or
RDA/ANRAD pertains to property within 300 feet of that municipality. An
affidavit of the person providing notice, with a copy of the notice mailed
or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission. The Commission shall not
take final action until the above boards and officials have had 14 days from
receipt of notice to file written comments and recommendations with the
Commission, which the Commission shall take into account but which shall
not be binding on the Commission. The applicant shall have the right to
receive any comments and recommendations, and to respond to them at a
hearing of the Commission, prior to final action.
§ 306-5. Security.
As part of a permit issued under the Bylaw, in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the
Conservation Commission may require that the performance and
observance of the conditions imposed thereunder (including conditions
requiring mitigation work) be secured wholly or in part by one or both of
the methods described below:
§ 306-6. Enforcement.
The Commission shall issue its permit, other order or determination
within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an
extension is authorized by the applicant.
D.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine its hearing
under this bylaw with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
E.
By a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities under
a written third-party escrow arrangement, or other undertaking of
financial responsibility sufficient, in the opinion of the Commission,
to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a certificate of
compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit.
A.
By accepting a conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner
of record, running with the land to the benefit of this municipality
whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before
any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method
shall be used only with the consent of the applicant.
B.
§ 306-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-6
1:435
§ 306-7. Large land development and appurtenances.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise
alter resource areas protected by the bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to
restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply
with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
A.
The Conservation Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall
have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United
States and the commonwealth.
B.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce the bylaw, its
regulations, and permits issued thereunder by letters, phone calls,
electronic communication and other informal methods, violation
practices, noncriminal citations under MGL c. 40, § 21D, and civil and
criminal court actions. Any person who violates provisions of this bylaw
may be ordered to restore the property to its original condition and take
other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be
fined, or both.
C.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and Town
Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon
request of the Commission, the Police Chief shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
D.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
E.
Any person who violates any provision of the bylaw, regulations,
permits or administrative orders issued thereunder shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 each day, or portion thereof, during
which a violation continues. In addition, any unauthorized fill or other
alteration that remains in place shall constitute a separate offense.
F.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the
Commission may issue citations with specific penalties pursuant to the
noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, which
has been adopted by the Town of Lancaster in Chapter 1, Article I,
Noncriminal Disposition, of the Code of the Town of Lancaster.
G.
Notice of intent plan contents. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to describe the nature and purpose of the proposed
development, pertinent conditions of the site and the adjacent areas.
The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for
operation and maintenance.
(1)
A.
§ 306-6 LANCASTER CODE § 306-7
1:436
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and
emergency repairs.
(2)
Locus map, taken at 1:25 from USGS. This map should include
abutters' properties.
(3)
Delineation of all wetlands, rivers, streams, brooks, intermittent
streams, ponds, lakes and all riparian areas.
(4)
Lines of delineation of twenty-five-foot "no-build" zone; 50 feet from
wetlands, 100 feet from wetlands and 200 feet from wetlands.
(5)
Drainage area map showing drainage area and stormwater flow
paths.
(6)
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures, including
swales and ponds.
(7)
A list of all existing and proposed easements with the purpose and
location of each.
(8)
(9) Location of existing and proposed underground utilities.
Location of all existing and proposed stormwater utilities, including
structures, swales and detention basins and easements.
(10)
(11)Topographic survey showing existing and proposed contours.
Soils investigation, including soil types, borings or test pits, for
areas where construction of infiltration practices will occur.
(12)
Description of all watercourses, impoundment, and wetlands on or
adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows.
(13)
(14)Delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains, if applicable.
Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwater
elevation (October to May) in areas to be used for stormwater
retention, detention or infiltration.
(15)
Existing and proposed locations, profiles of all brooks, streams,
drainage swales and the method of stabilization.
(16)
Proposed improvements, including location of buildings,
percentage of impervious surfaces and storm drainage facilities, if
applicable.
(17)
Structural detail for all components of the proposed drainage
systems and stormwater management facilities.
(18)
An erosion and sediment control plan, as described in § 306-8 of
these regulations.
(19)
§ 306-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-7
1:437
Timing schedules and sequences of development, including
clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading and
vegetative stabilization.
(20)
An operation and maintenance plan, as described in § 306-7C of
these regulations.
(21)
Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction
specifications.
(22)
(23)Location of areas to be cleared of more than 30% of the vegetation.
Plans must be stamped and certified by a qualified Professional
Engineer registered in Massachusetts.
(24)
An erosion and sediment control plan. An erosion and sediment control
plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a notice of intent
permit. The plan shall contain sufficient information to describe the
proposed erosion and sedimentation controls.
Design requirements. The design requirements of the erosion and
sediment control plan are:
(a) No disturbance to any wetland resource area.
(b) Reduced impervious area (redevelopment only).
Sequence activities to minimize simultaneous areas of
disturbance.
(c)
(d) Use best management practices.
(e) Show review of low-impact development.
Minimize peak rate of runoff in accordance with the
Massachusetts stormwater policy.
(f)
Minimize soil erosion and control sedimentation during
construction, provided that prevention of erosion is preferred
over sedimentation control.
(g)
(h) Divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas.
(i) Maximize groundwater recharge.
Install and maintain all erosion and sediment control measures
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good
engineering practices.
(j)
(k) Prevent off-site transport of sediment.
Protect and manage on- and off-site material storage areas
(overburden and stockpiles of dirt, borrow areas, or other
areas used solely by the permitted project are considered a
part of the project).
(l)
(1)
B.
§ 306-7 LANCASTER CODE § 306-7
1:438
Comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations, including waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic
system regulations, and air quality requirements, including
dust control.
(m)
Prevent significant alteration of habitats mapped by the
Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered Species
Program as endangered, threatened or of special concern,
estimated habitats of rare wildlife and certified vernal pools,
and priority habitats of rare species from the proposed
activities.
(n)
Institute interim and permanent stabilization measures, which
shall be instituted on a disturbed areas as soon as practicable
but no more than 14 days after construction activity has
temporarily or permanently ceased on that portion of the site.
(o)
(p) Properly manage on-site construction and waste materials.
(q) Prevent off-site vehicle tracking of sediments.
Erosion and sediment control plan contents. The Plan shall contain
the following information:
Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner,
applicant, and person(s) or firm(s) preparing the plan;
(a)
Title, date, North arrow, names of abutters, scale, legend, and
locus map;
(b)
Location and description of natural features, including:
Watercourses and water bodies, wetland resource areas
and all floodplain information, including the one-hundredyear
flood elevation based upon the most recent Flood
Insurance Rate Map, or as calculated by a professional
engineer for areas not assessed on these maps;
[1]
Existing vegetation, including tree lines, canopy layer,
shrub layer, and ground cover, and trees with a caliper
of 12 inches or large, noting specimen trees and forest
communities;
[2]
Habitats mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage
and Endangered Species Program as endangered,
threatened or of special concern, estimated habitats of
rare wildlife and certified vernal pools, and priority
habitats of rare species within 500 feet of any construction
activity.
[3]
(c)
Lines of existing abutting streets showing drainage and
driveway locations and curb cuts within the wetland buffers;
(d)
(2)
§ 306-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-7
1:439
Existing soils, volume and nature of imported soil materials
within the wetland buffers;
(e)
Topographical features, including existing and proposed
contours at intervals no greater than two feet with spot
elevations provided when needed;
(f)
Surveyed property lines showing distances and monument
locations, and the delineation and number of square feet of the
land area to be disturbed;
(g)
Drainage patterns and approximately slopes anticipated after
major grading activities (construction phase grading plans);
(h)
Location and details of erosion and sediment control measures
with a narrative of the construction sequencing/phasing of
the project, including both operation and maintenance for
structural and nonstructural measures, interim grading, and
materials stockpiling areas within the wetland buffers;
(i)
Path and mechanism to divert uncontaminated water around
disturbed areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
(j)
Location and description of industrial discharges, including
stormwater discharges from dedicated asphalt plans and
dedicated concrete plants, which are covered by this permit;
(k)
Stormwater runoff calculations in accordance with the
Department of Environmental Protection's stormwater
management policy;
(l)
Location and description of and implementation schedule for
temporary and permanent seeding, vegetative controls, and
other stabilization measures;
(m)
A description of construction and waste materials expected
to be stored onsite. The plan shall include a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(n)
A description of provisions for phasing the project where one
acre of area or greater is to be altered or disturbed;
(o)
Plans must be stamped and certified by a qualified professional
engineer registered in Massachusetts or a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control; and
(p)
Such other information as is required by the Conservation
Commission.
(q)
Operation and maintenance plan. An operation and maintenance plan
(OMP) is required at the time of application for all projects. The OMP
C.
§ 306-7 LANCASTER CODE § 306-7
1:440
shall be designed to ensure compliance with the permit, the bylaw and
the Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00,
and that they are met in all seasons and throughout the life of the
system. The Conservation Commission shall make the final decision
of what maintenance option is appropriate in a given situation, and
will consider natural features, proximity of site to water bodies and
wetlands, extent of impervious surfaces, size of the site, the types of
stormwater management structures, and potential need for ongoing
maintenance activities when making this decision. The OMP shall
remain on file as a part of the order of conditions and shall be a
perpetual condition.
The OMP shall include long-term pollution prevention, including:
(a) Good housekeeping practices.
(b) Vehicle washing controls.
(c) Spill prevention and response plans.
Provisions for maintenance of lawns, gardens, and other
landscaped areas.
(d)
(e) Provisions for operations and maintenance of septic systems.
Requirements for storage and use of fertilizers, herbicides and
pesticides.
(f)
Snow removal and disposal plans relative to wetlands resource
areas.
(g)
(h) Winter road salts and/or sand use and storage restrictions.
(i) Street sweeping schedules and disposals.
Provisions for prevention of illicit discharges to the stormwater
management system.
(j)
(1)
Operation and maintenance plan contents.
(a) The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
Maintenance agreements that specify:
The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for
operation and maintenance.
[1]
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and
emergency repairs.
[2]
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures,
including swales and ponds.
[3]
[4] A list of easements with the purpose and location of each.
(b)
(2)
§ 306-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-7
1:441
[5] The signature(s) of the owner(s).
Changes to operation and maintenance plans.
The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must
notify the Conservation Commission of changes in ownership
or assignment of financial responsibility.
(a)
The maintenance schedule in the maintenance agreement may
be amended to achieve the purposes of this bylaw by mutual
agreement of the Conservation Commission and the
responsible parties. Amendments must be in writing and
signed by all responsible parties. Responsible parties shall
include the owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and
persons with operational responsibility.
(b)
(3)
Inspections and site supervision.
Preconstruction meeting: Prior to starting any clearing, excavation,
construction or land-disturbing activity, the applicant, the
applicant's technical representative, the general contractor or any
other person with authority to make changes to the project shall
meet with the Conservation Agent to review the permitted plans
and their implementation.
(1)
Board inspection: The Conservation Commission, or its agent, shall
make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve
that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the order of condition as
approved.
(2)
D.
Commercial and housing development addendum. On home/
commercial development projects with wetlands/riverfront buffers,
wildlife easements or other restrictions, orders of conditions will be
written to include the following:
Mark buffers/restrictions before any residential or commercial
project commences.
(1)
Post a sign at all residential property entrances that informs
potential buyers of wetland restrictions that may affect their
homeownership. This disclaimer must also be clearly included in
all promotional material, including advertising and marketing
collateral.
(2)
The developer will be required to have from the home purchaser a
signed affidavit stating that the purchase understands that he/she
is purchasing property with wetlands, riparian areas or wetlands
buffers on the property. A copy of this affidavit will be submitted to
the Lancaster Conservation Commission within two weeks of sale.
(3)
E.
§ 306-7 LANCASTER CODE § 306-8
1:442
§ 306-8. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
permit application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative
effect upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw. Failure to
provide adequate evidence to the Conservation Commission supporting this
burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or
grant a permit with conditions.
§ 306-9. Appeals.
A decision of the Conservation Commission shall be reviewable in the
Superior court in accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
§ 306-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit,
approval or determination which previously has been issued.
§ 306-11. Effective date.
These regulations shall take effect upon approval of the Lancaster
Conservation Commission.
Chapter A400
ACTS AND RESOLVES
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 6 5-4-2009 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
ATM, Art. 7 5-4-2009 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
ATM, Art. 12 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 13 5-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
§ 306-8 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:443
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 16 5-4-2009 Farm preservation Ch. 66
Conservation
Commission
7-2009 Wetland Protection
Rules and
Regulations
Ch. 306
STM, Art. 5 10-5-2009 Numbering of
buildings amendment
Ch. 30
STM, Art. 6 10-5-2009 Personnel Ch. 140
STM, Art. 7 10-5-2009 Recreation
Committee
amendment
Ch. 17, Art. VII
Board of
Health
1-7-2010 Board of Health
Regulations
Ch. 303
ATM, Art. 12 5-3-2010 Energy conservation:
Stretch Energy Code
Ch. 63, Art. I
ATM, Art. 16 5-3-2010 Personnel
amendment
Ch. 140
ATM, Art. 18 5-3-2010 Water withdrawal Ch. 212
ATM, Art. 21 5-3-2010 Recreation
Committee
amendment
Ch. 17, Art. VII
STM, Art. 1 10-4-2010 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
ATM, Art. 10 5-2-2011 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
ATM, Art. 14 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 15 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 16 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 17 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 18 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 19 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 20 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 21 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 22 5-2-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Planning
Board
6-13-2011 Subdivision rules and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 301
ATM, Art. 12 5-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 13 5-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
§ DL-1 LANCASTER CODE § DL-1
DT:444
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 16 5-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 18 5-6-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
STM, Art. 4 10-28-2013 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
STM, Art. 5 10-28-2013 General Law
acceptance
Ch. A400
STM, Art. 7 10-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
STM, Art. 8 10-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
STM, Art. 9 10-28-2013 Sex offenders:
residency restrictions
Ch. 159
ATM, Art. 10 10-28-2013 Animal control Ch. 10
ATM, Art. 14 5-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 15 5-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 17 5-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 14 5-4-2015 Recreation
Committee
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. VII
ATM, Art. 15 5-4-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
Board of
Health
8-28-2015 Board of Health
regulations
amendment
Ch. 303
Board of
Health
11-4-2015 Board of Health
regulations
amendment
Ch. 303
ATM, Art. 17 5-2-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 19 5-2-2016 Town Meetings and
elections: term of
Moderator
Ch. 180, Art. II
ATM, Art. 20 5-2-2016 Council on Aging Ch. 17, Art. IX
Board of
Health
9-7-2016 Board of Health
regulations
amendment
Ch. 303
ATM, Art. 7 5-1-2017 Revolving funds Ch. 150
ATM, Art. 12 5-1-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 14 5-1-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
STM, Art. 6 10-2-2017 General Law
Acceptance
Ch. A400
STM, Art. 7 10-2-2017 General Law
Acceptance
Ch. A400
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:445
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM, Art. 1 11-6-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
Board of
Health
5-2018 Stormwater
Management Rules
and Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 305
ATM, Art. 11 5-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 12 5-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 13 5-7-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220
ATM, Art. 14 5-7-2018 Marijuana
Establishments
Ch. 128
Board of
Health
5-9-2018 Board of Health
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 303
§ DL-1 LANCASTER CODE § DL-1
DT:446