1
BY-LAWS OF THE TOWN OF MONTAGUE
ARTICLE 1
WARRANTS
Section 1: All warrants for Town Meeting shall be served by posting attested copies thereof in some conspicuous place in each of the post offices of the Town and in each of the public libraries of the Town, and the Town office building, and on the Town’s website at least seven days before said meeting. (Amended at ATM 5-2-15)
ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETINGS
Section 2: The annual meeting for the election of Town officers required by law to be elected by ballot shall be held on the first Monday in March of each year. *(This section was rescinded at a Special Town Meeting on 11/15/1973, by the following act passed by the General Court on February 22, 1974.)
Chapter 9, Acts of 1974, "An act relative to the dates of the Annual Town Election and Town Meeting held in the Town of Montague". Be it enacted as follows: Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law or by-law of the Town of Montague to the contrary, said Town shall hold the Annual Town Meeting for the election of Town officers and the determination of such matters as by law or vote of the Town are required to be elected or determined by official ballot on the third Monday in May of each year. All other business shall be considered at a meeting to be held on the first Saturday of May of each year. Separate warrants may be posted for said election and business meetings.
ARTICLE II
FINANCES, TAXES, AND APPROPRIATIONS
Section 1: The financial year shall end on the 31st day of January in each year. *(Chapter 44, Section 56 M.G.L. states fiscal years shall begin on July 1, and end on June 30th each year.)
Section 2: The Moderator of the Annual Meeting of the Town shall appoint an appropriation committee consisting of not less than 5 but not more than 7 residents who have reached the age of majority, who hold no paid Town office, which shall meet and investigate the cost of maintenance and expenditures of the different departments of the Town and recommend in detail the amounts to be appropriated for each department for the ensuing year. They shall also consider articles in Town warrants requiring the appropriation of money and shall make a written report to the meetings considering such articles. The committee members shall be initially appointed as follows: 3 for three years, 3 for two years, 3 for one year, and for a three-year period thereafter, and shall have the power to fill vacancies which occur in their number during their term of office. (Amended at STM 2-28-13)
Section 3: Orders upon the Town Treasurer for the disbursement of the appropriations made by the Town, shall be signed by a majority of the Selectmen. No such order shall be drawn in payment or satisfaction of any claim upon the Town, until such claim has been approved by a majority of the Board of Selectmen in writing.
Section 4: No order or draft, except such sums as he may be required to pay under the laws of the Commonwealth, shall be paid by the Treasurer unless drawn as provided in the preceding section: nor shall any such order or draft be paid unless it specifies out of what fund or appropriation it is to be paid, and when so drawn he shall not pay thereon more than the balance remaining to the credit of such fund or appropriation, and whenever any such fund or appropriation is exhausted, he shall give immediate notice thereof to the Selectmen.
Section 5: Every officer or agent, who receives any money belonging to the Town shall at the end of each month, pay over to the Treasurer all such money in his hands, with an itemized statement of the source from which he received the same, unless otherwise provided by law.
Section 6: Capital Improvements Committee: There shall be a Capital Improvements Committee consisting of one member appointed by and from the Planning Board, and five additional members to be appointed by the Moderator, with powers and duties to include (a) to conduct an annual review of the capital improvements program of the Town as well as proposals for the construction of municipal
2
buildings and acquisition of property, (b) to make recommendations to the Town Meeting regarding the above, and (c) to prepare an annual report.
ARTICLE III
TOWN OFFICERS AND REPORTS
Section 1: All Town officers shall turn over to their successors in office, at the expiration of their term of office all books, papers, documents, or other property in their custody belonging to the Town, and all departments shall turn over to the Town Clerk all books, papers, and documents belonging to the Town, and not necessary for the immediate use of their respective departments; and these shall be deposited in the Town Clerk's vault, unless otherwise provided by law.
Section 2: It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to publish the annual report of the Town officers, committees, and appointees, and the report shall be issued and distributed at least seven days previous to the first Monday of March of each year.
Section 3: The annual reports of all the Town officers, and committees shall be issued in one book and in addition to the department report for the municipal year it shall contain:
(a) A complete list of the elected Town officers, showing the organization of the different boards, and the expiration of the term of office of each member.
(b) A complete list of the appointees for the year, including the School and Police Departments.
(c) A copy of the warrant for the Annual and Special Town Meetings held during the year, and the minutes of such meetings.
(d) A statement in detail of the votes cast in the Town at the last preceding Town and State elections.
(e) A list of jurors as selected by the Selectmen for approval by the Town.
(f) The reports of the Library Trustees and librarians for the public libraries.
SELECTMEN
Section 4: The Selectmen shall have the general direction and management of the property and affairs of the Town in all matters not otherwise provided for. They shall have authority to prosecute, defend, or in a case not involving an expenditure exceeding $2,000.00, to compromise all litigation to which the Town is a party unless otherwise provided by law, and to employ special counsel to assist the Town Solicitor, whenever, in their judgment, necessity therefor arises. They shall make, from time to time, such rules and regulations, for the government, management and disposition of the Police as they may deem expedient.
Section 5: Their annual report shall contain:
(a) A statement of their expenditure of appropriation in detail, showing amounts paid to each person and the purpose of the payment.
(b) A concise and clear account of their doings during the year.
OVERSEERS OF THE POOR
Section 6: The overseers of the poor may annually appoint a person not of their own number as Town Almoner. His duties shall be such as they from time to time prescribe. He may be removed by them at any time. He shall be the Clerk of the Board and his salary shall be determined by them.
3
*Section 7: Their annual report shall contain:
(a) A detailed statement of the expenses for the support of the poor during the year, including poor of the Town supported in the Town or elsewhere, those at hospitals and other institutions, poor of other places who are supported here, poor chargeable to the State, and expenditures on account of tramps.
(b) A statement of the amounts received from other places and from the State, and from other sources, on account of reimbursement of money spent by the Town for the poor, and of monies due for such reimbursement and unpaid.
(c) The number of poor at the Town farm, giving their ages and the number of days they were cared for.
(d) An inventory and statement of the value of the real and personal property at the Town farm.
(e) A report upon the Town farm, its condition and management and the care which is there taken of the poor, a statement of its receipts, expenditures and productions, together with the latest reports which are accessible of inspections made of the Town farm by the State Board of Lunacy and Charity.
*(This section is now obsolete).
TOWN CLERK
Section 8: The Town Clerk shall have custody of the Town Seal, shall keep and cause to be permanently bound one or more files of the Town Report, and shall keep and file all original documents of the Town. He shall notify or cause to be notified all persons chosen or elected by the Town or appointed on committees of their election, choice or appointment. He shall furnish all boards and committees with a copy of all votes affecting them. He shall not allow original papers or documents of the Town to be taken from his office, except as they remain in his custody or authority of law.
Section 9: He shall furnish blanks with appropriate headings, upon which petitions, reports and other papers in the ordinary course of Town proceedings may be prepared. He shall fold uniformly all papers and documents within his department and shall endorse them in a manner to indicate the contents of each paper, and shall file and arrange them in a manner convenient for reference and examination. He shall index all such papers and documents and all future records of the Town.
Section 10: His annual report shall contain:
(c) Records of the Town Meeting held during the year. *(Subsections (a) and (b) were rescinded at the Town Meeting held on 3/7/1942.)
TOWN TREASURER
Section 11: The Town Treasurer shall not borrow money for the Town on any note unless it is countersigned by a majority of the Selectmen. Each Town note shall be upon a regular printed blank, in a form prescribed by the Selectmen; shall have printed upon it that it must be countersigned by a majority of the Selectmen to be valid, and shall state plainly upon its face for what purpose and under what vote of the Town it is given.
Section 12: He shall notify each Town board, quarterly, of the balance in his hands of any appropriation to their credit.
Section 13: His annual report shall contain:
(a) A tabulated statement showing the object of each appropriation for the year; the amount appropriated; the money expended; the balance unexpended; the balance on hand at the end of the preceding year; the amount received outside of the appropriation from transfer from another appropriation or otherwise; and a separate statement of transfers from one appropriation to another.
(b) A classified statement showing the items of the Town debt, date when each was contracted; its amount, rate of interest, date on which it will be due and purpose for which the borrowing was made.
4
c) A classified statement of all expenditures and receipts of the Town, so as to give a fair and full exhibit of the objects and methods of all expenditures.
(d) A statement of all money borrowed by the Town during the year and for what purposes, the amount of increase or decrease in the Town debt and the objects for which it was increased.
(e) The total valuation of real and personal estate of the Town and the relation of the Town debt to the three percent limit of indebtedness.
(f) Any monies due to the Town and unpaid.
COLLECTOR OR TAXES
Section 14: The annual report of the Collector or Taxes shall contain a statement of the amount committed to him for collection, amount of interest collected, amount paid over to the Treasurer, amount of abatements and discounts, amount of uncollected taxes, sewer and sidewalk assessments in detail for each year, and cash on hand.
Section 14A:
(a) The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector, shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals or transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
(b) The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfer of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(c) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
(d) The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension of revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268 in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning, Section 13 of Chapter 48; bicycle permits, Section 11A of Chapter 85; sales of articles for charitable purposes, Section 33 of Chapter l0l; children work permits, Section 69 of Chapter 149; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, Section 2lE of Chapter l40; dog licenses, Section 137 of Chapter 140; fishing, hunting, trapping license, Section 12 of Chapter 131; marriage licenses, Section 28 of Chapter 207; and theatrical events, public exhibition permits, Section 181 of Chapter 140.
5
ASSESSORS OF TAXES
Section 15: The annual report of the Assessors of Taxes shall contain:
(a) A complete list of all abatements of taxes, the names of the parties whose taxes have been abated during the year, the amounts of such abatements and the reasons for such abatements except as to those that are made directly by them to the Collector.
(b) A statement showing the number of assessed polls, value of real estate and personal property for the year, income and receipts and figures showing how the rate of taxation was fixed.
(c) The amount of money received as taxes from all other sources than taxation by the Town.
SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS
Section 16: The Superintendent of Streets shall keep a record of monies expended and work done in his department; a daily record of the names and number of men and number of teams employed; and the time and purpose for which they are employed; a record of the amount of money expended and time devoted to each street and way; of materials used; of persons furnishing materials; of the rate of wages paid; prices paid for materials and cost of teams.
Section 17: His annual report shall contain:
(a) A detailed statement of monies expended during the year in his department, properly classified under the different divisions of work.
(b) A statement of what streets and ways have been laid out, constructed or repaired, what bridges have been built or repaired, what sewers have been laid, and what sidewalks and crosswalks have been constructed or repaired during the year.
6
AUDITORS
*(Sections 18, 19, 20, 21, and 22, pertaining to Auditors was repealed by vote of Town Meeting action on 3/11/1929, Article 8.
BOARD OF HEALTH
Section 23: The Board of Health shall keep records showing:
(a) Complaints made to them.
(b) Nuisances abated and how abated.
(c) Number of persons who have entered the sewer.
(d) Number of persons who should and have not entered the sewer.
(e) Unusual sickness in the Town.
(f) Deaths and causes thereof.
Section 24: It shall be their duty to look after the sanitary condition of the Town. They shall make such regulations as they judge necessary for the public health and safety respecting nuisances, sources of filth, and causes of sickness within the Town, and respecting articles that are capable of containing infection and contagion that might be brought into or conveyed from the Town; and to enter complaint against all persons offending against the laws of this Commonwealth regarding health, or their regulations, and to prosecute the same to final judgment.
Section 25: Their annual report shall contain:
(a) A statement of their doings during the year.
(b) A record of contagious or infectious diseases during the year.
(c) Causes of deaths during the year.
TOWN SOLICITOR
Section 26: The Selectmen may annually appoint some member of the
bar, as Town Solicitor. He shall draft all legal instruments and do every professional act which may be required of him by vote of the Town or any board of Town officers, also when required by said board or any committee of the Town, he shall furnish a written opinion on any legal question which may be submitted to him, and he shall at all times furnish legal advice to any officer of the Town, who may require his opinion upon any subject concerning the office of such person. He shall prosecute all suits by the Town, and shall defend all action or suits brought against the Town or its officers in their official capacity. He shall try and argue any and all causes in which the Town shall be a party, before any tribunal, or before any board of referees or commissioners. He shall receive for his services such salary or compensation as may be fixed by the Selectmen, and shall be subject at any time to removal by them.
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Section 27: The annual report of the School Committee shall contain:
(a) A statement showing the value of school property held by the Town in buildings, grounds, furniture, text books and supplies.
(b) A statement of the cost of instruction and text books for each pupil, and the rank of the Town in this respect as returned by the State Board of Education.
(c) A statement of the rank of the Town in its appropriations for schools as returned by the State Board of Education.
7
(d) A report of the year's work in the schools with such recommendations and suggestions regarding educational work as they deem fitting.
(e) The school calendar for the year.
(f) A tabulated statement of membership, attendance and truancy in each school.
(g) A detailed statement of the expenditures during the year.
(h) A list of teachers and their salaries.
ARTICLE IV
REGULATIONS RELATING TO STREETS, SEWERS, ETC.
Section 1: The streets and public ways shall continue to be called and known by the name by which they are now called and known, unless the Town shall, at a meeting called for that purpose, vote to change such name. The Town shall from time to time establish the names of streets that may be hereafter laid out within the limits of the Town. The names of all existing streets, and those hereafter established, shall be recorded on the records of the Town.
Section 2: No person shall break or dig up the ground in any street or public way in the Town, or erect any staging thereon, or place thereon any wood, coal, brick, lumber, or other material, in such a manner as to
obstruct or impede the free use of said street or way for public travel, or place any rubbish in such street or way, without a written license from the Selectmen.
Section 3: Any person, business or corporation desiring to place any structure or object on or in any public way must first obtain a permit from the Board of Selectmen. The term public way as used in this article shall include sidewalks.
Section 4: Every such license shall specify the time it shall continue in force, and shall impose such conditions and restrictions regarding the extent of said obstructions, and in reference to erecting barricades, maintaining lights, and taking other precautions for the safety of travelers and other persons, as may seem needful to the Selectmen.
Section 5: Every person receiving such license, shall at the expiration of the time limited therein, leave such streets or ways in a condition acceptable to the Selectmen, and all work done under such license shall be under the general supervision of the Superintendent of Streets.
Section 6: The Selectmen before granting such license, shall require the applicant to execute a sufficient written agreement, with or without sureties, to indemnify and save harmless the Town from all loss, damage, or cost, to which it may become liable, on account of any act they may be committed by the licensee or his agents, or by reason of such obstruction.
Section 7: No person shall tie or fasten any horse, ox, mule, cow or donkey to any such tree or to any fence or other structure erected for the protection of said tree, nor allow any such animal to remain where it can reach such tree with its mouth.
Section 8: No person shall leave any horse or mule in any street or public way in either of the villages of Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, unless the same is securely hitched or fastened to some post or other suitable object, unless the person in charge thereof is sufficiently near to have full control hereof.
Section 9: No person shall stop with any horse, mule, donkey, ox, cow, carriage or vehicle across any street or public way in Town; nor at the side of any other vehicle in such way as to obstruct public travel. But this shall not apply to such temporary obstructions as may reasonably be necessary for delivering or receiving goods to or from residences of business.
Section 10: No person shall stop any horse, mule, ox, cow, or other animal, or any carriage or vehicle of any kind, across any crosswalk in any street or public way at Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, except for the purpose of getting into or out
8
of such carriage or other vehicle, and no such animal, carriage or vehicle shall be allowed to stand on such crosswalk longer than is necessary for persons to dismount from or enter such carriage or vehicle.
Section 11: No person shall be allowed to coast on any street or public way at Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, unless the Selectmen shall in writing set apart certain streets for that purpose.
Section 12: No person shall throw, or propel any stone, ball, or other missile, in, upon, along or across any street or public way in either of the Villages of Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls.
Section 13: Three or more persons shall not stand or be near each other, in any street or public way in Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, so as to obstruct such street or way, or interfere with the free and uninterrupted use of the same for travel.
Section 14: No person shall discharge any firearm, or shoot any missile or weapon in any street or public way in either of the Villages of Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, unless in the exercise of a duty required or justified by law.
Section 15: No person shall drive any horse, mule, or other animal, on any street or public way in either of the Villages of Montague Center, Turners Falls, or Millers Falls, at a rate of speed greater than 8 miles an hour, but this provision shall not apply to the Fire Department in case of alarm of fire.
Section 16: No owner of, or person having the control of, any horse, goat, mule, sheep, swine or neat cattle, shall suffer the same to go at large in any street, or public way in Town or to remain on such street or way unless in charge of a suitable person or persons, and no person shall pasture any animal in a public street or way except adjacent to his own premises.
Section 17a: The Selectmen shall cause snow and ice to be removed from the sidewalks abutting all Town property. Such sidewalks shall be sanded for reasonable safe passage by pedestrians.
Section 17b: The owner of any estate abutting upon any way within the Town where there is a sidewalk shall within twenty-four hours after ceasing to fall or form, or the accumulation of any other cause, of any snow, ice or sleet upon said sidewalk, cause the same to be removed therefrom, and if the same cannot be wholly removed shall sprinkle thereon sand or other substance so that such sidewalk shall be safe for travel.
Section 17c: No person shall remove or cause to be removed snow or ice from any privately owned premises and deposit it on any way, sidewalk or public parking place.
Section 17d: Whenever any way, sidewalk, or public parking place shall be encumbered with snow or ice contrary to the provisions of this section, the Chief of Police, or his designee shall notify the owner or person having the care of the land abutting thereon, to cause such way, sidewalk or public parking place to be made safe and convenient for travel by removing the snow, and as far as practicable the ice therefrom, within six hours from the time of receiving such notice.
Section 18: Any owner who violates Section 17 shall have a complaint filed against the owner in the District Court of Greenfield and, if found guilty, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars for the first offense, thirty-five dollars for the second offense, and fifty dollars for each subsequent offense. Each twenty-four hour period a violation of Section 17 exists shall be considered to constitute a separate offense.
Section 19: No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed any handbill, circular, program or advertising slip in or upon any street of the town, excepting that such handbill, circular, program or advertising slip may be placed within the doors of stores, offices and business houses and at the doors of residences. No person shall ring the door bell, or knock at or open the door of any dwelling house of which he is not the owner or occupant for the purpose of depositing therein any show bill, handbill, circular, program or other advertisement, or so distribute them or any of them as to cause a disturbance or litter.
Section 20: No person shall place or cause to be placed in any street, any garbage, shavings, paper, filth, oyster shells, cleanings, or any kind of rubbish, or any decaying animal or vegetable matter, or shall place or cause to be placed in any street, any ashes except in such place and manner as shall be directed by the Selectmen or Superintendent of Streets, provided, however, ashes, sand or other proper material may be placed upon a sidewalk to prevent its being slippery.
9
Section 21: No person shall revel, quarrel, behave in a boisterous, indecent or disorderly manner, or use any indecent, profane, insulting or abusive language, or sing any lewd, profane or indecent song in any street or near any dwelling house or other building or in any public place.
Section 22: * (Was not approved by the Attorney General)
Section 23: No person shall tie or fasten any horse or other animal, or team of any kind, to any lamp post or hydrant or to any ornamental or shade tree, shrub or vine, or so near a tree, shrub or vine that such animal can injure it.
Section 24: The Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, in the Town. They may also license suitable persons as junk collectors, to collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals, and second-hand articles from place to place in the Town; and they may provide that such collectors shall display badges upon their persons or upon their vehicles, or upon both, when engaged in collecting, transporting, or dealing in junk, old metals, or second-hand articles; and may prescribe the design thereof. They may also provide that such shops and all articles of merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle, or receptacle, used for the collection or keeping of the articles aforesaid, may be examined at all times by the Selectmen or by any person by them authorized thereto.
Section 25: Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, within the limits of the Town shall keep a book, in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of any such article, a description thereof, the name, age, and residence of the person from whom, and the day and hour when, such purchase was made; such book at all times be open to the inspection of the Selectmen and of any person by them authorized to make such inspection; every keeper of such shop shall put in a suitable and conspicuous place on his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters; such shop and all articles of merchandise therein, may be at all times examined by the Selectmen or by any person by them authorized to make such examination; and no keeper of such shop and no junk collector shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any of the articles aforesaid of a minor or apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such; and no article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until at least one week from the date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed. Such shops shall be closed between the hours of 6 p.m. and 7 a.m., and no keeper thereof and no junk collector shall purchase any of the articles aforesaid during such hours.
Section 26: No person shall in a state of nudity bathe or swim in any of the waters within the Town in places exposed to the public view, or in the immediate sight of the occupant or occupants of any dwelling house, shop or factory.
Section 27: No person under the age of fifteen years shall be or remain in or upon any street or public place in the Town at night after the hour of nine o'clock between the first day of April and the thirtieth day of September, both inclusive, of each year, or at night after the hours of eight o'clock, between the first day of October and the Thirty-first day of March, both inclusive, of each year, unless he is actually employed in some work that makes it necessary, or is accompanied by a person properly having general care and custody of him, or person to who he has been particularly intrusted by someone who properly has general care and custody of him, or is engaged in the performance of some mission or duty directed by a person having his general care and custody.
Section 28: No person shall lay any drain connecting with a common sewer without the permission in writing of the Selectmen. Such work must be under the general supervision of the Superintendent of Streets and in a manner satisfactory to him.
Section 29: No person, except the Superintendent of Streets in the performance of his duties, or in cases of emergency shall break or excavate, or cause to be broken or excavated, the pavement or ground in any public right-of-way, or place or cause to be placed any earthen or paving materials within said right-of-way so as to cause changes in land contours and/or drainage runoff patterns, without first obtaining from the Board of Selectmen or their designee a written license stating the space in the right-of-way that may be excavated and/or regraded, and such other provisions as they deem best. Violation of this by-law shall be punished by a fine of $250.00 for each offense.
Section 30:
WHEREAS, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts has instituted a regional recycling program pursuant to which a recycling materials processing facility will be constructed and the Town shall receive direct aid in the collection of recyclables and promotion of recycling activities; and
WHEREAS, the landfill capacity, environmental, and financial benefits associated with recycling can only be realized if the residents of the Town participate in a program of curbside collection of recyclables separated from unusable solid waste.
10
NO THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Meeting of the Town of Montague...and hereby enacted by the authority of the same as follows:
A: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable material from garbage or rubbish by the residents of the Town of Montague and the collection of the recyclables at the residents' curbside. The collection of separated recyclables shall be made periodically under the supervision of the Director of the Public Works.
(a) Mandatory recycling of newspapers shall start on July 1, 1987.
(b) Mandatory recycling of cans and bottles will start when the State's recycling facility becomes operational. Date to be announced two weeks before the opening of the facility.
B: DEFINITIONS
Recyclables are the discarded materials described below which may be reclaimed and are considered saleable by the Town of Montague. For the purpose of this ordinance, they are defined in the following categories:
(a) Aluminum - cans made from aluminum, aluminum foil, aluminum wrappers, and containers or trays used in the packaging, preparation, or cooking of prepared dinners, pies, or cakes, or other foods.
(b) Glass - all unbroken jars and bottles, or similar products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packing or bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known as glass excluding:
(1) Blue and flat glass and glass commonly known as window glass.
(2) Dishes and crockery.
(c) Ferrous metal cans - all containers, composed in whole of iron or steel and so-called "tin" cans used for the package or storing of various food and nonfood items, except containers which contained paint or petroleum-based solvents and any pressurized aerosol cans.
(d) Clean and unsoiled newspaper, magazines, including newsprint, all newspaper advertisements, supplements, comics and enclosures.
Newspapers shall be considered clean and uncontaminated if they have not been exposed to substances or conditions rendering them unusable for recycling. Persons may wrap solid waste in used newspapers and discard same with regular solid waste even if such wrapping does not render the newspapers unusable for recycling.
(e) Corrugated paper - corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and craft paper materials.
C: SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES AND PLACEMENT FOR REMOVAL
The resident shall use the recycling receptacle provided to each household for the purpose of collecting the recyclables and placing them for disposal.
(a) Recycling receptacles shall be placed on and removed from the curbside or tree belt in a manner similar to and at the same time as regular garbage or rubbish on designated days.
(b) All the metal and glass recyclables, as defined in Section B (a), (c), shall be placed together in the designated recycling receptacle separate from rubbish or garbage. These recyclables need not be washed, flattened, or processed in any way, and labels, lids, corks and neck rings not be removed.
11
(c) Recyclable newspapers, magazines and corrugated paper shall be placed on top of or next to the recycling receptacle in a manner to prevent the scattering of paper.
(1) Newspapers shall either be packed in standard grocery or paper shopping bags, placed in corrugated boxes, or securely tied in flat bundles, none of which shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds.
(2) If not used for packing paper recyclables, corrugated boxes and cardboard cartons shall be collapsed and tied in bundles not weighing more than fifty (50) pounds and placed on the top of or next to the recycling receptacle.
(d) Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic garbage bags for collection, removal, or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same container as, or otherwise mixed, with other forms of solid waste for collection, removal, or disposal.
(e) Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty (50) dollars.
D: OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLES. OFFENSES.
(a) Upon collection by the Town of Montague, pursuant to the program established hereby and the rules and regulations issued hereunder, such materials shall become the property of the Town of Montague. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person other than authorized employees of the Town of Montague acting in the course of their employment to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable material. Any and each collection or pick up in violation hereof from one or more locations shall be a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
(b) The recyclables collected by the Town shall be transported to and disposed of at the designated Materials Recovery Facility.
(c) Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred (300) dollars and the violator shall make restitution to the Town for the value of any recyclables illegally removed.
E: REPEALER
All ordinances or pats of ordinances, resolutions, regulations or other documents inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
F: SEVERABILITY
(a) This ordinance and the various parts, sentences, sections, and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause is adjusted invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
(b) This ordinance shall take effect no later than three weeks after Material Recovery Facility commences commercial operation. Notice of the commencement date shall be published twice, at least 10 days apart in a daily newspaper having circulation in the Town of Montague.
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 1: Whenever any Town officer or board shall call for bids for any work to be done or material to be furnished for the Town, such call shall state that sealed bids or proposals shall be sent to the Town Treasurer and that these bids will be opened by him at a specified time and place, in the presence of the officers or board calling for the same and such bidders as may desire to be present.
ARTICLE VI
12
Section 1: For the purpose of these by-laws, the Village of Montague Center shall be taken to include all the streets and public ways within a radius of one-half mile from the Town Hall; the Village of Turners Falls shall include the whole of Turners Falls Fire District; the Village of Millers Falls shall include all streets and public ways within a radius of one-half mile from "Amidon Hall", in said Millers Falls.
Section 2: Any violation of Section 21 of Article IV of these by-laws shall be punished by a fine of not more than five dollars.
Section 3: Any violation for Sections 17 and 18 of Article IV of these by-laws shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten dollars.
Section 4: Any violation of Sections 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 27, and 28 of Article IV of these by-laws shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty dollars.
Section 5: All votes and all previous by-laws of the Town inconsistent with the foregoing by-laws are hereby repealed.
Section 6: These by-laws shall not be altered or amended except at a regular Town Meeting held for that purpose, and the warrant for said meeting shall specify the proposed amendment or alteration.
BUILDING AND USE BY-LAW
NO. 1: No person, firm, or corporation, shall erect a building, house, or other structure more than eight feet in length or breadth, or seven feet in height, or make any addition or alteration more than eight feet in width or breadth or seven feet in height to any existing building, house or other structure in the Town of Montague unless the roofs are of a fire-resistant construction; and a license in writing be granted therefore by the Selectmen for the public good or for necessity. Said license shall be recorded in the Town records. Where any provision of this by-law imposes substantial hardship, any person so aggrieved may appeal to the Board of Appeals for a variance therefrom in accordance with Section 30 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. *(Section 30 of Chapter 40, Mass. General Laws has been repealed.)
NO. 2: No person, firm or corporation shall erect or make addition to, any building within the business district of the Turners Falls Fire District, the Millers Falls Fire District, the Lake Pleasant Fire District, or the Montague Fire District unless the walls thereof shall be of fire-resistant construction. A license in writing shall be granted therefore by the Selectmen.
NO. 3: No person, firm, or corporation shall erect or maintain any awning which projects over a public way unless a permit be obtained from the Selectmen, and unless said awning shall be safely and securely attached to the building and so located that the lowest part thereof shall be at least seven feet above the sidewalk and no part thereof to extend beyond the outer line of the sidewalk. Liability insurance for damage caused by the falling of such awnings shall be carried to the extent of $500,000.00 per person/$500,000.00 per accident. A copy of the permit and of the insurance policy shall be filed with the Building Inspector. Each application for a permit from the Selectmen for the above by-law shall be accompanied by a $10.00 fee.
NO. 4: No person, firm, or corporation shall erect or maintain any sign which projects over a public way unless a permit be obtained from the Selectmen and unless said sign shall be safely and securely attached to the building and be so located that the lowest part thereof shall be at least ten feet above the sidewalk and no part thereof to extend beyond the outer line of the sidewalk. Liability insurance for damage by falling of such signs shall be carried to the extent of $500,000.00 per person/$500,000.00 per accident. A copy of the permit and of the insurance policy shall be filed with the Building Inspector. Each application for a permit from the Selectmen for the above by-law shall be accompanied by a $l0.00 fee. A penalty of $20.00 shall be imposed for the violation of any of the above by-laws.
NO. 5: FALSE ALARM BYLAW
Any residence, school, municipal building or place of business which has an alarm system connected directly to the Police Department or connected indirectly to said Department through a private alarm company (each of which will be hereinafter referred to as a “monitored system”), shall be charged a fine for all responses by the Department to such buildings when the response is caused by: (1) the activation of the monitored system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the user of an alarm system or his employees or agents; or (2) the activation of the monitored system requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the Police Department when, in fact, there has been no unauthorized intrusion, robbery or burglary, or attempted threat. For the purposes of this bylaw, activation of a monitored system for the purposes of testing with prior approval by the Police Department, or by an act of God, including, but not limited to, power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and
13
similar weather or atmospheric disturbances shall not be deemed to be a false alarm. A fine for violation of this bylaw may be assessed against the owner or tenant of the residence or place of business. Penalties for violation of this bylaw shall be as follows, successive responses to be counted within any twelve month period: First three responses Warning; Fourth response $ 50.00; Fifth response $ 75.00; Sixth response $100.00; Seventh response $150.00; Eighth and subsequent responses $200.00; This section may be enforced pursuant to the noncriminal disposition method as contained in M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D. Enforcing persons shall be police officers. *(This section was approved at the Special Town Meeting on April 30, 2009, Article 12 as a Non Criminal Disposition by-law and accepted by the Attorney General on June 8, 2009)
NO.6 STRETCH ENERGY CODE; in effect as of July 1, 2010
§ 1 - Definitions
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 - is the model building code for energy efficiency, created by the International Code Council (ICC), adopted in Massachusetts and in effect as of January 1, 2010.
Stretch Energy Code – is the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 with Massachusetts amendments referenced in Appendix 120.AA of the Massachusetts Building Code, 7th edition (780 CMR).
§ 2 - Purpose
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code.
§ 3 - Applicability
The Stretch Energy Code, commencing July 1, 2010 applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as applicable.
§ 4 - Authority
Montague, as a municipality seeks to ensure that construction within its boundaries is designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR and through its general By-laws chooses to adopt Appendix 120.AA (780 CMR). This By-law article may be adopted or rescinded in the same manner by the municipality, as prescribed by law.
§ 5 - Stretch Energy Code is herein incorporated by reference.
The Stretch Energy Code is the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009, including amendments and modifications of Appendix 120.AA, in effect as of April 1, 2010, of the Massachusetts Building Code, Seventh Edition, 780 CMR.
This code is enforced by the Inspector of Buildings as a section of the Massachusetts Building Code.
*[Adopted April 1, 2010, STM Article 6]
BOARD OF APPEALS: There shall be a Board of Appeals of three members, as provided in Section 30 of the Chapter 40 of the General Laws, as amended, and associate members to be appointed for particular cases when needed, as provided in said section. The terms of the members shall end at the date of the annual town elections of the years in which their terms expire or when their successors qualify. *(Section 30 of Chapter 40, Mass. General Laws has been repealed.) **(Article 10 of the 1/31/1974 Special Town Meeting established a Board of Appeals under Section 81Z of Chapter 41, Mass. General Laws.)
Voted that the Town vote to amend its by-laws by adding the following new chapter thereto as follows:
GAS PIPING AND GAS APPLIANCES
Section 1: The Board of Selectmen shall appoint annually in April an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in buildings who shall be a licensed plumber or licensed gas fitter. Said inspector shall enforce the rules and regulations adopted by the Board established under Section 12H of Chapter 25 of the General Laws of Massachusetts as amended and shall perform any other duties as shall be assigned to him by the Board of Selectmen. Said Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances shall receive such compensation as shall be determined by vote of the Town Meeting.
Section 2: The Board of Selectmen may from time to time establish fees for inspections made by the Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances.
Voted that the Town accept the following By-Law (Fees):
That all Town officers shall pay all fees received by them, by virtue of their office, into the treasury.
14
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Section 1: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupants for the purpose of soliciting orders. Sales subscriptions or business of any kind, or soliciting alms or contributions for any person, cause or organization without first having registered in the office of the Police Chief. The registrant shall give his complete identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature of the products or services in which he is interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products or of the organization which he is representing, and the proposed method of operation in the Town, and such other information as may be requested of him. The Chief of Police shall thereupon, if satisfied with the honest and good character of the registrant, issue a written permit for a period not exceeding twelve months. Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing the Town carry upon his person the permit and the same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited.
Section 2: The Chief of Police may, however, authorize the directors of any veterans group, hospital, Community Chest, Red Cross, YMCA, or other organization engaged in social, charitable or educational services to solicit contributions without having each solicitor under their direction register. The provisions of this by-law shall not apply to officers or employees of the town, county, state or federal government or any subdivision thereof when on official business, nor shall it apply to religious or political organizations.
Section 3: Any such registration may be revoked by the Selectmen or the Chief of Police because of any violation by the registrant of this by-law or of any other by-law of the Town or of any state or federal law, or, whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in this by-law for the original registration.
Section 4: Anyone failing to register under this chapter or anyone who solicits after his registration has been revoked as herein provided shall be subject to arrest, prosecution, and fines not to exceed fifty dollars for the first offense, one hundred dollars for the second offense, and two hundred dollars for each subsequent offense.
TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person whether registered under this ordinance or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience, with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9 a.m. or after 8 p.m. of any weekday, or on a state or national holiday.
INOPERABLE OR UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE BYLAW
Voted 5-5-2012 Art. #26. Approved by Attorney General 9-4-2012.
Section 1: Purpose
It is the intent of this by-law to provide a mechanism for regulating, subject to reasonable and appropriate controls, the storage of Inoperable and/or Unregistered Motor Vehicles within the Town of Montague.
Section 2: Definitions
FARMER – a person substantially engaged in the occupation of farming, as further defined in Massachusetts General Law (M.G.L.) Chapter 90, Section 1.
GARAGE: A building, as defined by the Montague Zoning By-Law for the storage of motor vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle defined as such in M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 1, requiring registration pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 2 to be operated on a public way.
15
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: any Motor Vehicle or Trailer, that is not capable of being used as such in its existing condition by reason of being damaged, dismantled or failing to contain parts necessary for operation. Any Unregistered Vehicle, as defined herein, shall be considered an Inoperable Vehicle for purposes of this Bylaw.
OPERABLE VEHICLE: any Motor Vehicle or Trailer, that is capable of being used in its existing condition for the purpose for which it was designed and that is registered in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90, Section 2.
UNREGESTERED VEHICLE: any Motor Vehicle or Trailer that is not registered in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90, Section 2.
TRAILER: Any vehicle defined as such in M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 1.
Section 3: Storage of one (1) Inoperable Vehicle Permitted
A property owner, or other person having the permission of the property owner, may store one (1) Inoperable Vehicle on said premises.
Section 4: Storage of more than one (1) Inoperable Vehicle
(a) No property owner, or any person, may store or permit to be stored more than one (1) Inoperable Vehicle on said property owner’s premises unless:
1. The vehicles are stored in a garage, or;
2. An Inoperable Vehicle Storage Permit is granted by the Board of Selectmen after a public hearing as described in Section 5 of this By-law, or;
3. The property owner or person in control of the property holds a Class I or Class II or Class III License for the sale of motor vehicles or trailers issued pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 140, Section 57 to Section 69.
(b) This Section shall not apply to a Farmer or a Farm Equipment dealer as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 93G, Section 1.
Section 5: Inoperable Vehicle Storage Permit
(a) Any property owner or other person with the permission of the property owner, seeking to store more than one Inoperable Vehicle, un-garaged on a premise must make application for an Inoperable Vehicle Storage Permit to the Board of Selectmen.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $100. Said fee may be amended by the Board of Selectmen from time to time.
(c) Upon receipt of an application for an Inoperable Vehicle Storage Permit, the Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the issue within 30 days.
(d) An Inoperable Vehicle Storage Permit may be granted by the Board of Selectmen if it finds that no hazard to health or safety are involved and no unsightly conditions visible from public streets or ways, or abutting properties, exist or will be created and upon such terms and conditions as the Board deems appropriate, including but not-limited-to a limit on the number of Inoperable Vehicles that may be stored at any one time.
(e) Prior to any public hearing the Selectmen may request the Board of Health or any other agent of the town to conduct an inspection of the property in question. The Board of Health or other agent of the town, as requested, shall submit a report to the Board of Selectmen describing any issues of concern.
(f) The Board of Selectmen may waive the public hearing requirement to allow more than one (1) Inoperable or Unregistered Vehicle on a premises for a period of (30) days or less if it finds that no hazards to health or safety are involved and no
16
unsightly conditions visible from public streets or ways, or abutting properties, exist or will be created by the storage of said vehicles for such temporary period of time.
(g) Legal notice of any public hearing held pursuant to this section shall be given by:
(1) Posting legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing and,
(2) Sending notification to all abutters, within three hundred (300) feet of any part of the storage property, via first class letter.
Section 6: Enforcement
This By-law may be enforced by the Police Department, Board of Health, Zoning Enforcement Officer, or other designee of the Board of Selectmen.
Section 7: Violations and Penalties
(a) Non-Criminal Disposition - Whoever violates any provision of this by-law may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D and may be punished by a non-criminal fine of fifty dollars ($50) for the 1st offense, one hundred dollars ($100) for the 2nd offense, and two hundred dollars ($200) for the 3rd and subsequent offenses. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Criminal Complaint - Whoever violates any provision of this by-law may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court. The maximum penalty for violation of this by-law shall be three hundred dollars ($300) for each offense. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense; or
(c) The Town may enforce this Bylaw or enjoin violations thereof through any lawful process, and the election of one remedy by the Town shall not preclude enforcement through any other lawful means.
Section 8: Existing Inoperable Motor Vehicles
A property owner, or other person having the permission of the property owner, who, at the time this by-law takes effect, is in violation of any section(s) of this by-law shall have ninety (90) days to come into compliance.
Section 9: Severability
In the event any section or provision of this by-law is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining sections and provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
STRIPPING LAND OF SOIL AND LOAM
Section 1: No person, firm or corporation shall strip, sever, remove or convey away any soil, loam, sand or gravel from any land in the Town not in public use, unless and until such stripping, severance, removal or conveyance away, is first authorized by a permit issued by the Selectmen of Montague, except in conjunction with construction or a building on the parcel, or except in conjunction with the development, improvement, or landscaping of said land, or except for the continued operation of an existing sand and gravel pit. No such permit shall be issued unless and until an application therefor has been filed with the Board. Said Board shall then hold a public hearing on the application, and notice of the filing of the application and the date and time of the holding of the public hearing thereon, shall be advertised forthwith, at the expense of the applicant, in a newspaper, published in the County seven days, at least, before the meeting.
17
Section 2: The Superior Court shall have jurisdiction in equity to compel compliance with this by-law. The penalty for violation of this by-law shall be as follows: for the first offense, fifty dollars; for the second offense, one hundred dollars; and for each subsequent offense, two hundred dollars.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
In order to preserve peace and good order, no person will publicly consume alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors in any Town park, public school or property under the jurisdiction of the Gill-Montague Regional School Committee, cemetery, common or any public way in the Town of Montague unless a permit for such activity is issued by the License Commissioners and in the case of a regional school or property, authorization has also been given by the Gill-Montague Regional School Committee. Anyone violating this by-law shall be subject to arrest, prosecution and fines not to exceed fifty dollars for the first offense, one hundred dollars for the second offense, and two hundred dollars for each subsequent offense.
No person shall bring upon the premises of an establishment or restaurant holding a common victualler's license any alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquors for the purpose of consuming said alcoholic beverages and intoxicating liquors on said premises. Anyone violating this by-law shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars.
All liquor establishments have a minimum fifteen minute call time before closing.
COUNCIL ON AGING
There is hereby established a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating and carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in coordination with programs of the Department of Elder Affairs, all in accordance with Chapter 40, Section 8B of the General Laws of Massachusetts. The Council shall submit an annual report to the Town and shall send a copy to the Department of Elder Affairs of the Commonwealth. Said council shall consist of 7 members, more or less, appointed by the Board of Selectmen, and said members shall be voters and residents of the Town. Three members shall be appointed for three years, two members for two years, and two members for one year. The Council shall annually elect its chairman and other officers as it deems appropriate, and shall have all the powers specified in said Chapter 40, Section 8B.
A BY-LAW TO PROHIBIT SLEEPING OR LOITERING IN OR UPON STREETS,
SIDEWALKS, PARKS OR PUBLIC PLACES SUCH AS TO CONSTITUTE A PUBLIC
NUISANCE WITHIN THE TOWN OF MONTAGUE AND PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF.
Section 1: ACTS PROHIBITED. No person shall sleep or loiter in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or public place such as to constitute a public nuisance within the Town of Montague.
Section 2: LOITERING DEFINED. For the purpose of this by-law, loitering shall include the following acts:
(a) The obstruction of the free unhampered passage of pedestrians or vehicles in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or public place.
Section 3: PUBLIC PLACE DEFINED. For the purpose of this by-law, the term public place shall include streets, sidewalks, any place to which the public has right of access, shall include the quasi-public area in front of or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette or other place of business, and shall also include any parking lot or vacant private property not owned by or under the dominion of the person charged with a violation of this by-law.
Section 4: VALIDITY. Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this by-law be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court by competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the remaining provisions of this by-law.
Section 5: PENALTIES. Any person violating any of the provisions of this by-law shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars.
DRAWN VEHICLES
18
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any domesticated animal for the purpose of riding or pulling of drawn vehicles upon any sidewalk, or public park or common, in the Town of Montague. Domesticated animals shall include, but shall not be limited to horses, mules, donkeys, oxen, draught horses. Anyone violating this ordinance shall be subject to arrest, prosecution, and fines not to exceed fifty dollars for the first offense, one hundred dollars for the second offense, and two hundred dollars for any subsequent violation.
SWIMMING POOLS
Every outdoor swimming pool, with the exception of children's wading pools, but including all plastic pools or other synthetically manufactured pool constructed above ground, whether or not filled with water, shall be completely surrounded at all times by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height above grade, which may be the pool itself.
Every such fence or wall shall be so constructed as to not have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors, gates and picket fences; in the latter case, however, the gaps between pickets shall not exceed four inches.
All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be of not less than four feet in height and shall be equipped with a latching device located at least three feet above the underlying ground and inaccessible from the outside to small children. Every such gate or door shall be kept locked at all times when the swimming pool is not in use, and any ladders removed from use.
A natural barrier, hedge, pool cover or other protective device approved by the Building Inspector may be used in lieu of a fence or wall so long as the degree protection afforded by the enclosure, gates, and latch, described herein.
This by-law shall be enforced by Selectmen or appointed representatives of the Selectmen. Any person violating any provision of the by-law may be fined not more than one hundred dollars for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
DOG CONTROL
Section 1: No person shall keep any dog which by biting, barking, howling or in any manner disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or endangers the safety of any person.
Section 2: No female dog shall be allowed to run or be at large in any street or other public place in the Town while in season.
g
Voted 5/7/94 - Art. #29. Approved by Attorney General 8/22/94 - Pg. 149.
Every building in the Town of Montague shall have affixed thereto a number representing the address of such building (MGL c.148s.59).
(a) The address number shall be attached to each principal building and shall be made of permanent, weather-proof materials, shall be at least three (3) inches in height, and shall be clearly readable from the street upon which the building fronts. Any building that is not clearly visible from the street, shall have the address number posted on a suitable support visible at the driveway or other access that serves such building.
(b) The address number shall be that number presently being used, except that the Town may change an address number where deemed necessary and assign new address numbers where none exist. The Inspector of Buildings shall notify an owner of a building of a newly assigned number. The owner shall then have thirty (30) days in which to permanently display the number. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of changes and new assignments of address numbers.
(c) Failure to display and maintain an address number shall subject a building owner to a fine of five ($5.00) dollars per day. The display of a false or misleading address number shall subject a building owner to a fine of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per day. Each day shall be a separate offense. This by-law shall be enforced by the Police Department.
RIGHT TO FARM BYLAW
Voted 5/5/2012 – Art. #27. Approved by Attorney General 9/4/2012.
19
Section 1: Purpose and Intent
The Town of Montague understands that farming is an essential and valued activity which provides fresh food, economic diversity and local employment, open space, and scenic vistas to all the citizens of our town, and is a draw for tourism. Therefore, this bylaw is intended to encourage the pursuit of agriculture and agricultural-based economic activities and employment, and protect farmland. The purpose is to allow agricultural practices to function in harmony with the community, town agencies, and others.
This By-law restates with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations thereunder including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9, Chapter 111, Section 125A and Chapter 128 Section 1A. We, the citizens of Montague, restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town’s authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, (“Home Rule Amendment”).
Section 2: Definitions
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of agriculture, as allowed by zoning regulations. The words "farming" or “agriculture" or their derivatives shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
? farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
? dairying;
? production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
? Production of crops for biofuels;
? growing and harvesting of forest products on forest land, and any other forestry or lumbering operations;
? raising and keeping of livestock, including horses;
? keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise;
? keeping and raising of poultry, rabbits, sheep, swine, cattle, horses, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
“Farming” shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the following:
? operation and transportation of any farm equipment over roads within the Town;
? control of pests, including but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators, and disease organisms of plants and animals;
? application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides in accordance with state and federal regulations;
? conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities, including agri-tourism;
? processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand including related signage;
? maintenance, repair, or storage of equipment or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager, that is used expressly for the purpose of agricultural activities;
? on-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations, including burning brush in accordance with Massachusetts agricultural fire permit regulations;
? operation of composting facilities;
? irrigation of crops;
? construction and use of farm structures and facilities for the purpose of: storing animal wastes, farm equipment, pesticides, fertilizers, or agricultural products; housing of livestock; processing of animal wastes and agricultural products; season extension; hydroponic production of agricultural products; sale of agricultural products; and use by farm labor; all as permitted by local and state building codes and regulations;
? rejuvenating drainage or irrigation ditches; picking stone; construction, repair, and maintenance of fences; rejuvenating and maintaining pastures;
? herding or moving of livestock including horses from area to area, including along roads.
Section 3: Right To Farm Declaration
20
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Montague, in recognition of the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community, and society in general. The above-described agricultural activities could occur on weekdays, weekends, and holidays, by night or day, and include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with accepted agricultural practices. The benefits and protections of this By-Law are intended to apply exclusively to those agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. For any agricultural practice, in determining the reasonableness of the time, place and methodology of such practice, consideration shall be given to both traditional customs and procedures as well as to new practices and innovations. The Town endorses the use of best management practices to limit use of pesticides, protect animal health, and minimize negative environmental impacts.
Nothing in this Right-To-Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law. Moreover, this By-Law does not supersede any state or federal laws or regulations or private covenants.
Section 4: Effective Date
This Bylaw shall be effective upon approval by the Massachusetts Attorney General and the publication and posting as required by law.
Section 5: Disclosure Notification
In order to allow prospective purchasers or tenants to make informed decisions prior to a real estate transaction or rental agreement, and to promote harmony between farmers and their neighbors after such transactions, the Town of Montague requests that sellers and landlords and/or their agents (and assigns) provide written notification to prospective buyers and renters substantially as follows:
“It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities could include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust, and odors, and could occur by day or night on weekdays, weekends, and holidays. Occupying land within the Town of Montague means that one could expect and accept such conditions as a normal and necessary aspect of living in such an area”.
Written notification to buyers or renters may occur in one of several ways, including but not limited to disclosure forms, or as an addendum to a Purchase and Sale Agreement or rental agreement.
Within 30 days after this Bylaw becomes effective, a copy of the above notification will be displayed at the Town Hall and posted on the Town’s website. A copy of the notification shall be included in the Town’s annual report. The notification shall also be available for distribution upon request in the offices of the Select Board, Board of Assessors, and Town Clerk.
Section 6: Resolution of Disputes
Any person having a complaint about a farm or farming activity is encouraged to seek an amicable solution directly with the owner or operator of the farm at issue. Such person may, notwithstanding the pursuit of any other available remedies, request resolution assistance directly from the Agricultural Commission, or file a complaint with the Town Administrator, Select Board, Board of Health, or Zoning Enforcement Officer. The filing of a grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other available remedies. The Town officials may forward the complaint to the Agricultural Commission if deemed appropriate and the Commission can help to seek an amicable resolution through facilitating discussion between the parties. The Agricultural Commission will report back to the Town officials on the outcome within a reasonable time frame. Any complaints brought directly to the Agricultural Commission will also be forwarded to Town officials, so that they may help determine whether any public health or other laws and regulations are being violated.
Section 7: Severability Clause
21
If any part of this By-law is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this By-law. The Town of Montague hereby declares the provisions of this By-law to be severable.
NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION
Voted 5/7/94 - Art. #30. Approved by Attorney General 8/22/94 Pg. 150.
Any by-law of the Town of Montague, or rule or regulation of its officers, boards, or departments, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may in the discretion of the Town official who is the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided in MGL Chapter 40;21d.
"Enforcing person" as used in this by-law, shall mean any Police Officer of the Town of Montague with respect to any offense; and the Building Inspector and his designees, the Board of Health and its designees, the Sealer of Weights & Measures, the Superintendent of Streets, the Board of Selectmen or its designees, each with respect to violations of by-laws and rules and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. In addition to police officers who shall in all cases be considered enforcing officers for the purposes of this article, the municipal personnel listed for each section shall be enforcing persons for such sections. If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
The following by-laws, rules, and regulations are to be included within the scope of this article. The fines shall be as set forth in the applicable by-law rule, or regulation. Where the by-law, rule, or regulation does not state a specific fine, the penalty shall be as listed. Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
General By-Laws of the Town
Section Number & Name Enforcing Person Other Fine Schedule
Than Police Officers
Article IV; Sec. 2 Superintendent of Streets as set forth ($20.00)
Obstructing or impeding travel on
public way
Article IV; Sec. 12 as set forth ($20.00)
Throwing objects in public ways
Article IV; Sec. 23, Article VI as set forth ($20.00)
Loitering
Article IV; Sec. 14 as set forth ($20.00)
Unlawful discharge of firearm, missile,
or weapon
Article IV; Sec. 17a-b-c Superintendent of Streets as set forth ($20, $35,$50)
Snow removal
Article IV; Sec. 20 Board of Health as set forth ($20.00)
Littering
Article IV; Sec. 21 as set forth ($5.00)
Indecent or disorderly behavior
Article IV; Sec. 28 WWTP Superintendent as set forth (($20.00)
Superintendent of Streets
Board of Health
22
Article IV; Sec. 29 Superintendent of Streets as set forth ($250.00)
Unauthorized street opening
Article IV; Sec. 30 Board of Health as set forth ($50.00)
Unauthorized collection, separation, Superintendent of Streets
placement or ownership of recyclables
Article IV. Solicitors & canvassers as set forth ($50, $100, $200)
Article VI. Unregistered motor vehicles as set forth ($50, $100, $200)
Article VI. Stripping Board of Health as set forth ($50, $100, $200)
land of soil & loam Building Inspector
Article VI. Public consumption of as set forth ($50, $100, $200)
alcoholic beverages
Street numbering by-law (5/94) as set forth ($5.00 a day)
Traffic Rules & Regulations:
Article 3, Sec. 2 as set forth ($20.00)
Display of unauthorized signs/
traffic signals
Article 5, Sec. 4 as set forth ($20.00)
Standing of vehicles near schools
Article 5, Sec. 8 as set forth ($20.00)
Parking vehicles for sale
Article 5, Sec. 9 as set forth ($20.00)
Repairing of vehicles
Article 7, Sec. 14 as set forth ($20.00)
Driving on sidewalks
Rules & Regulations:
Article 8, Sec. 3 as set forth ($20.00)
Clinging to moving vehicles
Sewer Use By-Law
Article 10, Section 5 $50
Unauthorized sewer connection
Board of Health Regulations
MGL Ch 270; Sec. 16 Board of Health $100
Illegal dumping Director of Public Health
of trash
105 CMR 410.180 Board of Health $50
Sufficient potable Director of Public Health
water supply
105 CMR 410.300 Board of Health $50
Proper sewage disposal Director of Public Health
23
facility
105 CMR 410.600,602 Board of Health $25
Proper storage of Director of Public Health
rubbish
105 CMR 410.200-201 Board of Health $50
Proper and adequate Director of Public Health
heating facility supplied
310.CMR 15.01 (19-20) Board of Health $50
Improper discharge of Director of Public Health
sewage to ground or water
310 CMR 15.02 (2) Board of Health $50
Work on individual Director of Public Health
sewage disposal system
without permit
105 CMR 590.000 Board of Health $10 non critical
Sanitary code for food Director of Public Health $20 critical
Establishments`
Amended at ATM 5-2-2015
Approved by Attorney General 8-6-2015
Posted 8-12-2015
Effective 9-12-2015

Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
1
ZONING BYLAWS
Town of Montague
Available online at http://www.montague-ma.gov
Effective: February 19, 2019
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
2
MONTAGUE ZONING BYLAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1. PURPOSE ..................................................................................................................3
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS ...........................................................................................................3
SECTION 3. ADMINISTRATION ................................................................................................5
SECTION 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ........................................................................7
4.1 Types of Districts .....................................................................................................7
4.2 District Boundaries ..................................................................................................8
SECTION 5. DISTRICT REGULATION .......................................................................................9
5.1 Existing Uses, Structures, and Lots .........................................................................9
5.2 Use Regulations .......................................................................................................9
5.3 Multiple Principal Uses ..........................................................................................14
5.4 Accessory Uses .......................................................................................................14
5.5 Dimensional Requirements ....................................................................................15
SECTION 6. OVERLAY DISTRICTS ..........................................................................................17
6.1 Flood Plain Overlay District ..................................................................................17
6.2 Water Supply Protection District ...........................................................................17
6.3 Agricultural Business Overlay District ..................................................................21
SECTION 7. GENERAL REGULATIONS .................................................................................23
7.1 Sign Requirements .................................................................................................23
7.2 Parking Requirements ............................................................................................25
7.3 Loading Requirements ...........................................................................................28
7.4 Lot Access ..............................................................................................................28
SECTION 8. SPECIAL REGULATIONS ....................................................................................30
8.1 Trailer, Mobile Home, and Camper Regulations ...................................................30
8.2 Earth Removal Regulations ...................................................................................30
8.3 Home Occupations .................................................................................................33
8.4 Boarding of Animals ..............................................................................................34
8.5 Accessory Apartments ...........................................................................................35
8.6 Telecommunication Facilities ................................................................................37
8.7 Self-Service Storage Facilities ...............................................................................39
8.8 Back Lot Development in Agricultural Business Overlay District ........................40
8.9 Solar Energy Installations & Facilities...................................................................44
8.10 Marijuana Establishments ......................................................................................46
8.11 Open Space Residential Development ...................................................................47
8.12 Planned Unit Development ....................................................................................53
SECTION 9. SITE PLAN REVIEW AND SPECIAL PERMITS ................................................58
9.1 Site Plan Review .....................................................................................................58
9.2 Special Permit .........................................................................................................60
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
3
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The Purpose of this Zoning Bylaw (this “Zoning Bylaw” or “Bylaw”) is to promote the health, safety, convenience, amenities, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Montague, through encouraging the most appropriate use of the land as authorized by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution (the Home Rule Amendment) and Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws with the following objectives:
To conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets and ways; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid any undue concentration of population; to recognize the need for housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply, drainage, schools, parks, open space, and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, including consideration of town plans and programs, and to preserve and increase amenities available to the citizens of Montague.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
In this Bylaw the following terms shall have the meaning here assigned to them. Additional definitions relating to specific sections of these bylaws can be found in their respective sections.
BUILDING: an enclosed structure, either a principal building or shed, garage, stable, greenhouse, or other accessory building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: any subordinate building located on the same lot with the principal building or use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to use of the land. Any accessory structure shall not include any structures which are attached to the principal building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: shall mean the vertical distance from the mean finish grade of the ground adjoining the building at the street side to the highest point of the roof for flat or shed roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.. Not included are spires, cupolas, TV antennae, or other parts of structures which do not enclose potentially habitable floor space.
DRIVE-THROUGH: shall mean the provision of retail sales or services to customers who remain in their vehicles.
DWELLING: shall mean a building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one (1) or more households.
DWELLING UNIT: shall mean living quarters for a single household, with cooking, living sanitary and sleeping facilities, independent of any other unit. For the purposes of this bylaw, a single-family dwelling
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
4
unit shall consist of one (1) unit, a two-family dwelling unit shall consist of two (2) dwelling units and multi-family dwelling unit shall consist of three (3) or more units.
FRONTAGE: the uninterrupted length of the front lot line, as defined herein, whether straight or not, which conforms to the minimum lot frontage requirement and is on:
? A public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
? A way shown on a previously approved subdivision plan which has been constructed to the standards required when subdivision approval was granted; or
? A way that predates subdivision control that has, in the Planning Board's opinion, suitable width, grades, and construction adequate and reasonable for vehicular traffic, including emergency vehicles and snow removal vehicles, and the installation of utilities.
For the purposes of this bylaw, if a lot has frontage on more than one street, frontage on only one street shall be used to satisfy the minimum lot frontage requirement.
HOTEL: a building designed as a temporary abode for more than twelve (12) persons or providing six (6) or more sleeping rooms in which lodging is provided with or without meals.
LODGING HOUSE: shall mean living quarters, accommodating more than five unrelated individuals, whether as a licensed lodging house, dormitory, co-op, commune or similar arrangement. It does not include hotels or group residences regulated by agencies of the Commonwealth under § 71 of chapter 111.
LOT: a parcel of land held in fee simple ownership designated on a plan or deed filed with the Franklin County Registry of Deeds or Land Court; however, contiguous lots in common ownership may not be divided except in conformance with these bylaws. Two or more contiguous lots in common ownership may be treated as one lot for the purposes of this chapter; provided that the combined lots are used as a single lot would customarily be used. The following shall not be counted toward land within the minimum lot area: land under permanent water bodies; land within public ways, and land within private ways and rights-of-way where the general public has the right of access by automotive vehicles.
LOT LINE: a line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or any public place.
OPEN RECREATIONAL ENTERPRISE--shall include golf courses, ski facilities, picnic areas, campgrounds or similar activities with structures and paving covering not more than 5% of lot area.
PUBLIC UTILITY: shall include power lines, power transmission, power generation facilities, and telecommunication facilities (See Section §8.6) but shall exclude solar energy facilities and installations (See §8.9). A public utility may be privately owned but is otherwise regulated by the Mass Department of Public Utilities, the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or other governmental agencies.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: a business establishment consisting of a structure or group of structures containing separate storage spaces leased to individuals for storage of goods, products, materials or other objects.
SPECIAL PERMIT: a permission granted in writing by the Special Permit Granting Authority for a use or structure that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would be
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
5
compatible with the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district as special permits, if specific provision for such special permits is made in this Zoning Bylaw.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY: a general term denoting land, property, or interest therein, usually a strip acquired for or devoted to a planned roadway. A street right-of-way should be sufficient to accommodate the ultimate roadway, including, but not limited to: the street pavement, shoulder, grass strip, sidewalk, public utility facilities, street trees, and snow storage.
VARIANCE: a grant of relief from the requirements of this Bylaw which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by the Bylaw. Grants of relief are for dimensional and construction requirements only and do not include relief from the requirements of this Bylaw governing the use of land and premises.
SECTION 3. ADMINISTRATION
3.1 Scope and Authority
3.2.1 Enforcement Authority
The Inspector of Buildings shall act as the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be charged with the enforcement of this Zoning Bylaw.
3.2.2 Building Permits
No building or structure shall be built, moved, located or externally altered in size, shape, and no use of land or a building shall be begun or changed without a permit having been issued by the Inspector of Buildings or its designated agent; provided, however that no permit shall be issued for such construction, alteration or use of any structure, land, or building in violation of any provisions of this Bylaw or 310 CMR 15.000 (Title 5) as enforced by the Board of Health.
3.2.3 Enforcement Request
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer is requested in writing to enforce the provisions of this Bylaw against any person allegedly in violation of this Bylaw and the Zoning Enforcement Officer declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action, or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such request.
3.2.4 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by reason of his or her inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other administrative officer under the provisions of this Bylaw, or any person including an officer or board of the Town, aggrieved by an order of decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or other administrative officer, in violation of the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws or any provision of this Bylaw, may file an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
3.2.5 Penalty
(a) Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw, or any condition of a decision issued pursuant to this Bylaw, may be punished by a fine imposed by a Court of Law not
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
6
exceeding three-hundred ($300) dollars for each offense and each day that such a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) As an alternative means of enforcement, the Inspector of Buildings may impose noncriminal penalties pursuant to G.L. c.40, § 21D and Article VI of the Town’s General Bylaws, in accordance with the following schedule:
i. First offense: fifty ($50) dollars
ii. Second offense: one hundred ($100) dollars
iii. Third offense: two hundred ($200) dollars
iv. Fourth and each subsequent offense, per violation: three hundred ($300) dollars
3.2.6 Zoning Board of Appeals
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) of five members and three associate members, to be appointed by the Selectboard, which Board of Appeals shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction under this Bylaw, Chapters 40A and 40B of the Massachusetts General Laws in the manner prescribed by said laws and this Bylaw. The Zoning Board shall adopt rules governing the conduct of its business and shall place said rules on file with the Town Clerk. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(a) Appeals. To hear and decide appeals, as provided in MGL c 40A, including an appeal taken by any person aggrieved by his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action
(b) Special Permits. To hear and decide applications for special permits as provided in this Zoning Bylaw. See §9.
(c) Variances. To authorize upon application a variation from the terms of this Zoning Bylaw except that no variation to the district boundaries or uses permitted therein shall be allowed.
(d) Comprehensive Permits. To hear and decide applications for comprehensive permits as provided in Chapter 40B of the General Laws and this Zoning Bylaw.
3.2.7 Planning Board
There is hereby established a Planning Board of five members and one associate member, to be appointed by the Selectboard, which Planning Board shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction under this Bylaw and Chapters 40A and 41 of the Massachusetts General Laws in the manner prescribed by said laws and this Bylaw. The Planning Board shall adopt rules governing the conduct of its business and shall place said rules on file with the Town Clerk. The Planning Board shall have the power to hear and decide application for special permits as provided in the Zoning Bylaw. See §9.
3.3 Amendment
This Bylaw may be amended from time to time at any annual or special town meetings in accordance with Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
3.4 Validity
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
3.5 Effective Date
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
7
Upon its effective date, February 19, 2019, this Bylaw shall amend and be substituted for the existing Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Montague, but shall not affect such rights or duties that have matured, penalties that were incurred, proceedings that were begun or appointments made before its effective date, pursuant to the previously effective Zoning Bylaw, except as otherwise provided by Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
SECTION 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
4.1 Types of Districts
For the purposes of this Zoning Bylaw, the Town of Montague is hereby divided into the following districts:
Abbreviation District Name Statement of Purpose
RE
Recreation-Education
To allow for public enjoyment and use of parks and schools.
AF
Agriculture Forestry
To allow for a viable farming and forestry industry, protect natural resources, and preserve rural character
AF-2
Agriculture Forestry- 2
To allow for a viable farming and forestry industry, protect natural resources, and preserve rural character
AF-4
Agriculture Forestry- 4
To allow for a viable farming and forestry industry, protect natural resources, and preserve rural character
RS-1
Residential -1
To allow for livable and walkable residential neighborhoods on generally smaller lots serviced by municipal sewer
RS-2
Residential -2
To allow for livable and walkable residential neighborhoods that are generally not serviced by municipal sewer
RB
Rural Business
To allow small and natural resource based businesses that are compatible with existing agricultural and residential uses and scenic character
NB
Neighborhood Business
To allow for compatibility of residential and business uses in village areas
CB
Central Business
To allow for pedestrian-oriented downtown areas with mixed-use buildings and a range of retail and commercial services
GB
General Business
To allow for commercial activity that enables access to a broad range of products and services
ID
Industrial
To allow high quality employment opportunities through manufacturing, production, and research
HI
Historic Industrial
To allow for adaptive reuse of historic industrial buildings and sites Overlay Districts
FP
Flood Plain
To prevent loss of life, damage to private property, and lessen the impacts of flooding
WSP
Water Supply Protection
To prevent contamination of the surface water and ground water resources providing present and significant potential public water supplies for the Town of Montague
AB
Agricultural Business
To maintain the viability of agricultural businesses by conserving land with productive soils in large, contiguous blocks and minimizing conflicts between agricultural operations and residential uses, and to identify an area of town where other policies should be developed to promote and facilitate commercial agriculture
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
8
4.2 District Boundaries
The boundaries of these districts are defined and bounded as shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map" that is on file with the Town Clerk's office. The map, as revised, and all explanatory matter therein are made a part of this Zoning Bylaw. Except when labeled to the contrary, boundary or dimension lines shown approximately following or terminating at street, railroad or utility easement center or layout lines, boundary or lot lines, water body shoreline or the channel of a stream shall be construed to be actually at those lines. When shown approximately parallel, perpendicular or radial to such lines, they shall be construed to be actually parallel, perpendicular or radial thereto. When not located in any other way, boundaries shall be determined by scale from the map.
4.2.1 Existing lots
Where a zoning district boundary line divides any lot existing at the time such line is adopted, a use and principal structure permitted in one (1) district may be extended into the other district in which the lot has lot frontage, no more than thirty (30) feet with a width of no more than two hundred (200) feet.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
9
SECTION 5. DISTRICT REGULATION
5.1 Existing Uses, Structures, and Lots
The lawful use of any structure or lot existing at the enactment or subsequent amendment of this Bylaw may be continued although such structure or use does not conform to the provisions of this Bylaw, subject, however, to the following exceptions:
5.1.1 Restoration
In any event that a non-conforming structure is destroyed by fire or other natural cause, the same may be reconstructed or repaired at the same location for the same non-conforming use, provided the new building will be equal in appearance and character to the original structure and that such construction is commenced within twenty-four (24) months from the occurrence of such natural cause.
5.1.2 Abandonment
A non-conforming use which has been abandoned or not utilized for a period of twenty-four (24) months shall not be re-established.
5.1.3 Alterations
No non-conforming use shall be changed or extended, and no non-conforming building or structure shall be altered or replaced by a new building, except as authorized in §5.1.1, or unless granted a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals subject to a finding that the alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use and/or structure to the neighborhood, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §6.
5.2 Use Regulations
(a) Permitted Uses in all districts:
i. Agriculture and forestry on parcels of land exceeding 5 acres
ii. Religious, educational and other uses expressly exempt under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, § 3
iii. Governmental facilities and services
iv. Public parks and off-road recreational paths for walking and cycling
(b) Prohibited uses in all districts:
i. Collection, treatment, storage, burial, incineration, or disposal of radioactive wastes, including, but not limited to low-level waste.
5.2.1 RE. Recreation-Education Districts
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Educational uses
ii. Public parks
iii. Seasonal commercial enterprises that are subordinate to a primary recreational or educational use (such as food vendors, camps, or events)
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals:
i. Open recreational enterprise
ii. Cemeteries not exempt by M.G.L. Chapter 40A
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
10
5.2.2 AF, AF-2, AF-4. Agriculture-Forestry Districts
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Farming and forestry
ii. Single family dwellings
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals:
i. Educational uses not exempt by M.G.L. Chapter 40A
ii. Two-family dwellings
iii. Retail sales and services accessory to agriculture or forestry as primary use
iv. Social club or lodges
v. Open recreational enterprises
vi. Earth removal, per §8.2.3
vii. Public utilities
viii. Cemeteries not exempt by M.G.L. Chapter 40A
ix. Marijuana Cultivation
x. Other uses not listed here if similar to uses allowed in §5.2.2 (a) in externally observable attributes and compatibility with rural environs.
5.2.3 RS-1, RS-2. Residential Districts
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Single family dwellings
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals:
i. Educational uses not exempt by M.G.L. Chapter 40A
ii. Two-family dwellings
iii. Multi-family dwellings not exceeding 4 units
iv. Farming and forestry on 5 acres or less
v. Social club or lodges
vi. Cemeteries not exempt by M.G.L. Chapter 40A
vii. Public utilities (power lines, transmission and generation facilities excluding solar)
5.2.4 RB. Rural Business District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Single and two-family dwellings
ii. Agriculture and forestry
iii. Agricultural or forestry products processing with cumulative building area of up to 5,000 square feet
iv. Retail sales and services with cumulative building area of up to 5,000 square feet and without an accessory drive-through component
v. Craft workshops or light assembly shops with cumulative building area of up to 5,000 square feet
vi. Open recreational enterprises with cumulative building area of up to 5,000 square feet
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
11
vii. Uses customarily accessory to the above, including parking areas with up to 25 spaces to the rear or side of the principal building
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals:
i. Permitted uses in section (a) with cumulative building area exceeding 5,000 square feet
ii. Multi-family dwellings not exceeding 4 units
iii. Business, professional, or medical offices
iv. Hotels
v. Earth removal, per §8.2.3
vi. Public utilities
vii. Self-service storage facilities, per §8.7
viii. Marijuana cultivation or production, per §8.10
ix. Other uses similar to §5.2.4(a) in externally observable attributes.
(c) Special requirements
i. Accessory parking areas exceeding 25 spaces require a Special Permit
ii. Accessory parking area to the front (facing the street) of the principal building requires a Special Permit
5.2.5 NB. Neighborhood Business District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Single and two-family dwellings
ii. Retail sales and services less than 1,000 gross square feet of floor area and without an accessory drive-through component
iii. Business, professional, or medical office less than 1,000 gross square feet of floor area
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals:
i. Non-residential uses in § 5.2.5(a) exceeding 1,000 square feet of floor area and without an accessory drive-through component
ii. Multi-family dwellings
iii. Lodging houses
iv. Hotels
v. Non-profit clubs or lodges
vi. Parking lots or parking garages, as a principal use
vii. Craft workshop or light assembly shop
viii. Farming and forestry on less than 5 acres of land
ix. Public utilities
x. Other non-industrial uses if similar to § 5.2.5(b) in externally observable attributes and compatibility with residential environs.
(c) Special Standards for non-residential uses:
i. Hours of retail operation are limited to the period between 7 a.m. and 9 p.m. Hours of non-retail operation, if wholly contained within the building premises, may extend beyond the hours of retail operation if the activity has no impact on adjoining residential uses or buildings.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
12
ii. Exterior lighting and signs may not be illuminated, except for safety, beyond the hours of retail operation. Lighting may not project beyond the sidewalk or roadway immediately in front of the business.
iii. Noise, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust, strong or unhealthy odors, or air pollutants shall be wholly contained within the premises.
iv. Projected traffic shall not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood.
v. Exterior changes shall have a design integrated with the surrounding neighborhood with respect to building placement, proportion, color, rooflines, façade and landscaping treatment and other design details.
vi. In the instance of failure or inability to meet one or more of the standards, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for such use.
5.2.6 CB. Central Business District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Mixed-use with the street level as a commercial use and up to 4 dwelling units on upper floors
ii. Retail sales and services of 5,000 square feet or less of floor area, without an accessory drive-through component
iii. Business, professional, or medical offices
iv. Social clubs or lodges
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals:
i. Mixed-use with the street level as a commercial use and 5 or more dwelling units on upper floors
ii. Retail sales and services that involve construction or alteration of more than 5,000 square feet of floor area, without an accessory drive-through component
iii. Craft workshops or light assembly shops, with retail component
iv. Hotels
v. Parking lots or parking garages
vi. Public utilities
vii. Marijuana retailers, per §8.10
viii. Other uses similar to §5.2.6 (a) in externally observable attributes.
5.2.7 GB. General Business District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Business, professional, or medical offices, up to 5,000 square feet of floor area
ii. Retail sales and services that involve up to 5,000 square feet of floor area
iii. Social clubs or lodges
iv. Farming and forestry on land less than 5 acres, with a retail component
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board
i. Single and two-family dwellings
ii. Multi-family dwellings, including mixed use
iii. Hotels
iv. Retail sales and services that involve construction or alteration of over 5,000 square feet of floor area or that includes an accessory drive-through component
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
13
v. Business, professional, or medical offices that involve construction or alteration of over 5,000 square feet of floor area.
vi. Lodging houses
vii. Open recreational enterprises
viii. Public utilities
ix. Self-service storage facilities, per §8.7
x. Marijuana retailer, medical marijuana treatment center, cultivation, production, research or testing, per §8.10
xi. Craft workshops or light assembly shops
xii. Manufacturing, processing, or research
xiii. Other non-industrial uses if similar to §5.2.7 (a) in externally observable attributes
5.2.8 ID. Industrial District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Business office or professional office
ii. Manufacturing, processing, or research
iii. Bulk storage, warehousing, distribution
iv. Agriculture or forestry products processing
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board
i. All uses in §5.2.8(a) that involve the construction or alteration of over 20,000 square feet of floor area or the development of over 217,800 square feet (5 acres) of land.
ii. Solar energy facilities, per §8.9
iii. Self-service storage facilities, per §8.7
iv. Retail sales and services
v. Hotels
vi. Earth removal, per §8.2
vii. Open recreational enterprises
viii. Public utilities
ix. Marijuana cultivation, production, research, or testing, medical marijuana treatment center, or retail if accessory to cultivation or production as a primary use, per §8.10
x. Other uses similar to §5.2.8(a) in externally observable attributes.
5.2.9 HI. Historic Industrial District
(a) Permitted Uses:
i. Business, professional, or medical office in an existing building
ii. Retail sales and services in an existing building
iii. Manufacturing, processing, or research in an existing building
iv. Bulk storage, warehousing, distribution in an existing building
v. Craft workshop or light assembly shop in an existing building
(b) Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board:
i. Uses listed in § 5.2.9(a) that are in new structures or additions to existing buildings
ii. Multi-family dwelling
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
14
iii. Hotels
iv. Public utilities
v. Solar energy facilities, per §8.9
vi. Marijuana retailer, medical marijuana treatment center, cultivation, production, research or testing, per §8.10
vii. Self-service storage facilities, per §8.7
viii. Open recreational enterprises
ix. Farming and forestry on 5 acres or less
x. Other uses similar to § 5.2.9(a) in externally observable attributes.
(c) Special Requirements
i. Demolition of an existing structure requires a special permit from the Planning Board, excepting structures that have been deemed unsafe by the Inspector of Buildings.
5.3 Multiple Principal Uses
Multiple principal uses on one lot are permitted provided that the dimensional requirements of § 5.5 are met for each building without counting any area, frontage or minimum side yard or minimum front or rear yard setback requirements twice. Setback requirements must be met for each building from property lines and from other building setback lines. Not more than one principal building shall be erected on a lot without a Special Permit issued by the Planning Board after determining that each such building has adequate access and services to be functionally equivalent to those required for separate lots by the Planning Board in its Subdivision Regulation. Developments meeting the applicability and dimensional requirements of a Planned Unit Development shall be subject to requirements of §8.12
5.4 Accessory Uses
Any use which is, in Franklin County, customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted Principal Use shall be permitted on the same lot with said Principal Use, or on a lot adjacent thereto in the same ownership, subject to the general limitation that it shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood or the property in the vicinity, and subject further to the following provision: wherever a Principal Use is allowed by Special Permit then Accessory Uses to the Principal Use shall be subject to a Special Permit, unless otherwise provided in the bylaws. The following accessory uses have specific requirements in Section 8 SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
? Trailers, Mobile Homes, and Campers, §8.1
? Home Occupations, §8.3
? Boarding of Animals, §8.4
? Accessory Apartments, §8.5
? Solar Energy Installations, §8.9
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
15
5.5 Dimensional Requirements
5.5.1 Dimensional requirements schedule, principal use buildings
Minimum
Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(linear feet)
Minimum
Front Yard and Street Line Setback (a)
(linear feet)
Minimum
Side Yard Setback
(linear feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard Setback
(linear feet)
Maximum Building Height
(linear feet)
RE
no minimum dimensional requirements
AF
43,560, plus 22,500 per dwelling unit after first
150
25
15
30
28
AF-2
87,120
200
25
15
30
28
AF-4
174,240
250
25
15
30
28
RS- 1
15,000, plus 5,000 per dwelling unit after 2nd
100
15
10
30
28
RS-2
22,500, plus 5,000 per dwelling unit after first
150
25
15
30
28
RB
43,560, plus 22,500 per dwelling unit after first
200
25
15
30
28
NB
10,000
75
15
10
30
28
CB
no minimum lot size
no minimum lot frontage
Edge of sidewalk,
OR 10 max if no sidewalk
0, if there is access to rear of lot over a drive at least 12 in width
15
36
GB
no minimum lot size
no minimum lot frontage
25
0, if there is access to rear of lot over a drive at least 12 in width OR
30 where a new commercial use abuts an existing residential use
30
36
ID
87,120
no minimum lot frontage
25
15 OR
50 where a new industrial use abuts an existing residential use
30
50
HI
no minimum lot size
no minimum lot frontage
25
0, if there is access to rear of lot over a drive at least 12 in width
15
50
(a) No building need provide a street line setback greater than that of the principal buildings on 3 out of 4 adjoining properties on the same side of the street.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
16
5.5.2 Dimensional Requirements, Accessory Structures
Accessory structures are any subordinate building or structures located on the same lot with the principal building or use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main buildings or to use of the land. Examples of accessory structures include but are not limited to sheds, garages, stables, greenhouses and pools.
(a) The minimum front yard and street line setback shall be the same as that for a principal building, per §5.5
(b) The minimum side yard and rear yard setback from the property line shall be 10 feet.
(c) Sheds with 120 square feet in floor area or less may have a minimum rear and side yard setback of 3 feet.
5.5.3 Dimensional Relief
(a) Minimum lot size and/or minimum frontage
Relief may be granted by Special Permit for lots that are connected to both municipal sewer and public water and subject to finding that the relief given will not derogate from the public health, safety, or welfare or neighborhood character.
(b) Minimum front yard, street line, side yard, rear yard or building height
Relief may be granted for principal and accessory structures by Special Permit where special circumstances exist and can demonstrate that the improvement will not derogate from the public health, safety, or welfare or neighborhood character.
(c) Special Permit Granting Authority
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for dimensional relief pursuant to § 5.5 except the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for dimensional relief in the Industrial (ID), Historic-Industrial (HI) and General Business (GB) Districts, unless otherwise specified in this Bylaw.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
17
SECTION 6. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
The following Districts shall be superimposed on the other districts established by the Zoning Bylaw. All uses, dimensional requirements and other provisions of the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in force and effect, except that where the overlay district imposes greater or additional restrictions and requirements, such restrictions or requirements shall prevail. Any uses not permitted in the underlying districts shall remain prohibited.
6.1 Flood Plain Overlay District
6.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Floodplain Overlay District is to prevent loss of life, damage to private property, and lessen the impacts of flooding.
6.1.2 Applicability
The flood plain district includes all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A and A-1-30 on the Town of Montague Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and the Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps, dated August 15, 1979 as amended by the Federal Emergency Management Agency February 12, 1982.
6.1.3 Standards
The following requirements apply in the Flood Plain District:
(a) Within Zone A, where the base flood elevation is not provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the applicant shall obtain any existing base flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed by the Inspector of Buildings for its reasonable utilization toward meeting the elevation or flood proofing requirements, as appropriate, of the State Building Code.
(b) All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100 year flood.
(c) Any encroachment meeting the above standard shall comply with the floodplain requirements of the State Building Code.
6.2 Water Supply Protection District
6.2.1 Purpose
To protect the public health, safety and welfare by preventing contamination of the surface water and ground water resources providing present and significant potential public water supplies for the Town of Montague.
6.2.2 Definitions
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
18
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA: Any area determined by a hydrological study to be of porous, permeable geologic deposits, especially, but not exclusively, deposits of stratified sand and gravel, through which water from any surface drains into an aquifer, and which includes any wetland or body of surface water surrounded by or adjacent to any such area.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any substance or combination of substances which, because of quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to water supplies or to human health if disposed of into or on any land or water in this town. Any substance designated a hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 261 and the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 21C shall also be deemed a hazardous material for the purposes of this bylaw.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Materials or structures on or above the ground that do not allow precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
INTERIM WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA: The area encompassed by a 1,500 foot radius from a public water supply well for which a hydrological study has not been done
LEACHABLE WASTES: Waste materials including solid wastes, sludge and pesticide and fertilizer wastes capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the environment.
6.2.3 Applicability
The Water Supply Protection District (“WSPD”) consists of the following areas referenced on the Official Zoning Map:
(a) The aquifer recharge area for the Turners Falls Public Water Supply Tolan Well
(b) The aquifer recharge area for the Turners Falls Public Water Supply Hannegan Brook Well
(c) The Interim Wellhead Protection Area encompassed by a 1,500 foot radius from the Montague Center Public Water Supply Well
6.2.4 Standards
All uses permitted in the underlying zone are subject to the following standards:
(a) The use of sodium chloride and other deicing materials for ice control shall be minimized, consistent with public highway safety requirements.
(c) Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and other leachable materials shall not be used in amounts which result in groundwater contamination levels exceeding Massachusetts Drinking Water Standards.
(d) Any above-ground storage tanks for oil, gasoline, or other petroleum products, or for other hazardous materials, shall be placed on an impermeable surface, diked to 110% of the capacity of the tank, to prevent spills or leaks from reaching the groundwater. Floor faults shall be plugged to prevent discharges or leaks. No floor drains shall be allowed, only sump pumps to allow for pumped removal of any spilled materials into a contained and impermeable vessel for removal purposes.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
19
(e) Any run-off from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site by being diverted toward areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the extent possible. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination. All recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in full working order by owner.
(f) Where the premises are partially outside the WSPD, such potential pollution sources as on-site waste disposal systems shall, to the degree feasible, be located outside the District.
6.2.5 Prohibitions
(a) Business and industrial uses, not including permitted agricultural uses, which manufacture, use, process, store, or dispose of hazardous materials or wastes as a principal activity or in amounts exceeding the minimum threshold amount requiring compliance with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Hazardous Waste Regulation 310 CMR 30. These uses include, but are not limited to:
i. dry cleaning
ii. metal plating, finishing or polishing
iii. chemical or bacteriological manufacturing
iv. electronic circuit assembly
v. photographic processing
vi. wood preserving
vii. furniture stripping
viii. printing
ix. auto body repair
x. machine shops
(b) Business and industrial uses, not including permitted agricultural uses, which involve the on-site disposal of hazardous wastes from operations.
(c) Motor vehicle gasoline and diesel sales.
(d) Commercial and self-service laundries, unless connected to municipal sewer lines.
(e) Sanitary landfills, dumps, septage lagoons, wastewater treatment facilities for municipal or industrial wastes, junk and salvage yards.
(f) Disposal of liquid or leachable wastes, except for:
i. residential subsurface waste disposal systems;
ii. customary agricultural operations; and
iii. business or industrial uses which involve the on-site disposal of wastes from personal hygiene and food preparation for patrons and employees.
(g) Underground storage of oil, gasoline, or other petroleum products excluding liquefied petroleum gas. Underground storage of any other hazardous materials.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
20
(h) Outdoor storage of salt, de-icing materials, pesticides or herbicides.
(i) Disposal of snow from outside the WSPD.
(j) The use of septic system cleaners.
6.2.6 Uses allowed by Special Permit
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant Special Permits for the following uses within WSPD according to the procedures specified in §6.2.8:
(a) The rendering impervious of more than 20% of the area of any single lot.
(b) Any use retaining less than 50% of the lot area, regardless of size, in its natural vegetative state with no more than minor removal of existing trees and vegetation.
(c) Any use that involves trucking or bus terminals, commercial vehicle washes, commercial vehicle repair as primary or accessory use
6.2.7 Special Permit Procedures
(a) Required Findings. In addition to satisfying the criteria for a Special permit under §9.2 of this Bylaw, the Special Permit Granting Authority may grant a Special Permit for uses identified in §6.2.6 only upon finding that the proposed use will:
i. In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect the existing or potential quality or quantity of water available in the WSPD, and;
ii. Be designed to minimize disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be developed.
(b) Required Submittals. The plan submitted shall at a minimum include the following information:
i. A complete list of the chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and other potentially hazardous materials to be used, stored, or generated on the premises in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use.
ii. Those businesses using, storing, or generating hazardous materials shall file a hazardous materials management plan with the Planning Board and Board of Health which shall include:
? Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures.
? Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces.
? Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30.
iii. Drainage recharge features and provisions to prevent loss of recharge.
iv. Provisions to control soil erosion and sedimentation, soil compaction, and to prevent seepage from sewer pipes.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
21
6.2.8 Non-conforming Uses
Non-conforming uses which were lawfully existing, begun, or in receipt of a building or special permit prior to the first publication of notice of public hearing (June 3, 1991) for this bylaw and any amendments thereto may be continued. Such non-conforming uses may be extended or altered, as specified in §5.1 Existing Uses, Structures and Lots, provided that there is finding by the ZBA that such change does not increase the danger of ground water pollution from such use.
6.3 Agricultural Business Overlay District
6.3.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Agricultural Business Overlay District is to maintain the viability of agricultural businesses by conserving land with productive soils in large, contiguous blocks and minimizing conflicts between agricultural operations and residential uses, and to identify an area of town where other policies should be developed to promote and facilitate commercial agriculture. The district is configured to include those lands which, by virtue of their soils, acreage, location adjacent to and contiguous with other farmland, and lack of protection under existing zoning, comprise the critical agricultural areas of the Town of Montague.
6.3.2 Permitted uses
All uses, dimensional requirements and other provisions of the Montague Zoning Bylaw applicable to the underlying districts shall remain in full force and effect, except where conflicting provisions are applied by the overlay zone. Any uses not permitted in the underlying district shall remain prohibited unless stated otherwise.
6.3.3 Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board
(a) The rendering impervious of more than 25% of the area of any single lot or more than 21,780 square feet, whichever is less, for non-agricultural use.
(b) Back Lot Development, pursuant to §8.7.
(c) Governmental facilities and services
(d) All uses allowed by Special Permit in the underlying district, with the exception that Earth Removal is not permitted except as accessory to agricultural uses.
6.3.4 Special Permit Standards
Special Permits and Site Plan Approval for uses in the Agricultural Business District may be granted upon a finding by the Special Permit Granting Authority that the proposed use meets the following standards and is otherwise consistent with the purposes of this section and the Special Permit section of the Montague Zoning Bylaws.
Proposed uses shall:
(a) Be located on areas of the site with soils least suitable for agriculture
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
22
(b) Minimize non-agricultural uses of prime and unique soils and soils of statewide and local importance
(c) Maximize the distance of non-agricultural uses from permanently protected farmland and active agricultural operations and use buffering to avoid conflicts
(d) Maximize the amount of contiguous farmland undisturbed by non-agricultural uses
(e) Minimize impact on agricultural infrastructure, including barns and other agricultural buildings, farm roads, drainage, irrigation, etc.
(f) Maintain views of open agricultural land from public ways
(g) Be designed so that non-agricultural structures are integrated into the landscape
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
23
SECTION 7. GENERAL REGULATIONS
7.1 Sign Requirements
7.1.1 Applicability
No sign shall be erected except as provided by the Bylaws and after a permit has been issued by the Inspector of Buildings and, if required, a special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
7.1.2 Definitions
FLASH: shall mean any change in lighting intensity or messaging by an illuminated device that is less than one minute (60 seconds). This shall further include any change in illumination that leaves the illusion of motion, including scrolling.
SIGN: shall mean any external device visible to the public and designed to inform or attract attention of persons to the premises on which the sign is located, but not including traffic directional signs or signs erected by public agencies.
SIGN AREA: shall mean the surface area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing all the display area of the sign, but not including structural members not bearing advertising matter, unless internally or decoratively lighted. One side only of flat, back-to-back signs shall be counted.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: a self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer-type signs.
SIGN, BUILDING: Any sign which is painted on, incorporated into, or affixed parallel to the wall of a building.
7.1.3 Off-Premises Signs
Billboards or signs whose content does not relate exclusively to the premises on which they are located are prohibited.
7.1.4 On-Premises Signs
Signs whose content relates exclusively to the premises on which they are located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on those premises on which the signs are located, shall be allowed, subject to the following table. Exceptions are allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
District
Maximum sign size
Allowed signs
Residential and Agriculture Forestry Districts
4 square feet per premises
One free standing OR one building sign
Central Business
,Neighborhood Business, Recreation-Education
24 square feet cumulative sign area per business
One building sign per business AND one building sign affixed perpendicular to the building OR one portable A-Frame sign up to 6 square feet in size.
Rural Business, General Business,Industrial, Historic-Industrial
32 square feet cumulative sign area per business
One free standing sign per premises AND one building sign per business
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
24
7.1.5 Sign Limitations
(a) No sign shall, flash, or revolve, or consist of pennants, ribbons, spinners, strings of light bulbs, revolving beacons, searchlights.
(b) No building or free-standing sign shall project above the eave of the roof.
7.1.6 Illuminated and electronically controlled signs
(a) No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM, unless relating to an establishment open during those hours.
(b) Signs may only be illuminated from external sources directed solely toward said sign, and only white lights shall be used for illumination. The lighting of any sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed or shall be maintained at a sufficiently low level of intensity and brightness that it shall not adversely affect the neighboring premises nor the safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public ways.
(c) No sign shall be internally or surface illuminated except as may be allowed by Special Permit in the Central Business, General Business and Historic Industrial District.
7.1.7. Nonconforming Signs
(a) Continuance. A nonconforming sign lawfully existing at the time of adoption or subsequent amendment of this Bylaw may continue although such sign does not conform to the provisions of this section, but if the associated use to which a sign relates has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of two years or more, then the sign must be replaced with a conforming sign.
(b) Maintenance. Any lawfully existing sign may be maintained, repaired, resurfaced, or repainted, but shall not be expanded, extended, or enlarged, in dimension or use, except in conformance with the provisions of this section.
(c) Replacement. Any sign replacing a nonconforming sign shall conform to the provisions of this section, and the nonconforming sign shall not thereafter be displayed. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by vandalism, act of God, or other reason beyond the control of the owner, it may be restored or replaced within two years in the same manner and dimensions as the previous, nonconforming sign.
7.1.8 Exempt Signs
(a) Legal notices: identification, informational, or directional signs created or required by governmental bodies.
(b) Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking, but bearing no advertising matter, including name or products.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
25
(c) Signs indicating whether an establishment is open or closed, provided the sign does not flash and is not illuminated between the hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM, unless relating to an establishment open during those hours.
(d) Temporary signs and banners may be used in addition to the other signs, subject to the following size and duration limitation.
i. Public or commercial event signs. Temporary signs and banners are allowed for up to 30 days preceding a scheduled event and shall not exceed 16 square feet per location and must be removed within 5 days after the event.
ii. Tag Sale Signs. Allowed only during the period that the sale is in progress and the preceding 48 hours. Allowed only for tag sales that occur no more often than once each month. May be up to 3 square feet.
iii. Real Estate and Contractor's Signs. Remove within 14 days after the work, or closing is completed. May be up to 3 square feet.
iv. Traffic Control Signs for special events. Remove at the end of the event. Must be permitted by Department of Public Works.
v. Other Temporary Signs. Allowed for no longer than a 90 day maximum length of time and must be removed within five days after the event to which they apply. May be up to 4 square feet.
7.2 Parking Requirements
7.2.1 Applicability.
All parking demand created by new structures or uses, expansions of existing structures or uses, and change of use in existing structures must be provided in conformance with this section.
The Site Plan Review Authority and Special Permit Granting Authority in this section and shall be consistent with § 9.
7.2.2 Minimum Parking Space Requirements.
All parking demand created by new structures or uses, expansions of existing structures or uses, and change of use in existing structures shall provide a minimum number of off-street parking spaces as specified in the table below. When the application of a unit of measurement for parking spaces to a particular use or structure results in a fractional space, any fraction under 1/2 shall be disregarded, and fractions of 1/2 or over shall be counted as one parking space. Where more than one (1) use occurs on one (1) site, the requirements of this section shall be cumulative.
Principle Use Category
Parking Space Requirement
Dwelling unit in Central Business or Neighborhood Business
1 per unit
Dwelling unit in all other districts
1.5 per unit
Nursing Home
1 per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee on largest shift
Housing for Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
1.2 per unit
Retail or Office
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Hotel or Lodging House
1 per each guest room
Theater, restaurant, or other place of
1 per 4 seats
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
26
assembly
Industrial or Manufacturing
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 per employee, whichever is greater
7.2.3 District Parking Requirements
(a) Central Business District. All non-residential uses in the Central Business District are not required to provide off-street parking.
(b) Rural Business District. A parking area that exceeds 25 spaces or is located between the street and the front of a principal building requires a Special Permit.
7.2.4 Relief from Parking Requirements
(a) Reductions. The required number of spaces may be reduced by special permit if the Special Permit Granting Authority makes a determination that the amount of spaces will meet all parking needs for the site. Reductions may be allowed for multiple-use parking areas subject to a determination that there is not a substantial overlap of parking periods between multiple uses on the site.
(b) Off-Site Parking. A special permit may be granted to allow off-site parking spaces in a non-municipal parking area in order to meet the minimum parking requirements, subject to the following standards:
i. Off-site parking must be within reasonable walking proximity to primary use;
ii. Safe, well-marked pedestrian walkways, crossings, signage, and adequate lighting must be provided between the off-site parking and principal use;
iii. Multiple-use parking areas shall not have substantial overlap of parking periods for each use;
iv. Off-site parking spaces provided by a separate private property owner shall be subject to a legally binding agreement that shall be presented to the Special Permit Granting Authority as a condition of approval for a special permit.
7.2.5 Parking Design Standards.
Parking areas shall be subject to the following requirements but are not applicable to driveways serving Single or Two-Family Dwellings:
(a) Parking areas shall be designed so that their use does not require backing onto a public way.
(b) Parking areas shall not be permitted in the required street line setback or closer than ten (10) feet to the front lot line, whichever is greater.
(c) Individual space dimensions shall comply with generally accepted engineering practices and shall be painted, marked or otherwise delineated in a manner sufficient to visibly identify said spaces.
(d) Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Architectural Access Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Safety, as amended.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
27
(e) The minimum width of entrance and exit driveways shall be 10 feet for one-way use and 18 feet for two-way use. There shall be not more than two (2) driveway openings onto any street from any single premises. No driveway opening shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the street line of an intersecting way.
(f) All parking areas and driveways shall be maintained with a dust free all-weather surface properly drained to dispose of all surface water accumulating within the area. Where soil conditions allow, permeable or porous paving may be used for parking stalls to infiltrate stormwater.
(g) The layout of parking areas shall allow sufficient space for the storage of plowed snow unless removal from the site is provided.
(h) Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking areas to be used at night. All exterior lighting associated with parking areas shall be downcast and shall be directed or shielded to eliminate light pollution onto any street or abutting property.
7.2.6 Parking Design Standards for Lots With 10 or More Spaces
All uses that involve the construction or expansion of a parking area that creates 10 or more new parking spaces is subject to Site Plan Review. The following standards apply to new parking areas with 10 or more parking spaces, in addition to the standards in § 7.2.5.Waivers to standards in this section may be granted by the Site Plan Review Authority.
(a) Non-residential parking areas adjacent to a residential property shall be set back from the property line by at least 10 feet and shall have a continuous border of dense plantings or fencing at least 5 feet high, maintained to provide an effective visual screen.
(b) A minimum of 10 percent of the total parking area (exclusive of perimeter landscaped buffer strips) shall be landscaped open space. Internal landscaping shall be distributed throughout the lot for maximum shading and aesthetic improvement.
(c) Parking areas shall be separated from the street line by a landscaped area including shade trees (at least three-inch caliper at a point 6 inches above the ground) planted every 20 feet on center.
(d) One shade tree (at least three-inch caliper at a point 6 inches above the ground) shall be planted for every 10 parking spaces. Preservation of existing trees is desirable and may be substituted for planted trees. Parking spaces covered by solar photovoltaic canopies shall not count towards the shade tree requirement.
(e) Landscaped islands a minimum of 8 feet in width shall be used to break up rows of parking with 15 or more parking spaces in single or double bays. Each island shall incorporate at least 2 shade trees. A sidewalk a minimum of 5 feet in width may be located within islands, and shall connect to public sidewalks, if applicable.
(f) To the maximum extent possible, trees and other plant materials shall be native species. Trees, shrubs, ground covers and perennials used within parking lots should be of species able to withstand the harsh conditions and runoff of a parking lot. Any trees and shrubs that do not survive one year after planting shall be replaced in accordance with the requirements of this bylaw.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
28
(g) Low Impact Development (LID) features identified in the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management Manual such as swales, filter strips, structural soils, and bioretention areas that capture, treat, and infiltrate runoff from the parking area are encouraged and may be located within internal landscaping, landscaped islands, buffer strips and setbacks.
(h) Bicycle parking shall be provided. The design, location, and number of bike racks shall be approved by the Site Plan Review Authority.
7.3 Loading Requirements
Adequate off-street loading facilities and space must be provided to service all needs created by new structures or uses, additions to existing structures or uses, or change of use. Facilities shall be so sized and arranged so that no trucks need to back onto or off of a public way, or be parked on a public way while loading, or unloading, or waiting to do so. Loading facilities in the Central Business and Neighborhood Business Districts should maximize the use of existing alley ways. Loading docks may not face a public way unless said public way is considered an alley by the Department of Public Works, or a special permit is granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority for the Zoning District in which the principal use to which the loading dock relates is to be located.
7.4 Lot Access
7.4.1 Driveway Requirements
All new driveways connecting to public way require a driveway permit from the Montague Department of Public Works. The minimum side yard setback for a new driveway shall be at least 5 feet.
7.4.2 Access over front lot line
Vehicular egress and access to a lot must be across the front lot line meeting the minimum frontage requirements. However, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit permitting vehicular egress/access to a lot over a front lot line having less than the required minimum frontage, or over any side lot line or rear lot line.
7.4.3 Access over land zoned for such use
Egress and access to a lot or use must be over land zoned for such use. However, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit, with appropriate conditions, permitting egress/access over land where the use is not otherwise permitted.
7.4.4 Common Driveways
(a) Purpose
The purpose of Common Driveways is to enhance public safety by reducing congestion entering and leaving roadways, to conserve land and minimize impacts on agricultural and natural resources and to protect the value of real property.
(b) Applicability
A special permit from the Planning Board is required.
(c) Special Permit Standards
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
29
i. Common driveways shall not be used to satisfy lot frontage requirements.
ii. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a common driveway if it determines that the Town’s interest is better served by a common driveway than by individual driveways or subdivision approval.
iii. The Planning Board may deny a special permit for a common driveway if it determines that access is not feasible across the frontage of each lot proposed to be served by the common driveway.
iv. Designs, plans, easements and maintenance agreements for common driveways shall be developed in accordance with Planning Board regulations and shall require a standard of construction, financing and maintenance adequate for the anticipated uses.
7.4.5 Long Driveways
For residences with a setback of 500 feet or more from an accepted way, a driveway for such residence must meet the following standards. Exceptions may be granted by Special Permit from the Planning Board.
(a) Width shall be no less than 16 feet in width over its entire length
(b) Grade shall not exceed 10%
(c) Curve radius must not be less than 30 feet
(d) Passing turnouts shall be provided with a width of 20 feet and a length of 35 feet and shall be spaced no more than 300 feet between turnouts or terminus of the driveway
(e) Turn around area with a minimum 30 foot radius at terminus of driveway
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
30
SECTION 8. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
8.1 Trailer, Mobile Home, and Camper Regulations
8.1.1 Purpose
To regulate the use of trailers, mobile homes, and campers for residence or business purposes.
8.1.2 Definitions
CAMPER: shall mean a portable shelter eligible to be registered and insured for highway use, and designed to be used for travel, recreational and vacation use, but not for permanent residence; commonly called travel trailers, , motor homes, campers and tent trailers, but not mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME: shall mean a manufactured dwelling built on a chassis, brought to the site containing complete electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities, and designed without necessity of a permanent foundation designed for year round living.
TRAILER: shall mean a towed vehicle for non-residential use.
8.1.3 Applicability
The provisions of this section shall not be retroactive to apply to any mobile home located in the Town of Montague prior to 6/16/1973.
No person shall park, store or occupy a trailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle for living or business in the Town of Montague except in the following instances:
(a) The owner of land may permit occupancy by a guest, using a mobile home or camper, for living purposes, for a period not to exceed 90 days in a calendar year, provided that a permit shall first be obtained from the Board of Health if such occupancy exceeds 30 days.
(b) When a residence has been destroyed by a fire or other natural disaster, the owner or occupier of the residence may reside in a temporary mobile home for up to 24 months while the residence is being rebuilt.
(c) An office that is incidental to construction or development of a premises on which the trailer is located is permitted, but must be removed within 30 days of completion of construction.
(d) Replacement of a pre-existing Mobile Home by a larger unit shall require administrative approval by the Inspector of Buildings.
8.1.4 Standards
Wherever a trailer, mobile home, or camper is parked for occupancy, said trailer must conform to local and state sanitation regulations and all trailers are subject to dimensional setback requirements for accessory buildings in the respective zoning district.
8.2 Earth Removal Regulations
8.2.1 Purpose
To preserve Montague’s natural resources, protect the environment and water quality through the regulation of earth removal operations.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
31
8.2.2 Applicability
The removal from any premises of topsoil, borrow, rock, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand, or gravel shall be done only in accordance with § 8.2. except that the following shall be exempted from these provisions:
(a) The removal of less than 50 cubic yards of such material within any twelve-month period.
(b) Removal, incidental to construction on the premises, where such removal is explicitly allowed under a currently valid building permit or under agreements governing road construction in an approved subdivision, or as a routine part of normal farming operations.
8.2.3 Special Permit Requirements
Removal shall be allowed only under a Special Permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals following written application, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the Conservation Commission. The following shall be conditions for such issuance.
(a) The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing all manmade features, property lines, names and addresses of all abutters, if available, from the Assessor's including those across any street or way, topography at 5 foot contour intervals of the site and all land within 100 feet of the area from which the above material is to be removed, together with the lowest grade at which the finished surface will lie, and the proposed cover vegetation and trees. If involving more than five (5) acres and/or 10,000 cubic yards of removal, the plan shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Engineer.
(b) A performance bond in the amount determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be posted in the name of the Town assuring satisfactory performance in the fulfillment of the requirements of this Bylaw and such other conditions as the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose as conditions to the issuance of its permit.
8.2.4 Water Supply Protection District Standards
Excavation for removal of earth, sand, gravel and other soils shall not extend closer than six (6)
feet above the mean maximum ground water table for the site. This restriction shall not apply to
excavations incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to, providing for the
installation or maintenance of structural foundations, freshwater ponds, utility conduits, or on-site
sewage disposal. Additionally, the following conditions must be met:
(a) The owner of the excavation enterprise shall engage a registered professional engineer to determine the mean maximum ground water table for the site. The engineer's report shall include a map of the site detailing the mean maximum groundwater table elevations. The report, stamped, sealed, and signed by the engineer, shall be filed prior to the removal of any materials with the Building Inspector and the Board of Health.
(b) Between March 1st and May 30th of each year of operation of the excavation enterprise, the owner shall employ a registered professional engineer or soil scientist to do a site inspection and issue a certified report concerning the maximum depth of removal or excavation relative to the mean maximum ground water table. The report, stamped, sealed, and signed by the engineer, shall be filed within 30 days of the site inspection with the Building
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
32
Inspector and the Board of Health. The Building Inspector and a representative of the Board of Health shall accompany the engineer during the site inspection.
8.2.5 Earth Removal Standards
(a) Finish grade shall not lie below a level that would reasonably be considered a desirable grade for the later development of the area, or below the grades specified on the plan accompanying the permit application. The Zoning Board of Appeals may specify a base grade below which excavation shall in no event take place.
(b) Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water, and for prevention of wind and water erosion carrying material onto adjoining properties.
(c) One hundred (100) foot buffer strip shall be maintained at all boundaries, and not excavated unless at the termination of operations in order to improve overall grading.
(d) The visibility, sound, and airborne particles from processing equipment shall be screened from adjacent premises through the design and location of such equipment, and through the use of natural vegetation planting, overburden piles, and surge piles as screening.
(e) Dust shall be controlled through watering of roads, or other best practices, as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(f) Excavation for removal of earth, sand, gravel and other soils shall not extend closer than six (6) feet above the mean maximum ground water table for the site in the Water Supply Protection District (§6.2).
8.2.6 Restoration Standards
Forthwith following the expiration or withdrawal of a permit, or upon voluntary cessation of operations or upon completion of earth removal to the extent covered by the performance bond, that entire area shall be restored as follows:
(a) All land shall be so graded that no slope exceeds one (1) foot vertical rise in three (3) feet horizontal distance and shall be so graded as to provide safety for drainage without erosion.
(b) All boulders larger than one-half cubic yard shall be removed or buried, and all tree stumps removed.
(c) The entire area excepting exposed ledge rock shall be covered with not less than four (4) inches of topsoil, which shall be planted with native perennial cover vegetation adequate to prevent soil erosion.
8.2.7 Additional Conditions
Before granting a permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give due consideration to the location of the proposed earth removal, to the general character of the neighborhood surrounding such location, to the protection of water supply, to the general safety of the public on the public ways in the vicinity, and to the recommendation of the Conservation Commission. The Zoning Board of Appeals may set additional conditions to the above standards, including but not limited to: duration
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
33
of the permit, hours of the day during which removal may take place, hours during which vehicles may leave the premises, routes to be used by hauling vehicles, and trees to be planted.
8.2.8 Renewal or Revocation of Permit
A Special Permit granted under this Section may extended, without notice or a public hearing, but such extension shall not be for more than one year, provided the extension is requested prior to the expiration of the Special Permit. A permit may be renewed upon application for a new Special Permit, subject to the notice and hearing requirements of G.L. c. 40A, §9. Prior to renewal, inspection of the premises shall be made by the Building Inspector, or appointed agent of the Zoning Board of Appeals, to determine that the provisions of the Bylaw are being complied with.
8.2.9 Enforcement
The Zoning Board of Appeals, after hearing and proof of violation of this Bylaw, may modify, suspend or revoke the permit, after which the operation shall continue in accordance with the modified permit or, if revoked, cease and the area restored in accordance with § 8.2.6.
8.3 Home Occupations
8.3.1 Purpose
The purpose of permitting home occupations is to allow home-based economic activity compatible with residential environments. It is the intent of this Section that home occupations are to be defined solely by the standards listed in §8.3.3.
8.3.2 Applicability
All Home Occupations require a permit from the Inspector of Buildings, subject to finding that all the standards in §8.3.3 are met. Said permits may be revoked at any time by the Inspector of Buildings, if any of the standards are violated after issuance of the permit. Said permit shall not be transferable between persons or property locations.
8.3.3 Standards
(a) The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building or other structure accessory thereto.
(b) Floor area equal to no more than (25%) of the floor area of the principal building shall be used for the purpose of the home occupation.
(c) The home occupation shall be accommodated within an existing structure or within any extension thereto.
(d) Not more than one person not a member of the household shall be employed on the premises of the home occupation.
(e) There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or other variation from the residential character of the principal building other than an unlighted sign not to exceed (2) square feet in area.
(f) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
34
(g) Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a residential neighborhood.
(h) Parking generated shall be accommodated off-street, other than in a required front yard, and shall not occupy more than 35% of lot area.
8.3.4 Relief from Standards
In the event that any person is unable to obtain a permit for a home occupation as defined above because of a failure or inability to meet any one or more of the standards contained in § 8.3.3 the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to such person for such use. Special permits shall not be transferrable between persons or property locations.
8.4 Boarding of Animals
8.4.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to encourage homesteading and boarding of animals in a manner promotes the welfare of animals and minimizes nuisance to densely developed neighborhoods.
8.4.2 Definitions
KENNEL: A Structure used for the boarding, grooming, and training of more than four 4 dogs, cats, or other pets that are more than 3 months old, whether commercially operated or not, except for farm dogs used for herding or protection of livestock from predators and breeding and raising of dogs for sale and activities incident thereto.
LIVESTOCK: All cattle or animals of the bovine species; all horses, mules, burros, and asses or animals of the equine species; all llamas or animals of the camelids species; all goats or animals of the caprine species; all swine or animals of the porcine species; and all sheep or animals of the ovine species, and other animals raised for profit.
POULTRY: Any domesticated fowl, including, but not limited to chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and pheasants (including peafowl).
8.4.3 Keeping of livestock
The raising or keeping of livestock for pets or for use by residents of the premises but not for commercial agricultural purposes is permitted on residential parcels with a single or two-family dwelling as follows:
(a) The keeping of livestock, in accordance with applicable state laws, is allowed by right in Rural Business and all Agriculture Forestry Districts. A Special Permit is required from the Zoning Board of Appeals to keep livestock in the RS-1 and RS-2 District. The Zoning Board may impose a limit on the number of livestock animals that may be kept on the property as a condition of approval of a special permit.
(b) All structures housing or sheltering livestock must be located at least 100 feet from any abutting residence, business, school, or church (the principal structure, not the property line or accessory structure).
(c) All stormwater runoff from the pen or paddock and compost area shall be contained on the premises and must be maintained to control dust and odor so as to not constitute a
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
35
nuisance or safety hazard. Feed must be secured in accordance with best management practices.
(d) In all districts for parcels of 5 or more acres, if the keeping of livestock is an agricultural use, then the provisions of this section shall not apply.
8.4.4 Keeping of poultry
The raising or keeping of poultry for pets or for use by residents of the premises but not for commercial agricultural purposes is permitted on residential parcels as follows:
(a) Roosters (male chickens) are prohibited, with the exception of properties in the Agricultural-Forestry or Rural Business Districts.
(b) The structures housing or sheltering the poultry must be located at least 30 feet from any abutting residence, business, school, or church (the principal building, not the property line or accessory structure).
(c) The poultry must be restricted to the property.
(d) All stormwater runoff from the coop, run, and compost area shall be contained on the premises and must be maintained to control dust and odor so as to not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. Feed must be secured in accordance with best management practices.
(e) In all districts, for parcels of 5 or more acres, if the keeping of poultry is an agricultural use, then the provisions of this section shall not apply.
8.4.5 Kennels
Kennels are permitted by Special Permit in the Agriculture- Forestry Districts, Rural Business District and Industrial District provided the following standards are met:
(a) Any structures housing the animals are either located in an area where sound will be buffered so as to not cause a disturbance to the neighborhood or the buildings are sound insulated and must be located a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting residence business, school, or church (the principal building, not the property line or accessory structure).
(b) All animal wastes shall be collected and properly disposed of in a manner to prevent pollution of surface or ground water.
(c) Dogs shall not be permitted to bark excessively at night (e.g. for periods longer than fifteen minutes) so as to create a nuisance.
8.5 Accessory Apartments
8.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of permitting accessory apartments is to:
(a) Develop housing units in owner occupied single-family homes that are appropriate for households at a variety of stages in their life cycle;
(b) Provide older homeowners with a means of obtaining rental income, companionship, security, and services, thereby enabling them to stay more comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise leave;
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
36
(c) Add moderately priced rental units to the housing stock to meet the needs of smaller households and make housing units available to low and moderate income households who might otherwise have difficulty finding housing;
(d) Provide housing units for persons with disabilities;
(e) Protect stability, property values, and the residential character of a neighborhood, and
(f) Encourage increased housing density.
8.5.2 Definitions
ACCESSORY APARTMENT, WITHIN: an Accessory Apartment that is within a single-family dwelling is a self-contained housing unit incorporated within the single family dwelling that is clearly a subordinate part of the single- family dwelling and complies with each of the criteria stated in this bylaw.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT, ATTACHED: an attached Accessory Apartment is a self-contained housing unit added as an addition to a single family dwelling that is clearly a subordinate part of the single family dwelling and complies with each of the criteria stated in this Bylaw. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT, DETACHED: a detached Accessory Apartment is a self-contained housing unit that is located on the same lot as the structure of a single family dwelling and may be incorporated within a garage or carriage house or other accessory structure or as a stand-alone structure that is clearly subordinate to the primary use as a single family unit and complies with each of the criteria stated in this Bylaw. This definition does not include a trailer or mobile home, however mounted.
8.5.3 Applicability
(a) Accessory Apartment, Within. The Inspector of Buildings may issue a Building Permit authorizing the installation and use of an Accessory Apartment within an existing or new owner-occupied, single family dwelling unit.
(b) Accessory Apartment, Attached. An attached Accessory Apartment shall require a Special Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(c) Accessory Apartment, Detached. A detached Accessory Apartment shall require a Special Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
8.5.4 Standards
(a) Only one Accessory Apartment may be created within a single-family dwelling or on a house lot.
(b) Utilities and water supply shall be integrated with the single-family dwelling.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
37
(c) The owner(s) of the residence in which the Accessory Apartment is created must continue to occupy at least one of the dwelling units as their primary residence. A covenant, in a form satisfactory to Town Counsel, stating the conditions of any permit issued under this Section must be recorded in the Franklin County Registry of Deeds or Land Court, as appropriate, in the chain of title to the property, with documentation of the recording provided to the Inspector of Buildings, prior to the occupancy of the Accessory Apartment.
(d) The Accessory Apartment shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence as much as feasibly possible. Any new entrances shall be located on the side or rear of the building. A detached accessory apartment shall be compatible in design with the primary residence. Any stairways, access, or egress alterations serving the Accessory Apartment shall be enclosed, screened, or located so that visibility from public ways is minimized.
(e) The maximum gross floor area of Accessory Apartment shall be no greater than nine hundred (900) square feet.
(f) A minimum of two (2) but no more than four (4) off-street parking spaces must be available for use by the owner-occupants and tenants.
(g) When a property with an Accessory Apartment is sold, the new owner(s), if they wish to continue to exercise the Permit, must, within thirty (30) days of the sale, submit a notarized letter to the Inspector of Buildings stating that they will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises as their primary residence. This statement shall be listed as a condition on any Permits which are issued under this Section.
(h) Prior to issuance of a Building or Special Permit, a floor plan must be submitted showing the proposed interior and exterior changes to the building.
(i) For dwellings to be served by on-site septic system, the owner must obtain a letter from the Board of Health stating that the existing sewage disposal system is adequate for the proposed Accessory Apartment before a Building or Special Permit can be obtained.
(j) Accessory Apartments in the AF-1, RS-2 and RB districts will not require additional minimum lot size requirements in § 5.5.1, provided that the standard in § 8.5.4 (i) is satisfied.
(k) In order to encourage the development of housing units for disabled and handicapped individuals and persons with limited mobility, the Inspector of Buildings or the Zoning Board of Appeals may allow reasonable deviation from the stated conditions where necessary to install features that facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons.
8.6 Telecommunication Facilities
8.6.1 Purpose
To allow telecommunication and wireless communication services with minimal effect to the safety and general welfare of the public primarily through the following methods:
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
38
(a) Minimizing the required number of such facilities by maximizing the shared use of any new or existing structures.
(b) Minimizing the adverse visual impacts through careful design, siting, and screening.
8.6.2 Definitions
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES: includes towers, antennas, buildings and accessory structures designed or modified to provide personal communications services, radio and television broadcast or reception, wireless communications, or similar communication services. Not included are antennas used for personal television and radio reception or radio facilities actively used under a Federal Communication Commission amateur radio license or antennas that are located on existing utility poles within a street right of way. A Telecommunication Facility shall be considered a Public Utility for the purposes of this Bylaw (See §2).
8.6.3 Applicability
Telecommunication Facilities may be allowed by Special Permit pursuant to § 5.2 and § 8.6. No Facility shall be located in the RS-1 or RS-2 Residential Districts.
8.6.4 Submittal Requirements
The following materials shall be submitted with the Special Permit application for Telecommunication Facilities:
(a) A site plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer. The plan shall include four (4) view lines in a one (1) mile radius from the proposed site, shown beginning at True North and continuing clockwise at ninety (90) degree intervals. In addition the applicant shall set a balloon at the location and height of proposed towers for a period of time as determined by the SPGA.
(b) A report from a registered engineer shall:
i. demonstrate that the facility complies with all applicable standards of the State and Federal governments;
ii. describe the capacity of the tower or facility including the number and type of transmitter/receivers that it can accommodate;
iii. describes the planned layout of all facilities in Montague and abutting Towns;
iv. describes all accessory structures to be constructed on site.
(c) A copy of the requests made by the applicant to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, including responses from those agencies, demonstrating compliance with applicable regulations related to the facility.
(d) A locus map at an appropriate scale showing all buildings within 500 feet of the proposed facility.
(e) A copy of the co-location agreements.
8.6.5 Special Permit Standards
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
39
(a) To the maximum extent possible, all service providers shall co-locate on a single structure. Structures shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of users technologically practical. The intent of this standard is to reduce the number of towers located within the Town.
(b) No Facility shall exceed 200 feet in height as measured from the mean finished grade at the facility base. Exterior lighting of the tower, except as required by the FAA, and lighting of accessory structures shall be prohibited.
(c) New towers shall be free-standing monopoles.
(d) Facilities shall not be located within 1,500 feet of the peak of Will’s Hill, Chestnut Hill, Dry Hill, and Country Hill or located in such a way as to adversely impact the view of a one of these hills.
(e) Siting shall be such that the view of the Telecommunication Facility shall be as limited as possible when viewed off site.
(f) No telecommunication tower, inclusive of any attachments, shall be erected nearer to any property line than a distance equal to 125% of its vertical height.
(g) Facilities shall be screened year-round from abutters and residential neighborhoods.
(h) Fencing shall be provided to control access to Telecommunication Facilities and shall be compatible with the scenic character of the neighborhood and landscape.
(i) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(j) All Facilities shall be painted, or otherwise colored, so that they will blend in with the surrounding landscape or the structure on which they are located. A different coloring scheme shall be used below and above the tree or building line.
(k) There shall be no storage of vehicles on the site or exterior storage of equipment on the site.
(l) To the extent feasible, all network interconnections and power lines, to and from the Facility, shall be via underground lines.
(m) All Facilities, attachments, and accessory structures which have not been used for a period of one (1) year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. Such expense shall be secured with a performance guarantee in an amount determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority and posted in the name of the Town.
8.7 Self-Service Storage Facilities
8.7.1 Purpose
To allow for the limited construction and operation and maintenance of self-service storage facilities in areas where such use is not inconsistent with neighborhood character, and will have minimal impact on public health, safety and welfare, the environment and scenic and historic
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
40
character. The Special Permit Granting Authority for Special Permits under this § 8.7 shall be that of the Zoning District in which the self-service storage facility is to be located.
8.7.2 Standards
(a) No activity other than rental of storage units and pick up and deposit of property shall be allowed at a facility, except for accessory or incidental uses required in administration and security of the site. The use of storage units for any purpose other than storage shall be prohibited.
(b) All goods, products, materials and other objects stored shall be secured inside storage structures. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
(c) The storage of flammable liquids including petroleum products, highly combustible or explosive materials, corrosive or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited.
(d) Servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawnmowers or any similar equipment shall be specifically prohibited. Storage of motor vehicles, motor boats and similar equipment shall be prohibited in the Water Supply Protection District.
(e) Hours of customer access shall be specified by the Special Permit Granting Authority and limited to minimize impact on neighboring properties and public safety services.
(f) The site shall be secured by fence or other barrier to prevent unauthorized access. The Special Permit Granting Authority may require additional measures to monitor and limit access and ensure security.
(g) Self-service storage facilities shall be designed and landscaped so that they are not immediately visible from a public way.
(h) Adequate parking and unit access shall be provided, consisting of paved lanes and a minimum of three (3) spaces, plus one space for every five (5) individual storage units. If the access lane to the units and between structures accommodates temporary parking without blocking travel in the lane, additional per-unit parking is not required.
(i) Drainage from impervious surfaces shall be fully accommodated onsite.
(j) The Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider design and appearance of buildings, setbacks, visual impact, lighting, security issues, traffic circulation, consistency with current and abutting land uses and the market demand for self-service storage facilities in determining whether to grant, condition or deny this permit.
(k) The Special Permit Granting Authority may require additional conditions and set standards for performance and maintenance or vary prescribed conditions upon finding that such action is consistent with accepted engineering and design practices and is reasonably necessary to meet the purpose and intent of the Zoning Bylaws.
8.8 Back Lot Development in Agricultural Business Overlay District
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
41
8.8.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to promote permanent protection of productive agricultural land by allowing landowners to develop property that is not valuable for agricultural purposes.
8.8.2 Applicability
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit under this section for development of back lots in the Agricultural Business District that do not meet the frontage requirements of the Montague Zoning Bylaws upon finding that the proposed development meets the standards set forth in this section and § 6.3 (Agricultural Business District) and is otherwise consistent with the purposes of this section and the Montague Zoning Bylaws.
8.8.3 Access Requirements
(a) Back lots shall have access to a public way or a “way in existence” as defined by Chapter 41, § 81L, definition of “subdivision”, or via driveways that are designed to standards adequate to ensure safe access for construction, passenger and emergency vehicles. There shall be no structures located in the driveway.
(b) Up to four (4) back lots may share a common driveway pursuant to a Special Permit under this section and § 7.4.3 of the Montague Zoning Bylaws. Shared driveways shall meet all standards for Common Driveways under the Montague Zoning Bylaws and regulations of the Planning Board.
(c) Access driveways may be incorporated into back lots or structured as legal rights-of-way across land of others. Planning Board approval of legal documents creating rights-of-way is required.
(d) Access driveways may not be located within 250 feet of another access driveway to a back lot developed under this bylaw.
8.8.4 Dimensional Requirements
Minimum lot size (not including access drive)
22,500 square feet
Minimum lot frontage
0 feet
Maximum lot frontage
50 feet
Minimum street line setback
200 feet
Minimum front, side, and rear yard setback
Same as underlying district
Minimum setback from active farming operations
100 feet
8.8.5 Siting of dwelling units and drives
(a) Back lots shall be located on land that due to soils, topography, location, size or other factors is unsuitable or undesirable for agricultural use. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the land to be developed is not valuable for agricultural purposes.
(b) Dwelling units shall be integrated into the existing landscape through placement of buildings within woodland along the edges of fields or in locations visually screened by natural vegetation or topography to the maximum extent possible.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
42
(c) The visual impact of back lots and the traffic impact of access driveways on abutting landowners shall be minimized.
(d) Significant site features, including water courses, floodplains, wetlands, ponds and other water bodies, scenic views and historic sites shall be preserved.
(e) The Planning Board may require that building envelopes be designated within individual back lots and shown on plans.
8.8.6 Agricultural land protection requirement
For each back lot allowed by Special Permit, the applicant shall secure permanent protection of a parcel of land that is at least two acres or equal to the area of the back lot, whichever is greater, and each with a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a public way or a way in existence. The land to be protected shall:
(a) Be located within the Agricultural Business District.
(b) Be presently and primarily used in producing or raising agricultural, commodities including, but not limited to livestock, poultry, bees, fruits, vegetables, berries, nuts, feed, forage, seed, flowers, sod, greenhouse products and ornamental plants and shrubs.
(c) Have soils classified as agriculturally "prime," “unique” or of "statewide or local importance" by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
(d) Be able to be developed for residential purposes under the Montague Zoning Bylaws and all applicable provisions of local, state and federal law.
(e) Not include any structures or roads except those used for agricultural purposes.
Applicants are encouraged to protect parcels of land that are adjacent to land already protected by an Agricultural Preservation Restriction or Conservation Restriction. If multiple back lots are proposed, the Planning Board may require that parcels of land protected be contiguous to each other. Protection of land shall be accomplished by recording at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds or Land Court of a permanent agricultural preservation restriction, approved by the Planning Board, limiting use to agriculture and open space. The restriction shall be enforceable by the Town. Land permanently protected may be retained by the property owner or conveyed to others for active agricultural use.
8.8.7 Subdivision
(a) Back lots with at least 20 feet of frontage:
The Planning Board may approve division of back lots with at least 20 feet of frontage on a public way or a way in existence pursuant to MGL Chapter 41, § 81P and § 3.2 of the Montague Subdivision Regulations, upon finding that access is adequate for the proposed use.
(b) Back lots with less than 20 feet of frontage:
For back lots with less than 20 feet of frontage on a public way or a way in existence, the applicant may seek (a) Planning Board waiver(s) to divide the lot(s)
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
43
pursuant to MGL Chapter 41, § 81-P, 81-R and § 3.2 of the Montague Subdivision Regulations. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing pursuant to MGL Chapter 41, § 81-T on the waiver request; this hearing may be concurrent with the Special Permit hearing. Waivers may be granted upon finding by the Planning Board that access is adequate for the proposed use.
8.8.8 Special Permit Conditions
The following conditions shall apply to all special permits for back lot developments, in addition to any other conditions imposed by the Planning Board:
(a) No lot shall be built upon without the provision of potable water and sewage disposal facilities approved by the Board of Health.
(b) No further subdivision shall occur and the Planning Board shall record such condition on any approved Back Lot Site Plan clearly defining the lots upon which buildings can be placed and noting such condition in any Special Permit granted.
(c) The access driveway shall provide the only vehicular egress/access to the lots served.
(d) The Special Permit shall state that the access driveway is not a private road or a public road and that it does not meet the standards for a Town road.
(e) The Special Permit shall state that the access driveway shall not be accepted as a public way and the Town of Montague shall not under any circumstances be held liable for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or snow removal on any access drive.
(f) The Special Permit shall state that under no circumstances shall the Town of Montague be held liable in the event that emergency vehicles cannot get to their destination because of improper construction or maintenance of the access drive. It shall be the owners’ responsibility to be sure that the driveway is passable for emergency vehicles at all times.
(g) Each landowner served by the access driveway shall be jointly and severally responsible and liable for the repair and maintenance of all portions of the access drive to which more than one landowner holds a right-of-way.
(h) Every deed conveying a back lot created under this section shall incorporate by reference the Special Permit authorizing the lot's creation, and all conditions imposed in said permit.
(i) No building permit shall be issued for any back lot until (1) a Special Permit has been granted; (2) proof of recording at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds of the Special Permit and all required documents approved by the Planning Board, including rights of way, agricultural preservation restrictions, documents creating homeowners associations and maintenance agreements is submitted to the Planning Board and the Inspector of Buildings and (3) the lot has been legally divided and proof of recording at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds is submitted to the Planning Board and the Inspector of Buildings.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
44
8.9 Solar Energy Installations & Facilities
8.9.1 Purpose
To encourage solar energy collection on roofs, over parking lots, and on degraded areas and to minimize the environmental impact when that is not otherwise practical.
8.9.2 Definitions
BUILDING MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATION: A solar energy installation that is permanently affixed to a building, as defined by the building code. This definition is inclusive of canopy structures.
ACCESSORY GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATION: A solar energy installation that primarily supports on-site energy needs that is mounted on the ground, either directly or on supports which do not constitute a building under the building code.
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY: a ground-mounted solar energy installation that exceeds 2,000 square feet of panel surface area. Solar Energy Facilities shall not constitute a Public Utility for the purposes of this bylaw.
8.9.3 Building Mounted Solar Energy Installations
Building Mounted Solar Energy Installations are permitted in all zoning districts.
8.9.4 Accessory Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Installations
Ground Mounted Solar Energy Installations shall be considered an accessory structure and shall meet the setback requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located. Ground-Mounted Solar Energy Installations are permitted in accordance with the following table:
Zoning District
Requirement
Neighborhood Business, Central Business, and Recreation-Education
Special Permit Required
RS-1
Special Permit Required if exceeding 150 square feet of panel surface area
All other districts
Special Permit Required if exceeding 500 square feet of panel surface area
8.9.5 Solar Energy Facilities
Solar Energy Facilities are allowed in the Industrial and Historic-Industrial Districts by Special Permit and Site Plan Review from the Planning Board, subject to the submittal requirements and standards of this section. The Planning Board may require additional conditions or vary the prescribed conditions upon a finding that such action is reasonably necessary to meet the purpose and intent of the Bylaws.
(a) Required Submittals. In addition to the required Site Plan elements in §9, the following materials are required for permitting approval of Solar Energy Facilities:
i. A plan for the general procedures of operation and maintenance of the installation including security measures, maintenance of emergency access and the clear and available means of shutting down the facility in the event of an emergency.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
45
ii. A fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal and site restoration, prepared by a professional engineer.
iii. Owners and successors in title shall provide a satisfactory form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal and restoration of the landscape, in an amount determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125 percent of the cost of removal. Such surety may be waived for municipally or state owned facilities.
iv. A stormwater management report prepared by a professional engineer.
(b) Special Permit Standards
i. Adequate access and parking shall be provided for service and emergency vehicles; however there shall be no exterior long term storage of equipment or service vehicles on the site.
ii. For every mature tree cleared for construction, measured in board feet of wood; at least an equivalent mass of living mature trees shall be retained on-site.
iii. An 8 foot security fence shall be installed no closer to a property line than the setback required for a principal building. In addition, the site and its fencing shall be screened by buffering vegetation from general view from the surrounding ground level unless the Planning Board determines that there is no public benefit from such screening.
iv. The facility shall provide a vegetated buffer strip of at least 100 feet from any street line property boundaries or from the property line of any abutting residential use.
v. To the extent feasible, all network interconnections and power lines, to and from the facility, shall be via underground lines.
vi. Drainage from impervious surfaces shall be fully accommodated onsite.
vii. No array shall be floodlit.
viii. Herbicides may not be used to control vegetation at the solar electric installation.
ix. The owner of the array must provide for and post a 24 hour emergency contact phone number and identification of the owner. The information shall remain current and shall also be provided to the Police Chief and Fire Chief.
x. Decommissioning Requirements. Any facility which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be decommissioned by the owner or operator who shall notify the Board by certified mail of the proposed date of shut down and removal. Decommissioning shall consist of the following:
? Physical removal of all panels, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
? Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
? Stabilization and re-vegetation of the site and erosion prevention.
? The Town shall have the right, upon determination of abandonment, but not the obligation, to claim the financial surety, enter the site and remove the facility in accordance with the requirements of this section.
? All facilities, attachments, and accessory structures which have not been used for a period of one (1) year shall be considered abandoned. The removal expense shall be secured with the performance guarantee.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
46
8.10 Marijuana Establishments
8.10.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the orderly placement of medical and recreational marijuana establishments in areas where such a use is not inconsistent with the neighborhood character and in accordance with State law.
8.10.2 Definitions
For the purpose of this bylaw, the definitions of MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT, MARIJUANA RETAILER, MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR, MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER, MARIJUANA RESEARCH FACILITY OR TESTING LABORATORY, shall be consistent with the definition as found in G.L. c 94G and MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER shall be consistent with the definition as found in 955 CMR 501
8.10.3 Applicability
All uses incorporating marijuana cultivator, marijuana research facility or testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturing, marijuana retail or Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall be subject to Special Permit and Site Plan Review. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall be that of the Zoning District in which the use is to be located. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider the design of buildings, setbacks, visual impacts, outdoor lighting, security, hours of operation, odor control, traffic circulation, and consistency with current and abutting land uses.
8.10.4 Special Permit Standards
(a) No Marijuana Establishment shall locate any buildings, or structures within 300 feet of a pre-existing public or private school providing education in kindergarten or grades 1 through 12, as measured from the nearest point of the school property.
(b) Marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia shall not be visible from outside the building in which the Marijuana Establishment is located. No outside storage is permitted, except for outdoor cultivation facilities.
(c) No odor may be noxious or cause a nuisance, or impair public comfort and convenience. Marijuana Establishments shall incorporate odor control technology and provisions.
(d) The special permit shall be limited to the current applicant and shall provide that the permit shall lapse if the applicant ceases operating the Marijuana Establishment or if the applicant’s license with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts expires or is terminated.
(e) The Special Permit Granting Authority may require additional conditions and set standards for performance and maintenance upon finding that such action is reasonably necessary to meet the purpose and intent of the Zoning Bylaws, provided such conditions are consistent with G.L. c. 94G, 935 CMR 500, 105 CMR 725, 935 CMR 501 and any amendments thereto.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
47
8.11 Open Space Residential Development
8.11.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to:
(a) Promote and protect agricultural and forestry-related activities by preserving the most viable agricultural and prime forest land; and
(b) Encourage a less sprawling form of development that preserves open land and protects the natural and cultural features of the site.
8.11.2 General Description
This optional bylaw provides residents and developers of land in the AF-4, AF-2, AF, RS-1 RS-2 and RB Zoning Districts with an alternative to a standard subdivision development that is often incompatible with agricultural and forested land use and operations. Open Space Residential Development refers to residential development in which lots for buildings and accessories are grouped together in one or more areas within the boundaries of a larger parcel of land. The building lots are of a reduced size and concentrated together, taking up only a portion of the parcel of land. A permanent conservation restriction or agricultural preservation restriction preventing future development is placed on the open space to be preserved. Single-family dwellings are allowed “By Right” with Site Plan Review in an Open Space Residential Development. Two-family dwellings may be allowed in an Open Space Residential Development if granted a Special Permit by the Planning Board.
8.11.3 Procedures
(a) The Planning Board may approve a plan for the construction of an Open Space Residential Development in the AF, AF-2, AF-4, RS-1, RS-2 and RB Zoning Districts (subject to the regulations and conditions set forth under this section and §9.1: Site Plan Review and Montague’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
(b) Applicants are encouraged to contact the Planning Board prior to the application for Open Space Residential Development Review to discuss the applicant’s plans and promote better communication. Applicants are encouraged to submit a conceptual plan for review by the Planning Board prior to the application for Open Space Residential Development Review. Materials and information to be submitted with the conceptual plan shall be agreed upon by the applicant and the Planning Board.
(c) Applicants for an Open Space Residential Development shall submit seven (7) copies of an Open Space Residential Development and the narrative required to meet the requirements of this Open Space Residential Development Bylaw, Section 8 Site Plan Review, and the requirements of Montague’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations for a preliminary plan, which plan shall show locations of proposed streets, building envelopes and Protected Open Space. The plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect, or registered land surveyor.
The Planning Board approval for Open Space Residential Development Review shall not substitute for compliance with the Subdivision Control Act nor oblige the Planning Board to approve a related Definitive Plan for subdivision approval nor reduce any time periods for the Board consideration under that law. However, in order to facilitate processing, the
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
48
Planning Board may, insofar as practical under law, adopt regulations establishing procedures to allow the applicant and Planning Board to agree on an application which shall satisfy this section and the Board’s regulations under the Subdivision Control Act, if applicable. In addition, to the extent permitted by law, the Planning Board shall coordinate the public hearing requirement for an Open Space Residential Development with the Public Hearing required for a Definitive Subdivision Plan. The applicant is also responsible for obtaining all applicable permits or approvals that may be required for the Open Space Residential Development from other Town Boards or municipal officials.
(d) In addition to any information required by the above-referenced Subdivision Rules and Regulation, the application shall include the following information:
i. The form of organization proposed to own, manage, and maintain the preserved land;
ii. the substance of covenants to be imposed upon use of land;
iii. a preliminary septic system design or approval from the Montague Department of Public Works to connect to the municipal sewer system;
iv. the proposed source of potable water;
v. a development schedule;
vi. measures to prevent soil erosion, increased runoff, and flooding, and to manage stormwater;
vii. preliminary drainage calculations (definitive calculations to be included with definitive subdivision plan);
viii. projected traffic flow patterns, the total number of building lots and the proposed number of Single or two-family dwellings;
ix. proposed design features intended to integrate the proposed development into the existing landscape; and
x. the proposed use (e.g. farming, forestry, etc.), size, shape, location, and natural resource value of the land to be permanently protected.
(e) Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall transmit copies of the application to the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, the Board of Health, the Highway Superintendent, the Fire Chief and the Police Chief. In addition, the Town Clerk will notify the Historical Commission, and Agricultural Commission that a copy of the application is available for review at Town Hall. Town Boards and municipal officials other than the Planning Board shall have 45 days from the date the completed application is received by the Town Clerk to report to the Planning Board their findings and recommendations. The Fire and Police Chief will review the application to ensure that the proposal provides adequate emergency vehicle access to all lots. If necessary to ensure compliance with this section, the Planning Board may require further reasonable engineering or environmental analysis to be conducted at the expense of the applicant.
After the opportunity for review of other boards and municipal officials has taken place, the Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing under this section, in conformity with the provisions of M.G.L Chapter 40A, § 11 or § 9 if a Special Permit is required, and the provisions of the Zoning Bylaws and the regulations of the Planning Board. In addition, to the extent permitted by law, the Planning Board shall coordinate the public hearing requirement for the Open Space Residential Development with the Public Hearing required for a Definitive Subdivision Plan.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
49
8.11.4 Minimum Standards
(a) The minimum area of land for an Open Space Residential Development is five (5) acres. All land within the Open Space Residential Development tract shall be under single ownership or control at the time of the application. Adjoining lots must be adjacent to or only separated by a public way from the other lot.
(b) One single-family dwelling and accessory structures are permitted on each building lot. A two-family dwelling unit may be allowed on one or more building lots in an Open Space Residential Development if granted a Special Permit by the Planning Board. Multi-family dwelling units are not allowed in Open Space Residential Developments.
(c) The maximum density of an Open Space Residential Development shall not exceed the allowed density for a conventional subdivision in any zoning district unless a density bonus is granted pursuant to § 8.12.8 Bonus Incentives. In an Open Space Residential Development, the maximum number of building lots will be determined by one of the following methods at the Applicant’s option:
i. Method 1 - The maximum density for the Open Space Residential Development under Method 1 shall be calculated by taking the parcel area and subtracting out any acreage that is wetlands, floodplains, existing permanently protected open space, land with slopes greater than 25%, and 10% of the total parcel area for roads and drainage to find the Net Parcel Area. The Net Parcel Area shall be divided by the Minimum Lot Area of the zoning district in which the parcel is located to determine the maximum number of lots allowed. All wetlands shall be defined under the supervision of the Conservation Commission and in accordance with the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Ch. 131, Sec. 40.
ii. Method 2 - A preliminary plan for a conventional (non-Open Space Residential Development) subdivision for the site shall be submitted illustrating the number of lots that could be created under a conventional subdivision. If no sewer is available, the results of deep hole and perc tests indicating how many of these lots would be buildable. The perc tests shall be conducted under the supervision of the Board of Health, and in conformance with Title 5, percolation tests. The number of buildable lots will equal the maximum number of lots for the Open Space Residential Development.
(d) Each lot shall have adequate road access. The Planning Board shall determine that each lot shown on the plan has practical access from the way upon which the lot fronts, in that there are no legal or physical impediments which will prevent access particularly for emergency vehicles such as fire engines and ambulances. The road serving the Open Space Residential Development shall comply with the Design Standards of Montague’s Subdivision Regulations unless such compliance is waived by the Planning Board pursuant to § 6.3 of the Subdivision Regulations.
(e) At least forty percent (40%) of the total lot area shall be preserved as Protected Open Space including agricultural or forested land. The minimum required Protected Open Space shall not include wetlands, floodplains, existing permanently protected open space,
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
50
land with slopes greater than 25%, roadways or accessory uses. To the extent possible the preserved land shall form a contiguous tract to enable continued farming or forestry operations or open space corridors. The amount of land preserved may be reduced by Special Permit where the lot is connected to municipal water and sewer.
(f) If there is no connection to sewer, with the Definitive Subdivision Plan, the applicant shall submit a septic system design for the Open Space Residential Development prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and approved by the Board of Health, in conformance with Title 5 of the State Environmental Code, and a plan illustrating the location of water supply wells. An Open Space Residential Development may utilize shared septic systems designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the State Environmental Code Title 5, 310 CMR. Septic systems shared or otherwise should be located outside of all agricultural land supporting farming operations to the maximum extent possible.
(g) Every Open Space Residential Development shall include a condition that the approved and recorded Definitive Subdivision Plan of said Open Space Residential Development shall have endorsed upon it a statement that the subdivision is an approved Open Space Residential Development and that no land within the subdivision may be further subdivided as to increase the number of building lots.
(h) Each lot shall comply with the minimum dimensional requirements of this Open Space Residential Development Bylaw.
8.11.5 Dimensional and Density Requirements
An Open Space Residential Development must conform to the following minimum dimensional and density requirements:
Zoning District
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Frontage
(linear feet)
Minimum Front Yard and Street Line Setback
(linear feet)
Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback (a)
(linear feet)
Maximum height
(linear feet)
AF-4 and AF-2
32,000
100
25
10
35
AF, RS-1 and RS-2
8,000
50
15
10
35
(a) Attached single family dwellings may be laid out with one side having no side yard setback. The opposite side yard shall be at least 10 feet.
8.11.6 Additional Site Design Standards
(a) Wherever it is feasible, all residential buildings shall be located away from agricultural soils that are classified by the Natural Resources Conservation Service as prime farmland and soils of state and local importance and placed on soils the least suitable for production of crops and livestock. This provision does not apply to the location of on-site
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
51
septic disposal systems that must be placed on soils meeting the Massachusetts Environmental Title 5 Code.
(b) The layout and construction of utilities, drainage systems, and roads shall be located to have the least possible impact on agricultural lands and uses or mature forest stands.
(c) To minimize conflict between agricultural operations, all residential lot lines shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from agricultural activities. This area shall be made up of a buffer strip of trees or open space.
(d) To the maximum extent possible, residential units should be integrated into the landscape to avoid interrupting the view of the agricultural or forested landscape from adjacent public ways. Vegetative and structural screening, landscaping, grading, and building placement on the lot should be used to minimize visual interference with pre-existing landscape features.
(e) To the maximum extent possible, structures should be sited within any woodland contained on the parcel; along the edges of fields; or in locations where structures can be visually screened or absorbed into natural vegetative or topographic features.
(f) All principal and accessory structures and accessory uses within the development shall be set back from the property lines of the development by a buffer strip, to be kept in a natural, landscaped or managed condition, of at least fifty (50) feet in width in the AF-4 and AF-2 districts and twenty-five (25) feet in the AF, RS-1, RS-2 and RB districts.
(g) Design of roads, utilities, and drainage shall be functionally equivalent to the standards contained in the Planning Board’s Subdivision Regulations insofar as reasonably applicable, but the Board may vary those standards to meet the particular needs of the Open Space Residential Development and natural features.
(h) There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation, facilities, roadways, driveways, and parking. There shall be no parking in the buffer strip, or in areas not otherwise designated for parking.
8.11.7 Open Space Requirements
The following standards shall apply to open space to be protected as part of the Open Space Residential Development:
(a) The area to be preserved as agricultural or forested land, as required under § 8.11.4 (e) shall be made subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described in M.G.L. c.184 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of future laws) running to or enforceable by the Town of Montague. To meet this requirement, a Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 184 shall be placed on the Protected Open Space and recorded in the Registry of Deeds by the applicant at the time the approved Definitive Plan is submitted to the Registry of Deeds for recording. The applicant shall notify the Planning Board in writing within ten (10) days after the Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction and the Definitive Plan, as approved and endorsed, have been
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
52
recorded at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds and, in the case of registered land, with the recorder of the Land Court, of such recording, noting book, page number and date of recording. The Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction placed on the Protected Open Space shall be held by the Conservation Commission of the Town of Montague, a suitable State Agency, or by a non-profit conservation land trust the principal purpose of which is the conservation or preservation of open space. Any fees associated with the holding and enforcement of the Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction by an entity such as a non-profit conservation land trust will be the responsibility of the Applicant or Homeowners Association as agreed to in writing prior to the recording of the Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction.
(b) The purpose of the Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction will be to clearly identify the uses and restrictions which apply to the Protected Open Space in order to protect the value of the property within the development. The Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction shall limit the use of the protected land to the following:
i. Agricultural production, including but not limited to, the raising of crops and livestock, forest management activities, nurseries, orchards;
ii. Activities necessary to successful agricultural production, including but not limited to, farm equipment operations, manure storage, and use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers as regulated by state and federal laws;
iii. Farm support operations, including but not limited to, farm equipment storage, agricultural processing, greenhouses, and farm animal veterinary services.
iv. Uses may also include passive recreation, easements for utilities, easements for future septic systems, and easements for private drinking water wells.
Said restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Planning Board shall prescribe and may contain additional restrictions on development and use of the land as the Planning Board may deem appropriate to meet the purposes of this Section.
(c) The Protected Open Space may be conveyed in one of the following ways:
i. Conveyed to an incorporated non-profit Homeowners Association made up of the owners within the development subject to a covenant, running with the land that provides for the following:
? Ownership and membership within the Homeowners Association shall pass with conveyances of the lots in perpetuity.
? Maintenance of agricultural open space shall be ensured by establishing a maintenance fee for each lot sufficient to cover maintenance expenses or through a comparable arrangement satisfactory to the Planning Board. The covenant established shall describe land management practices that will ensure that the existing fields and pastures will be plowed or mowed at least once per year. Included with the covenant shall be copies of a lease, for a minimum of five years, with a farmer or operator who will use the land for agricultural purposes. Such a land agreement document shall be submitted with the Definitive Subdivision Plan and shall be subject to
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
53
approval by the Planning Board and Town Counsel. A tentative agreement should be established and presented with the Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
ii. Conveyed to a suitable State Agency or non-profit land trust whose principal purpose is to conserve farmland and/or forest land, subject to the covenant requiring employment of land management practices which will ensure that existing agricultural fields and pastures will be plowed or mowed at least once per year; or
iii. Conveyed to the Montague Conservation Commission, at no cost. Acceptance of such a conveyance shall be at the option of the town and shall require approval at Town Meeting; or
iv. The Planning Board, at the request of Applicant, may consider granting a Special Permit to have the Protected Open Space retained by a private individual or a trust owned by private individuals provided that the interests of the residents of the Open Space Residential Development will be protected as outlined in the requirements of the Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction. Such Special Permit shall meet the requirements of § 9.2 of the Zoning Bylaws and other requirements to be determined by the Planning Board. A Conservation Restriction or Agricultural Preservation Restriction shall be placed on the Protected Open Space as specified in §8.11.7.
8.11.8 Bonus Incentives
In addition to the dimensional and density requirements of §8.11.5, Bonus Incentives are available in the form of extra buildings lots allowed within the development above the basic number of building lots allowed under §8.11.4(c). The total number of bonus lot(s) cannot be more than 20% of the maximum number of building lots allowed before the addition of bonus lots (e.g. 2 bonus lots for a 10-lot subdivision for a total of 12 lots). The Planning Board will determine, upon review of the development plan, the bonus lot total. Approval of an Open Space Residential Development shall be granted only if the Planning Board determines that the requirements of the Open Space Residential Development and the Site Plan Review bylaws have been complied with and if applicable, the Special Permit requirements have been met
i. Any development that increases the amount of land permanently preserved to a minimum of 60% of the total parcel area earns a 10% building lot bonus.
ii. An Open Space Residential Development plan that creates a minimum of 10% affordable housing units earns a 10% building lot bonus. Affordable housing units shall be eligible for inclusion in Montague’s Subsidized Housing Inventory as determined by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development. The applicant shall provide documentation demonstrating that the unit(s) shall count towards the Subsidized Housing Inventory to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
8.12 Planned Unit Development
8.12.1 Purpose
To allow for “Planned Unit Developments” in designated areas of Town, whereby through a comprehensive site plan, a unified development containing a mixture of land uses and buildings
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
54
is developed as a single entity. It is the intent of this provision to ensure sound planning and zoning practices while allowing certain desirable departures from the requirements of specific zoning provisions. The goals of the Planned Unit Development are:
(a) Encourage flexibility in the design of development through a carefully controlled review process of detailed plans within a particular zoning district.
(b) Promote the use of multiple-story buildings and campus-like clustering of buildings to maximize the amount of available open space.
(c) Encourage a less sprawling form of development which makes more efficient use of land, requires shorter networks of streets and utilities and which fosters more economical development and less consumption of developable land.
(d) Provide an efficient procedure which will ensure appropriate high-quality design and site planning.
(e) Promote high-quality coordinated building and site design which buffers adjacent residential uses and protects both scenic and natural features.
(f) Maximize pedestrian circulation within the project and connection to surrounding compatible land uses, both through the design of circulation systems and through the design and layout of land uses.
8.12.2 Applicability
A Planned Unit Development is a development of land as a single entity under the direction of a comprehensive site plan, in which a mixture of land uses, a variety of building types and designs, and open space are provided for in a coherent manner. A Planned Unit Development may occur in the Industrial (ID), General Business (GB), or Historic Industrial (HI) Zoning Districts by Special Permit from the Planning Board.
8.12.3 Dimensional requirements
To be eligible for a planned unit development, the parcel must have a minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet. Building height must comply with the underlying district. Existing historic mill buildings being reused as part of a Planned Unit Development may have a building height equal to the height of the historic structure.
8.12.4 Use regulations
(a) The uses allowed in a Planned Unit Development are any uses allowed either by right or special permit within the underlying zoning district.
(b) Uses in a planned unit development shall comply with all other applicable sections of this Zoning Bylaw, including but not limited to 7.1 Signs, 7.2 Parking, and 7.3 Loading Requirements, in addition to the required provisions of this section.
(c) More than one principal building and use is permitted on a lot.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
55
(d) One or more separate but contiguous parcels may be assembled to create a Planned Unit Development. Proposed Planned Unit Developments may include preexisting uses and buildings provided they are integrated into the development plan. Planned Unit Developments may consist of land in more than single ownership and may consist of separate parcels provided all current and future owners and lots are: (i) bound by the restrictive covenant(s) or conditions of the approved Planned Unit Development according to the Special Permit approval; and (ii) commit to maintain the project as a single Planned Unit Development.
(e) Subdivision of lots within a Planned Unit Development after final approval of the Site Plan or Special Permit shall be considered an amendment to the Special Permit and will require approval by the Planning Board.
8.12.5 Access requirements
(a) Entrances to Planned Unit Developments shall be limited to one access point onto a public way. The Planning Board may grant additional access points to improve traffic circulation for public safety or emergency services purposes if deemed necessary.
(b) Common driveways and parallel service drives may be required in the Planned Unit Development to minimize driveway openings.
(c) Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access shall be incorporated into the Planned Unit Development. Walkways or bicycle paths shall be provided throughout the site, and shall connect to existing off-site pedestrian and bicycle paths.
(d) Where public transit could serve the Planned Unit Development, access shall be facilitated by bus pullout areas, bus shelters, lighting, and/or other passenger amenities in coordination with the regional transit authority.
8.12.6 Design requirements
(a) Developments shall have an integrated design with respect to building placement, proportion, color, rooflines, and other architectural details.
(b) Developments must incorporate human scale features such as landscaping, pedestrian plazas and other public spaces, first floor windows, pedestrian level lighting, benches, awnings and architectural details.
(c) Each building's main entrance shall be clearly defined with architectural details such as raised parapets, peaked roofs, arches, canopies, and overhangs.
(d) Rear or side facades visible from other uses, parking areas, or streets must be of finished quality and should be landscaped.
(e) Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of buildings to the maximum extent feasible.
(f) All mechanical equipment including dish antennae, outdoor storage, and waste disposal areas shall be screened from public view.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
56
(g) Wall signs in multi-tenanted buildings must be placed within the same sign band.
8.12.7. Design guidelines
(a) New buildings shall relate harmoniously to existing buildings on the site and to the surrounding neighborhood.
(b) Boxy buildings should be softened with architectural details and landscaping. Pitched rooflines are encouraged.
(c) Long unbroken facades must be avoided. The use of facade offsets, recesses, angular forms, and landscaping rather than ornamentation is encouraged to break up the mass of large or continuous walls.
(d) The use of exterior building materials such as masonry, stone, wood, and brick is preferred.
(e) Facade details and building elements shall be proportionate to the scale of the building.
(f) Lighting fixtures should complement the architectural design of the Planned Unit Development.
(g) The placement of wall signs on individual buildings should complement the architectural design of the Planned Unit Development.
(h) Large expanses of parking should be broken up with internal landscaping and dedicated pedestrian walkways.
(i) All utility lines shall be placed underground where physically feasible.
8.12.8 Phasing requirements
All applications for Planned Unit Developments shall include sufficient information to evaluate total build-out of the site. The Planning Board may permit a phased schedule in accordance with an approved “Comprehensive Site Plan” for the Planned Unit Development.
(a) The initial construction phase shall provide sufficient on-site and off-site improvements to adequately serve the constructed portion independent of future phases, encourage completion of the build-out design, and minimize disruptions during future construction phases. Improvements shall include but are not limited to driveways, walkways or bicycle paths, parking, sewer, water, stormwater systems, lighting, and landscaping. The Planning Board may permit phased construction of improvements if deemed appropriate.
(b) The applicant may be required to provide the Town with a performance guarantee to cover the costs of construction of the on-site and off-site infrastructure improvements and traffic mitigation measures, subject to approval from the Planning Board, in the form of a performance bond, letter of credit, or cash escrow.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
57
8.12.9 Procedural requirements
All Planned Unit Developments require a Special Permit and Site Plan Review. The Planning Board shall be the Site Plan Approval Authority and the Special Permit Granting Authority for all Planned Unit Developments. A Special Permit may be granted by the Planning Board for multiple uses allowed by right or by special permit if the Planning Board finds that the proposed uses will not have adverse effects which overbalance the beneficial effects according to the requirements and criteria of § 9.2, Special Permits. In addition to the Site Plan Review and Special Permit requirements of § 9 of this Bylaw, site plans shall include:
(a) Color renderings of facade elevations of all sides of all proposed new construction and renovations including proposed mature landscaping.
(b) Color photographs showing the proposed building site and adjacent properties and buildings.
(c) Drawings/cut sheets of all proposed lighting, signs, and pedestrian amenities as they are to be located on the property.
(d) A landscaping plan that includes all existing and proposed vegetation with elevation views and a description of all plantings (include common names), size (upon planting and upon maturity), spacing, and numbers of plants.
(e) Description of how the project will impact traffic conditions on streets and intersections likely to be affected by the project including the level of service, traffic flow, turning movements, sight distances, traffic controls, pedestrian and bicycle movement and public transportation. Provide information on the average daily and peak hour traffic projections and directional distribution of site-generated traffic.
(f) A description of the proposed uses and associated square footage.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
58
SECTION 9. SITE PLAN REVIEW AND SPECIAL PERMITS
9.1 Site Plan Review
9.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Site Plan Review process is to provide detailed review of certain uses and structures which have a potential for significant impact on the character, infrastructure, and natural resources of the Town of Montague.
9.1.2 Applicability
The following activities and uses are subject to site plan review:
(a) All uses that involve the construction or expansion or change of use of over 3,000 square feet of floor area.
(b) All uses that involve the development of over 130,680 square feet (3 acres) of land.
(c) Any new structure, group of new structures, changes of use, or additions which result in an increase of 500 or more vehicle trips per day, as proposed in an applicant’s business plan acceptable to the reviewing authority or estimated by a professional engineer.
(d) All uses that involve the construction or expansion of a parking area that creates ten (10) or more new parking spaces, per §7.2.6
(e) Specific Uses identified elsewhere in this bylaw:
? Accessory Apartments within existing single family homes, per §8.5
? Self-storage facilities, per §8.9
? Solar energy facilities, per §8.9
? Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Marijuana retailer, cultivation, production, research or testing, per §8.10
? Open Space Residential Development, per §8.11
? Planned Unit Development, per §8.12
9.1.3 Authority
The Planning Board shall be the Site Plan Review Authority in the General Business, Industrial and Historic-Industrial District. The Board of Appeals shall be the Site Plan Review Authority in all other districts, unless otherwise stated in the Bylaws.
9.1.4 Procedure
All uses and structures that require Site Plan Review shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in this section. The Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board, as appropriate, may waive any requirement in § 9.1.5 that it deems inapplicable to the proposed project. Site Plan Review procedures will be based on whether or not a Special Permit is required:
(a) Special Permit Required
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
59
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public hearing, vote and issue decisions on any application filed under this section in accordance with procedures outlined in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, § 9 and 11.
(b) Special Permit Not Required
Site Plan Review shall be conducted by the Site Plan Review Authority for uses that are allowed as of right, unless otherwise noted. A public hearing is not required and approval requires a vote of a simple majority of the Site Plan Review Authority. Failure of the Site Plan Review Authority to act within sixty (60) days of submission shall constitute an approval of the site plan, unless extended by written agreement between the applicant and the Site Plan Review Authority.
9.1.5 Site Plan Elements
Site plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, or surveyor and shall at a minimum, accurately include the following information, if applicable:
(a) Building dimensions and design
(b) Building location, lot boundaries, and adjacent ways
(c) Natural features including topography, contours, wetlands, streams, waterbodies, and areas subject to flooding
(d) Landscaping features including the location and description of screening, fencing, and plantings
(e) Stormwater management
(f) Circulation plan for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access to the site and within the site
(g) Parking and loading accommodations
(h) Utility services and proposed connections
(i) Location and intensity of exterior lighting
(j) Exterior signage
(k) On site waste management and snow removal
(l) Hours of operation estimated daily, and peak hour vehicle trips, estimated volumes of water and wastewater.
9.1.6 Evaluation Guidelines
In reviewing the Site Plan, the following shall be considered:
(a) Compliance with the Montague Zoning Bylaws.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
60
(b) Impacts to municipal infrastructure and services.
(c) Safety and adequacy of vehicular and pedestrian movement.
(d) Design features that integrate the proposed development into the existing landscape, maintain neighborhood character, enhance natural and aesthetic assets and screen objectionable features from neighbors and roadways.
9.1.7 Decision
The site plan may be approved, approved with reasonable conditions, or rejected if a site plan fails to furnish adequate information required in § 9.1. Decisions are to be filed with the Town Clerk and the Inspector of Buildings.
9.1.8 Appeals
Decisions on site plans may be appealed directly to Superior Court in accordance with MGL c. 40A, whether or not the Site Plan Review is for a project that requires a Special Permit.
9.1.9 Modifications
Any proposed modifications to the approved site plan shall be submitted to the Site Plan Review Authority for approval at an open meeting.
9.1.10 Expiration
Site plan approval shall expire within two (2) years if a substantial use thereof has not commenced. The approval may be extended by up to two (2) years at request of the applicant, provided the request for an extension is filed prior to the expiration of the Site Plan Approval.
9.2 Special Permit
9.2.1 Purpose
Special Permits are required for certain uses or structures, as designated in § 5.2. (Permitted Uses) and other sections of these bylaws. Special Permit review is intended to ensure that any proposed use of land or structure(s) will not have an adverse effect on other uses in a neighborhood or on the town and that the use is in harmony with the intent and purpose of this section.
9.2.2 Procedure for Special Permits
(a) Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) in the General Business, Industrial and Historic-Industrial District. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the SPGA in all other districts, unless specifically designated otherwise in the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaws. Special Permits shall be granted, denied, or issued with conditions by the SPGA according to the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
(b) Special Permit Granting Authority Rules and Regulations
Pursuant to §9 of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, each Special Permit Granting Authority may adopt rules relative to the issuance of Special Permits. The rules and regulations may relate to the size, form, content and style of the plans and procedures
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
61
for submission and approval of such Special Permits, and shall not be inconsistent with the General Laws and provisions of this Bylaw. The SPGA may from time to time amend these rules. Copies of the rules shall be on file and available for review at the office of the Town Clerk.
(c) Application
An applicant for a Special Permit shall file a completed application with the Town Clerk using the form specified by the Town. A copy of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the applicant with the office of the Special Permit Granting Authority .
(d) Site plans
Site plans submitted with a Special Permit application shall be in conformance with the requirements of §9.1.
(e) Public hearing
Special Permits shall only be issued following a public hearing held within 65 days after filing an application with the Town Clerk. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall take final action on an application for Special Permit within 90 days following the closing of the public hearing. The required time limits for the public hearing and final action may be extended by written agreement between the applicant and the SPGA, and a copy of the written agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The SPGA shall file the written decision with the Town Clerk within 14 days of the final vote or sooner as required to meet the 90 day maximum time frame. Failure of the SPGA to take final action within 90 days, or extended time if applicable, shall constitute approval of the Special Permit.
(f) Independent Consultants
Upon submission of an application for a Special Permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority is authorized to engage outside consultants to peer review the application, pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G, whose services shall be paid for by the applicant.
9.2.3 Special Permit Criteria
Before granting a Special Permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider the proposed use in relation to the site and the adjacent uses and structures in the Town and shall find that there will be no significant adverse effects to the neighborhood or the Town, considering the following criteria:
(a) The degree to which the activity, site plan, and building design are consistent with suitable economic development activities in Montague, as identified in the Comprehensive Plan and other current Town plans.
(b) Capability of and cost to the Town to provide municipal services for the proposed use and premises, including police, fire, emergency services, and road maintenance and the ability of existing infrastructure to support the proposed use including but not limited to existing roads and bridges and their condition.
(c) Impact on the Town's school or other educational facilities and provision of housing for Town residents.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
62
(d) Consequences of sound, light, odor, noise, traffic congestion, or other disturbances for abutting and other properties that may be impacted.
(e) Environmental impact of the proposal, including the degree to which the proposal results in water, air, noise or light pollution; topographic change; removal of mature trees or other botanical assets; removal of cover vegetation; risk of erosion or siltation; increased storm water runoff from the site; or displacement of natural habitats.
(f) Impact on existing traffic conditions and vehicular and pedestrian safety, particularly at intersections with Town roads.
(g) Degree to which the proposal is compatible with the character of the surrounding area and neighborhood.
(h) Degree to which the proposal preserves scenic views and historic, natural and cultural resources through site design, landscaping and protection of resources.
(i) Employment and fiscal consequences to the Town.
(j) Impact on agricultural or forestry operations or the productivity of the land for those uses.
(k) Degree to which the proposed use is consistent with the purpose(s) of the zoning district.
(l) Capability of the Town or other public or private entities to provide water supplies, sewage treatment, and stormwater management.
(m) Other impacts on the Town including support of local products and businesses, protection of open space, provision of recreational opportunities for Town residents, and energy conservation.
9.2.4 Conditions, safeguards and limitations
In granting a Special Permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority may, in accordance with Chapter 40A of the General Laws, impose conditions, safeguards and limitations. Such conditions, safeguards and limitations shall be in writing and may include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Setback, side and rear yards greater than the minimum required in this Zoning Bylaws.
(b) Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining properties or from streets by the use of walls, fences, plantings or other such devices.
(c) Limitations of size, method or time of operation or extent of facilities.
(d) Modification of the exterior design or appearance of buildings, structures, lighting, signs or landscape materials.
Montague Zoning Bylaws- Effective 2/19/2019
63
(e) Additional parking, loading or traffic requirements beyond the minimum required in this Zoning Bylaw.
(f) Measures to protect against environmental pollution.
(g) A performance bond or other security to ensure that the project meets the conditions specified in the special permit.
9.2.5 Modifications
Any proposed modifications to the approved final plans, including but not limited to changes, alterations, or expansions shall be submitted to the SPGA for approval at an open meeting. Minor modifications may be approved without further hearing if the modification(s) are determined to be within the approved project scope, consistent with the findings and conditions of the Special Permit, and consistent with all other applicable sections of the zoning bylaw. The SPGA reserves the right to hold further public hearings on changes to the plans that are determined to be outside of the approved project scope, inconsistent with the findings and conditions of the Special Permit, or otherwise inconsistent with an applicable section of the zoning bylaws.
9.2.6 Lapse of Special Permit
Special Permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months following the filing of the Special Permit approval with the Town Clerk, excluding any time required for the adjudication of an appeal, if applicable.

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TOWN OF MONTAGUE
Effective Date of Subdivision Control Law in Montague: October 4, 1972
As amended through June 27, 2017
Town of Montague Page 2
SECTION 1
Authority and Purpose
§ 1.1 Statutory authority.
§ 1.2 Purpose.
SECTION II
Definitions
§ 2.1 Terms defined.
SECTION III
General Regulations
§ 3.1 Limit of one building or principal structure per lot.
§ 3.2 Plan believed not to require approval.
§ 3.3 Planning Board approval required for subdivision.
§ 3.4 Access Adequacy.
SECTION IV
Procedure for Submission and Review of Plans
§ 4.1 Presubmission review.
§ 4.2 Preliminary Plan requirements.
§ 4.3 Definitive Plan.
§ 4.4 Subdivision standards in the Floodplain.
Town of Montague Page 3
SECTION V
Design Standards
§ 5.1 Streets.
§ 5.2 Easements.
§ 5.3 Natural features.
§ 5.4 Open spaces.
§ 5.5 Drainage.
§ 5.6 Sewerage.
§ 5.7 Water.
§ 5.8 Passive solar design.
SECTION VI
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivisions
§ 6.1 Installation schedule
§ 6.2 Clearing and grubbing of right-of-way.
§ 6.3 Foundation of roadway.
§ 6.4 Surfacing of roadway.
§ 6.5 Curbs.
§ 6.6 Sidewalks.
§ 6.7 Tree belts and trees.
§ 6.8 Utilities.
§ 6.9 Street signs.
§ 6.10 Streetlighting.
§ 6.11 Monuments and markers.
§ 6.12 As-built plans.
Town of Montague Page 4
§ 6.13 Final cleanup.
§ 6.14 Street acceptance.
SECTION VII
Administration
§ 7.1 Inspections.
§ 7.2 Permission required.
§ 7.3 Waiver of compliance.
§ 7.4 Fees.
§ 7.5 Severability.
§ 7.6 Higher standard to govern.
§ 7.7 Statutory rules and regulations.
Town of Montague Page 5
SECTION I
Authority and Purpose
§ 1.1 Statutory authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Montague by MGL C. 41 § 81-Q, as amended, and by all subsequent amendments thereto, said Board hereby adopts these rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Montague, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, MGL C. 41 § 81-K to 81-GG.
§ 1.2 Purpose.
A. These Subdivision Regulations for the Town of Montague have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the environment, and for the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of Montague by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein but which have not become public ways and by ensuring sanitary conditions in the subdivisions and, in proper cases, parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning Board and of the Board of Appeals under these regulations shall be exercised with due regard for:
(1) The provision of adequate vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel.
(2) Minimizing congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways.
(3) Reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles.
(4) Securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies.
(5) Ensuring compliance with the applicable Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Montague. All subdivisions must fully comply with the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw.
(6) Mitigating the impact of new development on the environment by minimizing impervious surfaces, clearing of vegetation and grading, through the use of Low Impact Development (LID) site design and stormwater management practices.
(7) Securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility service, street lighting, police, fire and other requirements, where necessary, in a subdivision.
(8) Coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other, with the public ways in the Town of Montague and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions.
Town of Montague Page 6
(9) Ensuring consistency with the most current Town of Montague Master Plan, Open Space and Recreation Plan, and any other relevant planning documents.
B. It is the intent of the Subdivision Control Law that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of said Board if said plan conforms to the Subdivision Control Law, the recommendations of the Board of Health, and to the rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that such board may waive when appropriate, as provided for in MGL C. 41, § 81-R, such provisions of the rules and regulations as deemed advisable (MGL C. 41, § 81-M).
SECTION II
Definitions
§ 2.1 Terms defined.
Terms and words not defined in these regulations shall have the meanings defined in MGL C. 41, § 81-L. The following terms and words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT – The person or persons who apply for approval of a proposed subdivision plan. The “applicant” or “applicants” must be the owner or owners of all the land included in the proposed subdivision. An agent, representative or his assign may act for an owner, provided that written evidence of such fact is submitted. Evidence, in the form of a list of its officers and the designated authority to sign legal documents, shall be required for a corporation.
BOARD – The Planning Board of the Town of Montague.
DEAD-END STREET – A street which joins another street at only one (1) end.
ENGINEER – A Massachusetts registered professional engineer.
LOT – An area of land in ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or available for use, as the site of one (1) or more buildings or structures.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT - Low impact development (LID) is an approach to site design and stormwater management that seeks to maintain the natural features of a site, reduce impervious surfaces like roads and parking lots, and allow stormwater runoff to infiltrate the ground close to where it falls by using small, decentralized stormwater best management practices (BMPs). These techniques reduce soil erosion and sedimentation and the amount of pollutants that stormwater can pick up from lawns and road-ways, and helps to recharge groundwater levels. Examples include, but are not limited to: sensitive site design; narrower, shorter roads and driveways; vegetated swales and filter strips; rain gardens and bioretention areas; rainwater harvesting; green roofs; street trees; preservation of mature trees and vegetation; and permeable or porous pavement.
Town of Montague Page 7
OWNER – The owner of record as shown at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
SUBDIVISION:
A. The division of a tract of land into two (2) or more lots and shall include re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided; provided, however, that the division of a tract of land in two (2) or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a “subdivision” within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on:
(1) A public way or a way which the clerk of a city or town certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
(2) A way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
(3) A way in existence on October 4, 1972, the date when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Montague, having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon (see Section 3.2 C.).
B. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by zoning or other bylaw, if any, of the Town of Montague, for the erection of a building or structures on such lot, and if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be of at least twenty feet.. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of land in which two (2) or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town of Montague into separate lots on each of which one (1) of such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a “subdivision.”
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW – Refers to MGL C. 41 §§ 81-K to 81GG, titled “Subdivision Control,” as last amended.
SURVEYOR – A registered professional land surveyor.
ZONING – The Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw.
Town of Montague Page 8
SECTION III
General Regulations
§ 3.1 Limit of one building or principal structure per lot.
Not more than one (1) building, designed or available for use for dwelling purposes, or not more than (1) non-residential principal structure or facility shall be erected and placed or converted to use as such on any lot in the Town of Montague unless more than one building or principal structure is specifically authorized by the Montague Zoning Bylaws. Such authorization may be conditional upon the provision of adequate access to each building or principal structure.
§ 3.2 Plan believed not to require approval.
A. Any person who wishes to record a plan of land at the Registry of Deeds or to file a plan of land with the Land Court and who believes that said plan does not require approval (“ANR Plan”) under the Subdivision Control Law shall submit said plan and application (use Form A) to the Town Clerk, accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval and the filing fee of $50.00 per lot. One Mylar original, four (4) paper copies and a digital copy in PDF format of said plan shall be furnished to the Town Clerk. Said plan shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor and shall describe the land to which the plan relates, sufficient for identification, and shall include the name and address of the owner(s) of the subject land. Plans submitted for a determination that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, shall be delivered to the Town Clerk or shall be sent by registered mail to the Planning Board c/o the Town Clerk, postage prepaid. If so mailed, the date of receipt by the Town Clerk on behalf of the Planning Board, shall be the date of submission of the plan.
B. A plan submitted under §3.2 shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Franklin County Registry of Deeds, and shall, at a minimum, show the following information:
(1) The name(s) of the record owner(s) of the subject land, and the names of the owners of all adjacent land as determined from the most recent tax records of the Town;
(2) The location of all existing buildings on the subject land;
(3) The location of all easements and rights of way located on or serving the subject land;
(4) The existing and proposed boundaries of the subject land and of each parcel and lot created or altered by the plan;
(5) The zoning classification of the subject land;
Town of Montague Page 9
(6) A locus plan at a scale sufficient to show the subject land in relation to the nearest intersecting street(s);
(7) The locations, widths, and names of all abutting ways;
(8) A notation reading:
Endorsement of this ANR Plan does not certify that the lots shown on the Plan qualify as building lots under the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw.
C. Frontage on Ways In Existence - In determining whether an existing way or a way in existence prior to October 4, 1972, when the Subdivision Control Law came into effect in Montague, provides adequate frontage to qualify a plan as not a subdivision, the Board will consider the following:
(1) Is the right-of-way at least 30 feet wide and of reasonable horizontal alignment?
(2) Does the existing horizontal and vertical alignment of the roadway provide safe visibility?
(3) Is the roadway at least sixteen (16) feet wide with an additional two (2) feet of shoulder on each side (20 feet wide in total) to provide space for snow removal?
(4) Is the roadway constructed with at least 18" of gravel with adequate provisions for drainage?
(5) If the road could ever service more than ten dwelling units, is it bituminous surfaced or have provisions been made for such surfacing without cost to the town?
(6) Have provisions been made for public utilities without cost to the town?
(7) Is the grade less than or equal to 8%?
The Board will not normally find a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Montague to provide adequate frontage unless it meets all of the above standards, provided, however, that the Board may waive strict compliance with these standards upon its determination, following consultation with the Selectmen, Highway Superintendent, Police Chief and Fire Chief, that the way will, in fact, be adequate to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings or structures erected or to be erected thereon.
Town of Montague Page 10
D. Frontage on a Public Way - When the lots shown on a plan presented for endorsement under §3.2 are claimed to have frontage on a public way, the way must physically exist on the ground and must provide safe and viable access to the proposed lots. Additionally, the Planning Board may require documentation evidencing the layout and acceptance of the way as a public way.
E. Frontage on a Subdivision Way - A way shown on an approved subdivision plan will be considered as frontage for purposes of §81L only if either: (a) the way and any associated municipal services are fully constructed in accordance with the Planning Board’s approval of such subdivision plan, or (b) such construction has been adequately secured in accordance with M.G.L. c. 41, §81U.
F. Adequacy of Access - In addition to determining that all lots shown on a plan presented for endorsement under §3.2 have the required frontage on one of the three types of ways specified in M.G.L. c. 41, §81L, before endorsing a plan as “Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law not required,” the Planning Board must also determine that each lot shown on the plan has practical and permanent access from the way upon which the lot fronts or another public way, in that there are no legal or physical impediments which prevent present adequate access to the lot. Such way must provide adequate access for emergency and public safety vehicles in terms of grade, width and road construction. Access to the lot should be through the frontage unless a Special Permit is granted by the Planning Board based on their determination that there is adequate access in terms of grade, width, and construction of the way to provide access for emergency and public safety vehicles.
G. Time Limit – Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §81P, if the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under §3.2, or fails to notify the Town Clerk and the applicant of its action within twenty-one (21) days after the plan submission, the Board shall be deemed to have determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and shall forthwith make such endorsement on the plan. If the Board fails to make such endorsement, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect.
H. If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall forthwith, at a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting and without a public hearing, endorse on the plan the words “Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law not required.” The Board shall then sign said endorsement. Said plan shall then be returned to the applicant, and the Board shall notify the Town Clerk of its action. The applicant shall provide the Board with two (2) copies of the endorsed print. In the event that there is not a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting within the twenty-one (21) day time limit, the Chair of the Planning Board may schedule a Planning Board meeting to review the ANR plan at his or her discretion.
I. If it deems necessary, the Planning Board shall have the plan reviewed by an Engineer before making a determination. The cost shall be borne by the applicant (see Section 7.4).
Town of Montague Page 11
J. The Planning Board will notify the applicant within 21 days of the submittal of an ANR Plan if it does not meet the requirements of this section and the reason for denying approval of the ANR Plan.
§ 3.3 Planning Board approval required for subdivision.
No person shall make a subdivision, within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, of any land within the town or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of ways or the installation of municipal services therein unless and until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted and approved by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 3.4 Access Adequacy.
A. General. Plans shall be endorsed as not requiring approval under the Subdivision Control Law, and subdivision plans shall be approved only if each building lot to be created by such plan has adequate access as intended under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL C. 41, § 81-K through 81-GG.
B. Standards of Adequacy. Streets within a subdivision shall be considered to provide adequate access if, and only if, complying with all of the standards established in this regulation.
C. Obligations. The Board may require as a condition of its approval of a subdivision plan, that the developer dedicate a strip of land for the purpose of widening accessways to a width as required above and that they either make physical improvements within such way or compensate the town for the cost of such improvements in order to meet the standards specified above.
D. Ways Providing Access to Streets within a Subdivision. Ways providing access to streets within a subdivision shall normally be considered to provide adequate access only if they comply with all of the standards herein for subdivision streets including but not limited to the right-of-way width, pavement width, maximum grade, foundation and surfacing materials, and sight distance requirements of this regulation. The Board may waive strict compliance with these access requirements only upon its determination, following consultation with the Select Board, Superintendent of Streets, Police Chief and Fire Chief, that the way will be sufficient to serve the access needs of the potential uses of land in the subdivision.
Town of Montague Page 12
SECTION IV
Procedure for Submission and Review of Plans
§ 4.1 Presubmission review.
Prior to investing in extensive professional design efforts for preliminary or definitive subdivision plans, it may be beneficial for the prospective applicant to discuss his/her ideas with the Planning Board. It may be useful in avoiding problems at a later stage of the subdivision review process. Pencil sketches of the prospective subdivision will be helpful in the discussion.
§ 4.2 Preliminary Plan requirements.
A. General. A Preliminary Plan of a residential subdivision may be submitted by the subdivider to the Planning Board and to the Board of Health for discussion and tentative approval, modification or disapproval by each board. However, in the case of a nonresidential subdivision, a Preliminary Plan must be filed. The submission of such a Preliminary Plan will enable the subdivider, the Planning Board, the Board of Health, and other municipal boards as appropriate to discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a Preliminary Plan be filed in all cases. During the Preliminary Plan review, applicants should be prepared to discuss issues in a general way that will be addressed by the Environmental Impact Report that accompanies the Definitive Plan (see Section 4.3 E). A properly executed application Form B shall be filed with the Preliminary Plan submitted to the Planning Board.
B. Filing procedure.
(1) Any person who submits a Preliminary Plan shall deliver such plan and shall give notice to the Town Clerk or shall send such plan by certified or registered mail to the Planning Board c/o the Town Clerk. Receipt of such plan stamped by the Town Clerk on behalf of the Planning Board, shall constitute the date of submission. Such plan shall be accompanied by the completed Form B and a filing fee of three hundred dollars ($300) plus seventy five dollars ($75) per buildable lot in the form of a certified check or money order made payable to the Town of Montague. In addition, any person who submits a Preliminary Plan shall also submit the plan to the Board of Health at the same time (see 4.2.B (2)).
(2) The applicant shall file the original preliminary plan and four (4) copies with the Planning Board c/o the Town Clerk and two (2) copies with the Board of Health. Each copy submitted by the applicant shall have a tag or form attached (see Form L) listing the Board or municipal official that should receive it. The original preliminary plan date stamped should be placed in the Planning Board files. The Planning Board or their staff shall distribute the hard copies of the Preliminary Plan to the Planning Board, Board of Selectmen, Fire Chief, and Highway
Town of Montague Page 13
Superintendent. The applicant shall also submit an electronic PDF version of the Preliminary Plan to the Planning Board, transferred through a medium specified by the Board. The electronic PDF version of the Preliminary Plan will be distributed by the Planning Board or their staff to the Planning Board, Board of Health, Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Highway Superintendent, Building Commissioner, Water Department Superintendent, Wastewater Treatment Facility Chief Operator, Superintendents of Schools, Historical Commission, and Agricultural Commission. The above Town officials shall, within thirty (30) days after the filing of the plan, report in what respects, if any, the proposed subdivision streets and improvements could fail to comply with the standards for design, layout, and construction by the Town, could fail to support adequate public services such as fire protection, wastewater treatment or public water supply, or could present other development concerns.
C. Contents. The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet on a sheet of paper twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches. The plan shall include the following:
(1) The subdivision name, boundaries, true North arrow, date, scale, legend and title “Preliminary Plan.”
(2) The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant and the engineer or surveyor. The seal and certificate number of the engineer or surveyor shall appear on the Preliminary Plan.
(3) The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent tax list.
(4) Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements and any public or common areas within the subdivision, in a general manner. The proposed names of new streets shall be shown in pencil until they have been approved by the Board.
(5) Major site features such as existing wetlands, water bodies, stone walls, fences, buildings or other structures, and large trees and rock outcroppings.
(6) A brief narrative description of the proposed stormwater management system, with the proposed location of LID structures shown on the plan and a completed LID Site Planning and Design checklist (see Appendix B).
(7) The proposed sanitary sewer system and water distribution system, in a general manner.
(8) The approximate boundary lines proposed, with approximate areas and dimensions.
Town of Montague Page 14
(9) The names, approximate locations and widths of adjacent streets.
(10) The topography of the land, in a general manner.
(11) An index plan at a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, when multiple sheets are used.
(12) A key plan at a scale of one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet.
(13) Initial findings, in a general way, of the environmental impact analysis required with the Definitive Plan.
(14) In the case of a subdivision covering less than all of the land owned by the subdivider, a plan showing, in a general manner, the proposed overall development of all said land.
D. Alternative Preliminary Plan for Open Space Residential Development. If an applicant is not proposing an Open Space Residential Development for a subdivision in the AF-4, AF-2, and AF Zoning Districts, then the Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an alternative Preliminary Plan showing an Open Space Residential Development subdivision in accordance with the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw, if adopted. [OSRD bylaw to be voted on at future Town Meeting]
E. Action by the Board
(1) Within forty-five (45) days of submission of the Preliminary Plan, the Board shall act to:
(a) Approve the Preliminary Plan as presented;
(b) Approve the Preliminary Plan with modifications; or
(c) Disapprove the Preliminary Plan.
The Planning Board must file its decision with the Town Clerk and submit its decision to the applicant by certified mail within forty-five (45) days of submission of the Preliminary Plan.
(2) In the case of disapproval, the reasons why shall be stated. Approval of the Preliminary Plan does not constitute the approval of a subdivision, and no Register of Deeds shall record a Preliminary Plan.
§ 4.3. Definitive Plan.
A. General.
Town of Montague Page 15
(1) A Definitive Plan shall be governed by the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time of submission of such plan or in effect at the time of submission of a Preliminary Plan, provided that a Definitive Plan evolved therefrom shall have been submitted to the Planning Board within seven (7) months from the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan.
(2) A Definitive Plan shall also be governed by the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaws in effect at the time of submission of such plan or a Preliminary Plan from which a Definitive Plan is evolved, in accordance with the provisions of MGL C. 40A, § 6, as amended.
B. Filing procedure.
(1) Any person who submits a Definitive Plan of a subdivision shall give notice and deliver such plan to the Town Clerk or shall send such plan by certified or registered mail to the Planning Board c/o the Town Clerk. Receipt of such plan and filing fees by the Town Clerk on behalf of the Planning Board, shall constitute the date of submission. In addition, any person who submits a Definitive Plan shall also submit copies of the plan to the Board of Health at the same time (see Section 4.3.B (3)). The Planning Board or their staff shall distribute the hard copies of the Definitive Plan to the Planning Board, Board of Selectmen, Highway Superintendent, and Fire Chief.. The electronic PDF version of the Definitive Plan will be distributed by the Planning Board or their staff to the Planning Board, Board of Health, Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Highway Superintendent, Building Inspector, Water Department Superintendent, Wastewater Treatment Facility Chief Operator, Superintendents of Schools, Historical Commission, and Agricultural Commission.
(2) The applicant shall file with the Planning Board the following:
(a) An original reproducible drawing of the Definitive Plan and four (4) copies of the plan and application thereof. Each copy submitted by the applicant shall have a tag or form attached (see Form L) listing the Board or municipal official that should receive it. The original drawing may be returned to the applicant after a decision on the Definitive Plan by the Board. The applicant shall also submit an electronic PDF version of the Definitive Plan to the Planning Board, transferred through a medium specified by the Board.
(b) One (1) properly executed application including Form C.
(c) A filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500) per plan plus seventy-five dollars ($75) per lot shown on the Definitive Subdivision Plan if a Preliminary Plan has been filed. If no Preliminary Plan has been filed then
Town of Montague Page 16
the filing fee shall be five hundred dollars ($500) per plan plus two hundred dollars ($200) per lot shown on the Definitive Subdivision Plan. The filing fee shall be in the form of a certified check or money order made payable to the Town of Montague. Any additional expenses for professional assistance related to the application including the review of the plans, survey or inspections shall also be paid by the applicant (see Section 7.4). In addition, the applicant will be billed for the cost of the newspaper publishing the legal notices.
(d) A certified list of abutters.
(e) A list of any waivers requested pursuant to Section 7.3 Waivers and the reason for the request.
(3) The applicant shall file with the Board of Health the following:
(a) At the time of the filing of the Definitive Plan with the Town Clerk, two (2) copies shall also be filed with the Board of Health.
(b) Two (2) copies of the application with the properly executed Form C.
C. Board of Health Review
The Board of Health shall report, in writing, to the Planning Board and subdivider its approval or disapproval of said Definitive Plan. In the event of disapproval, it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots or areas shown on said plan cannot be used as building sites without injury to the public health. The Board of Health shall include specific findings and the reasons therefor in such report, and, where possible, it shall make recommendations for adjustments necessary for the Plan’s approval. Any approval by the Planning Board shall be on the condition that lots or areas deemed injurious to the public health shall not be built upon without prior consent of the Board of Health. The Planning Board shall endorse on the Definitive Plan such conditions, specifying the lots to which said conditions apply. Failure by the Board of Health to report on the proposed subdivision within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the plan shall be deemed approval of the Plan by the Board of Health. When the Definitive Plan shows that no public or community sewer is to be installed to serve any lot thereon, approval of the Definitive Plan by the Board of Health shall not be treated as, nor deemed to be approval of a permit for the construction and use on any lot of an individual sewage system; and approval of a Definitive Plan for a subdivision by the Board of Health shall not be treated as, nor deemed to be, an application for a permit to construct or use an individual sewage system on any lot contained therein. Such application for a permit to construct or use an individual sewage system must be filed with the Board of Health.
D. Contents of the Definitive Plan.
Town of Montague Page 17
(1) The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer, registered landscape architect, and/or registered land surveyor. It shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink upon Mylar. The plan shall be at a scale of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet, unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board. Sheet size shall not exceed thirty six by forty two (36 x 42) inches. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The data required below may be on separate sheets as is necessary.
(2) The Definitive Plan shall have the following information:
(a) The subdivision name, boundaries, true North arrow, date, scale, legend and bench mark. All elevations shall be tied to the United States Geological Survey bench marks if within five hundred (500) feet of the subdivision.
(b) The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant, the engineer and/or surveyor and their official seals.
(c) The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent tax list.
(d) Existing and proposed lines of streets, rights-of-way, lots, easements and public or common areas within the subdivision. Proposed names of new streets shall be shown in pencil until they have been approved by the Planning Board. The purpose of easements will be indicated.
(e) The location, names and present widths of street(s) bounding, approaching or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subdivision.
(f) Zoning districts, including overlay districts, of all the areas shown on the plan.
(g) A key plan showing the location of the subdivision at a scale of one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet and an index plan at a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet or at a scale matching that used on the Assessor’s maps.
(h) Existing (solid line) and proposed (broken line) topography at two-foot contour intervals, including the finished grade of all lots.
(i) Lot numbers, street frontage including lengths, and areas of lots.
(j) The location of all natural waterways, water bodies, wetlands, certified vernal pools, drainage courses, floodplains, public water supply recharge areas (Zone 2), NHESP Priority and Estimated Habitats of rare species, significant and high hazard dam inundation areas, and prime farmland or forestland within and adjacent to the subdivision.
Town of Montague Page 18
(k) The location of significant site features, such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings or structures, large trees exceeding twelve (12) inches diameter at breast height, and rock outcroppings.
(l) The site planning process corresponding to the subdivision plan as submitted shall be documented in narrative form and shall include the following steps:
i. Identify and map natural features and critical environmental resources (as described in Section 4.3D (j) and (k) herein);
ii. Delineate potential building envelopes that avoid natural features and environmental resource areas, minimize clearing and grading, and maximize vegetation and soil retention; and
iii. Delineate location of roads, driveways, and sidewalks/pathways to minimize impervious surfaces, and to protect and preserve open space, natural features and critical environmental resources.
(m) The locations of all permanent monuments, properly identified as to whether proposed or existing.
(n) The location and results of all percolation and soil tests to evaluate subsurface conditions for each lot requiring a septic system or for any community or shared septic system in the prospective subdivision. The tests will be done in accordance with the Department of Environmental Protection’s Title 5 regulations and local health and septic regulations, if any. A registered Professional Engineer or sanitarian must stamp the plan and the test results. If the proposed subdivision will be served by the municipal wastewater treatment facility then the applicant must obtain a letter from the Wastewater Treatment Facility Chief Operator certifying that there is sufficient wastewater treatment capacity to serve all the lots in the subdivision.
(0) The size and location of existing and proposed water supply facilities either private wells or public water supply. If the proposed subdivision will be served by a water district, then the applicant must obtain a letter from the applicable water district superintendent certifying that there is sufficient capacity available to provide potable water to all lots in the subdivision.
(p) Sufficient data, including the length, bearings, radii and central angle, to determine the exact location, direction and length of every street, way, lot line and boundary line and to establish these lines on the ground. If the proposed subdivision is within five hundred (500) feet of a monument of the Massachusetts coordinate mapping system, it shall be tied into said system.
Town of Montague Page 19
(q) Street profiles shall be prepared as follows:
i. A horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet shall be used.
ii. A vertical scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet shall be used.
iii. The existing grade of the road center line shall be drawn in a fine black solid line.
iv. The existing right side line shall be drawn in a fine black dotted line.
v. The existing left side line shall be drawn in a fine black dashed line.
vi. All elevations shall refer to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey bench marks if within five (500) feet of the proposed subdivision.
vii. Proposed roadway center-line grades shall be drawn in heavy red lines with precise elevations at points of vertical tangency, points of vertical contact high point and low point.
viii. Proposed right side line shall be drawn in heavy red lines with precise elevations at points of vertical tangency, points of vertical contact high point and low point.
ix. Proposed left side line shall be drawn in heavy red lines with precise elevations at points of vertical tangency, points of vertical contact high point and low point.
x. Rates of roadway gradient shall be shown in percentage.
xi. The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and stormwater management facilities, including all measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water, and descriptions of LID best management practices (BMPs). If applicable, the size, location and rates of gradient of proposed stormwater drains, sewer lines, catch basins and manholes, as well as any other drainage facilities shall be shown. The sizes of all pipes shall be shown.
xii. The invert and rim elevations of each manhole or catch basin shall be shown.
Town of Montague Page 20
xiii. As long as the work is related to the proposed subdivision, profiles shall be shown, even if the new work is outside said subdivision.
xiv. The size and location of all water supply lines. Water mains will be shown in profile to show grade and to demonstrate sufficient clearance from other structures.
xv. The size and location of all other utilities to be placed in the right-of-way shall be shown. These shall be placed so as to minimize flood damage.
xvi. The location of any intersected public or private way shall be shown.
(r) Cross sections shall include street sections showing paving, crown, berm, shoulder, sidewalks, planting strips, curbs and distance to the right-of-way line, as well as cross sections for any drainage trench.
(s) An erosion and sedimentation control plan designed to mitigate and prevent erosion/sedimentation of disturbed areas during and after construction activities. The plan shall show, in detail, what and when such measures will be implemented, on both a temporary and permanent basis, including land disturbances for house construction.
(t) A completed Low Impact Development (LID) Site Planning & Design checklist (see Appendix B).
(u) The Applicant shall identify, in writing to the Planning Board, any proposed waivers of subdivision requirements.
(v) Suitable space to record the action of the Board and signatures of Board members.
(x) Any other information that the Board may deem necessary.
E. Environmental impact report.
(1) In order to more fully ensure the health, safety and welfare of the Town of Montague and its inhabitants, all prospective subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots or ten (10) acres in size shall be required to submit a detailed environmental impact report. Further, the Board may require said report or portions of it for smaller subdivisions where the information contained in such a report would be necessary to evaluate the prospective subdivision’s impact upon a particular piece of land. The report should include the following:
Town of Montague Page 21
(a) A description of the topography, geology and soil characteristics of the proposed subdivision and contiguous area and an analysis of the natural land features to sustain the proposed development; an analysis of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and other potential land capability effects of the proposed subdivision; and a description of the measures planned to protect the natural land features against potential deterioration resulting from the proposed subdivision.
(b) Identification of surface and subsurface water features within the proposed subdivision, as well as those water features potentially affected by it, including underground aquifers, brooks, streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands, and a description of the measures planned to protect those surface and subsurface features against potential deterioration resulting from the proposed subdivision.
(c) A description of special physical conditions existing within the proposed subdivision, (e.g., floodplains, unique landscape features, etc.) and a description of the measures to accommodate these special conditions.
(d) An analysis of airborne emissions to be generated by the proposed subdivision or incident to it, in relation to state and federal air pollution standards, as well as nearby off-site emission sources potentially affecting air quality of the proposed subdivision.
(e) Identification of any existing or potential on- or off- site sources of noise which might significantly inhibit speech or sleep [above forty (40) dBA] and a description of the measures to alleviate the problem.
(f) Identification of any notable aesthetic characteristics on or near the proposed subdivision, including stone walls, features of historical, architectural, archaeological or scenic interest, as identified in the Montague Open Space and Recreation Plan and other relevant plans, and a description of the measures designed to protect these aesthetic features.
(2) A stormwater management plan.
(a) Low Impact Development (LID) techniques should be used whenever feasible to manage stormwater within the proposed subdivision.
(b) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared according to the requirements of the Montague Stormwater System Policy, and should include the following:
i. A description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances, impoundments, and wetlands, wetland buffer zones, 100-year floodplains, water supply areas, swimming beaches or other
Town of Montague Page 22
environmental resources on or adjacent to the site into which stormwater flows.
ii. The existing and proposed topography at 2-foot contour levels.
iii. A recharge area analysis that calculates pre-and post-project annual groundwater recharge rates on the parcel.
iv. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the 2-year, 10-year, and 25-year, 24-hour storm event. The 100-year 24-hour storm event must be evaluated for downstream impacts. Peak discharge rates must be calculated using the point of discharge or the downgradient property boundary. Separate drainage calculations shall be submitted for each point of discharge of flow from the site. The most current data on storm intensities from the Northeast Regional Climate Center at Cornell University (http://www.nrcc.cornell.edu/) shall be used for stormwater calculations.
v. Soils information from test pits performed at the location of proposed stormwater management retention, detention and infiltration structures, including soil descriptions, depth to seasonal high groundwater and depth to bedrock. Soils information will be based on site test pits logged by a Massachusetts Certified Soil Evaluator.
vi. Structural details of all components of the proposed stormwater management system, including materials to be used, construction specifications, and typical construction details.
vii. Operations and Maintenance Plan of the stormwater management system to ensure that it functions as designed. The O&M Plan shall include: a.) the name and contact information of the owners of all components of the system; b.) a map showing the location of the stormwater management devices including all structural and nonstructural components; c.) maintenance agreements that specify names and addresses of person(s) responsible for operation and maintenance and its financing, an Inspection and Maintenance schedule, including an O&M estimated budget, maintenance tasks to be performed, a list of easements with the purpose and location of each and the signature(s) of the owner(s).
(3) A biotic study.
Town of Montague Page 23
(a) A description of the biotic community, listing types of vegetation and animals found within the proposed subdivision and contiguous area.
(b) Identification of any rare or endangered species potentially affected by the proposed subdivision, a description of any potential disruption of wildlife habitat which may result from the proposed subdivision and the methods to be taken to limit the loss of wildlife habitat.
(4) A land use study and a Property Owners Association Agreement.
(a) An analysis of land use within the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding land uses, including:
i. Any loss of farmland or decrease in farm production or viability;
ii. Impact on contiguous tracts of forestland;
iii. Potential for trail and/or wildlife connections to adjacent or nearby undeveloped lands, if any; and
iv. Potential for pedestrian and bicycle connections to adjacent residential development, nearby schools, shopping, and recreation.
(b) An assessment of the economic impact of the proposed subdivision upon education (the number of additional children in the school system), the demand for municipal services and facilities (water, sewage treatment, solid waste management, road maintenance, fire and police protection and recreation), traffic, utilities and streetlights.
(c) Provision of a Property Owners Association Agreement which shall provide for an incorporated Homeowners' Association that will be responsible for the ownership and maintenance of the streets, including snow removal, and all associated improvements in the proposed subdivision whereby each lot owner in the development is automatically a member and each lot is subject to a charge for a share of the maintenance expenses or through a comparable arrangement satisfactory to the Planning Board and Town Counsel.
(5) A traffic study. The applicant shall submit a traffic analysis using trip generation standards by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Explain traffic impacts, types of streets, opportunity for public transit access, if any, and impacts on vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation.
(a) Estimated daily and peak hour vehicle trips generated by the proposed use.
(b) A plan to minimize traffic impacts and provide safety on the proposed project through such means as physical design and layout concepts, promoting use of public transit or van- or carpooling, encouraging pedestrian and bicycle access to the site, or other appropriate means.
Town of Montague Page 24
(c) Provide the existing level of service (LOS) on all roads within ½ mile of the subdivision and any other roads determined by the Planning Board to be potentially affected. Demonstrate that the project, including any concurrent road improvements, will not decrease the LOS of any area roads or intersections affected by the project below the existing conditions when the project is completed. Such analysis shall consider the incremental nature of development and the cumulative impacts on the LOS.
F. Compliance with the Wetlands Protection Act. In accordance with MGL C. 131, § 40, no person shall remove, fill, dredge or alter any watercourse, pond, floodplain or wetland without filing a written Notice of Intent to perform said work with the Local Conservation Commission and with the Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection. Permission for such work must be obtained from the Conservation Commission.
G. Review by other Town officials.
(1) Town officials (see Section 4.3.B.(1)) shall, within forty five (45) days after the filing of the plan, report in what respects, if any, the proposed subdivision streets and improvements could fail to comply with the standards for design, layout, and construction by the Town, could fail to support adequate public services such as fire protection, wastewater treatment or public water supply, or could present other development concerns. Town officials may also make such recommendations and suggestions to the Planning Board for other town services, including public safety, which, in their opinion, would improve the subdivision and its future development as an integral part of the entire town.
H. Public hearing.
(1) Before approval, modification, or disapproval of the Definitive Plan is given, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Said public hearing shall be held after the Board of Health and other Town officials report on the plan, or after the forty-five day period to report expires. Notice of the specific time and place of the Public Hearing shall be given by the Planning Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Montague once in each of two (2) successive weeks, the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of such hearing. Such Public Hearing notice shall also be posted in Town Hall for fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing. A copy of the Definitive Plan shall be available to the public through the Town Clerk’s office not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of the public hearing.
(2) A copy of said notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Board, by registered or certified mail, to all owners of land abutting the proposed subdivision and to the abutters of the abutters within three hundred (300) feet of
Town of Montague Page 25
the site. The Planning Board shall also send notice of a public hearing to the following: the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the Highway Department, the Building Commissioner, the Water District, the Wastewater Treatment Facility Chief Operator, the Superintendents of Schools, Historical Commission, and Agricultural Commission. The expense of these notifications and publications shall be borne by the applicant.
I. Approval, modification or disapproval. After the required public hearing but within ninety (90) days from the date of submission, in the case of a subdivision where a Preliminary Plan has been filed, the Planning Board shall take final action upon the Definitive Plan. In the case of a subdivision plan where no Preliminary Plan has been submitted, the Planning Board shall take final action within one hundred and thirty-five (135) days from the date of submission. The Planning Board shall approve the Definitive Plan as submitted, approve the Definitive Plan with modifications, or disapprove the Definitive Plan. If the Board modifies or disapproves the Definitive Plan, it shall state with its vote reasons for its action. Final action is the filing of the Planning Board decision with the Town Clerk and submission of its decision to the applicant by certified mail. An extension may be granted if mutually agreed to in writing by the Applicant and the Planning Board and filed with the Town Clerk.
J. Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of the Board’s approval upon a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the applicant shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in Article VI of these rules and regulations for all lots within the subdivision within a specified period of time. Such construction and installation shall be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by another, of the following methods, which may from time to time be varied by the applicant with the written approval of the Board.
(1) The Planning Board shall require from the applicant a detailed cost estimate for all construction within the proposed roadway layout and any utility easements, certified by the project's Registered Professional Engineer. Said estimate shall be based on the current edition of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s "Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges," and shall include:
(a) Quantity, unit price and total amount for each construction item.
(b) Total amount for cost of completion of project.
(c) Costs adjusted to account for municipal prevailing wages rates, and all municipal procurement requirements under state law and Montague bylaws and Montague practices for construction projects.
(d) Costs adjusted to add a minimum 25% inflation/overrun contingency factor up to 50% as determined by the Planning Board.
(e) Engineering inspection, materials testing, legal and other soft costs.
Town of Montague Page 26
(f) The Planning Board reserves the right to increase the required amount deposited as necessary over time to insure sufficient performance guarantee.
(2) Types of performance guarantee.
(a) Proper bond. The applicant shall file a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time frame within which such construction shall be completed. Performance time shall be subject to Planning Board approval; or
(b) Deposit of money or negotiable securities. The applicant shall file money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board, after consultation with Town Counsel, to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time frame within which such construction shall be completed. The applicant shall provide proof that the deposit of money or negotiable securities shall remain available to the Town of Montague until such time as the Planning Board approves a release of said monies; or
(c) Restrictive covenant. The applicant shall file a restrictive covenant executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided to serve any lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed; provided that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been provided to serve such lot; and provided further, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of the covenant but not later than three years for the date of such deed; or
(d) Funds retained by lender. The applicant shall deliver to the Planning Board an agreement between the applicant and the lender executed after the recording of the first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion thereof given as security for advances to be made to the
Town of Montague Page 27
applicant by the lender. Such agreement shall provide for the retention by the lender of funds sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure the construction of ways and installation of municipal services. The applicant and the lender shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, which may consult with the Treasurer/Collector and/or Town Counsel for this purpose, that a) lender is of sound financial condition or b) the funds to secure such an agreement are beyond the reach of the applicant’s or lender’s creditors and will be available regardless of the bank’s financial condition at the time of entering into the agreement and thereafter. In the event the Applicant and Lender are unable to demonstrate that the funds will be available in the event of a default or failure of performance, then the Planning Board, in its sole discretion and determination, may reject such agreement as insufficient to serve as a performance guarantee. Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various stages of work, and shall further provide that in the event the work is not completed within the time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed shall be available to the Town of Montague for completion.
(3) Form of performance guarantees. Performance guarantees shall be filed with the Planning Board and shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a) If performance is guaranteed by means of a restrictive covenant pursuant to Subsection J(3)(c), such restrictive covenant shall be in the form and contain the language as shown in the form entitled “Approval with Restrictive Covenant,” or as otherwise required or approved by the Planning Board.
(b) If performance is guaranteed by means of a bond pursuant to Subsection J(3)(a), a deposit of money or negotiable securities pursuant to Subsection J(3)(b), or an agreement whereby the construction lender retains loan funds pursuant to Subsection J(3)(d), the performance guarantee shall comply with the following:
i. It shall define the applicant’s obligation as “the construction of streets and ways, the installation of municipal services and the construction of certain other improvements for lots as shown in the Definitive Plan entitled ‘______________________,’ dated __________, and approved by the Planning Board on ____________, including without limitation the work described in attached Schedule ‘A’ (Subsection ---).
ii. It shall specify a scheduled completion date on which the construction of the approved subdivision streets and improvements shall be completed by the applicant. The Planning Board may
Town of Montague Page 28
extend such time as it deems appropriate after receipt of a written request by the applicant and received by the Planning Board at least 45 days prior to the scheduled date of completion.
iii. It shall state that it shall not expire until the Planning Board, upon written request, certifies that all road work and improvements have been completed according to the approved plan and that the performance guarantee is released.
iv. It shall state that it applies in full to all successors of the applicant whose performance is guaranteed.
v. It shall state that the full amount of the guarantee shall be due immediately to the Town of Montague in case of the default of the applicant or his/her successor in constructing the streets and ways, municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan. Default of the applicant or successor shall be defined in the performance guarantee as meaning:
a. Failure to complete all roadways or other improvements according to the approved Definitive Plan by the scheduled completion date; or
b. Bankruptcy of the applicant for the benefit of the creditors of the applicant, or the foreclosure of any mortgage on all or part of the land of the approved subdivision before the scheduled completion date; or
c. Notice to the Planning Board of the withdrawal or termination of any performance guarantee given hereunder, or of a request to substitute performance guarantee hereunder, prior to the scheduled completion date of the work, unless it is given 45 days prior to the anticipated date of such withdrawal, termination or substitution; or
d. Any other condition or circumstance that constitutes default, in the opinion of the Planning Board.
vi. The performance guarantee shall include a detailed scope of work to be completed under the performance guarantee and may provide for a schedule of partial releases, in accordance with Subsection 5 below, which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various stages of work (Schedule A).
vii. The performance guarantee shall not contain any language which contradicts the above-stated requirements.
Town of Montague Page 29
viii. A cost estimate may be requested by the Planning Board once prior to the establishment of the performance guarantee and once with each subsequent full or partial performance guarantee release; the estimate will remain effective for 90 days. The estimate will reflect the cost to the Town for completing the work as a public works project which may necessitate legal fees, public bidding, additional staff time, prevailing wage, etc.
(4) Partial Release. Prior to final release of a performance guarantee, the Planning Board may grant one or more partial releases from the required performance guarantee for partial completion of improvements, provided that:
(a) No lot(s) shall be released from the restrictive covenant unless construction of streets and ways, and installation of municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan for said lots, has been completed or another form of security has been substituted, sufficient to complete said streets and ways, municipal services and other improvements. The form entitled “Release of Lots – Certificate of Performance,” or the form entitled “Release of Lots – Provision of Surety,” whichever is appropriate, shall be submitted when applying for a partial release of lots from a restrictive covenant.
(b) No reduction in the amount of the performance guarantee shall reduce the performance guarantee to a value below the estimated cost of completing the unfinished portions of the improvements. The penal sum of any such bond held under Subsection J(3)(a), or deposit held under Subsection J(3)(b), or any amount of funds retained pursuant to an agreement under Subsection J(3)(d) shall bear a direct and reasonable relationship to the expected cost, including a contingency amount of at least 25% but no more than 50% of the expected cost to guard against the effects of inflation or to provide for an overrun contingency necessary to complete the subject work.
(c) No partial release of security shall be granted until the Planning Board has received written verification from the Town’s consulting engineer that a minimum of 50% of the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
(5) Final release. Upon the completion of the construction of streets and ways, and the installation of municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan, the applicant may request release of the covenant, bond, deposit of money or securities, or funds retained by lender by sending a statement of completion and a request for release by registered mail to the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. The Board shall act on such request within forty-five (45) days.
Town of Montague Page 30
(a) Such statement shall be accompanied by the following:
i. Written certificate from a registered civil engineer of the Planning Board’s choosing that the streets, drainage, and utilities conform to the Planning Board’s requirements in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan.
ii. Written certificate from a registered civil engineer of the Planning Board’s choosing that the water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and hydrants conform to specifications and the Planning Board’s requirements in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan.
iii. Written certificate from a registered land surveyor of the Planning Board’s choosing, that all permanent bounds and monuments on all street lines and on all lots within the subdivision are in place and are accurately located in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan, and that the as-built plan submitted accurately reflects the conditions in the completed subdivision and are in compliance with the approved Definitive Plan.
iv. Written certificate from a registered civil engineer of the Board’s choosing that the streets, drainage, and stormwater management system shall have been in use through one (1) full year and shall have performed as designed.
v. Written confirmation from the head of the Highway Department that the road construction including paving and associated improvements have been exposed to one (1) full year without damage, or that damage, if incurred, has been repaired to the satisfaction of the Highway Department.
vi. Written confirmation from the Tree Warden that installation of the street trees and other plantings required by the approved Definitive Plan have been completed satisfactorily and that damaged plantings have been replaced. A one (1) year warranty for trees and plantings shall be required.
vii. The address of the applicant.
viii. Two copies, plus one original mylar, and one electronic PDF version, of an as-built plan of the streets and ways within the subdivision.
Town of Montague Page 31
ix. Written evidence that all fees to cover inspection for release of the performance guarantee have been paid by the applicant.
(b) If the Planning Board determines that said construction or installation has been completed, it shall release the interest of the Town in such performance guarantee. If performance was secured by means of a restrictive covenant, the interest of the Town shall be released by execution of a “Lot Release – Certification of Performance.”
(c) If the Planning Board determines that said construction or installation has not been completed in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan, it shall specify in a notice sent to the Town Clerk and, by registered mail, to the applicant, the details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with the approved Definitive Plan. Failure of the Planning Board to do so within 45 days after the receipt by the Town Clerk of the statement from the applicant requesting release of the Town’s interests will result in the termination of obligations under the performance guarantee and any deposit shall be returned and any such restrictive covenant shall become void. In the event that said 45-day period expires without such specification by the Planning Board or without the release of the performance guarantee as aforesaid, then the Town Clerk shall, upon request, issue a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
(d) Even though all improvements covered by the performance guarantee have been completed, the Planning Board may refuse to release the performance guarantee if completion of construction on any remaining undeveloped or partially developed lot(s) poses a substantial risk or injury to the covered improvements.
K. Recording of the plan. The applicant shall record the Definitive Plan as approved and endorsed by the Planning Board, at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds and, in the case of registered land, with the recorder of the Land Court. The applicant shall notify the Planning Board in writing within ten (10) days after the recording of the Definitive Plan of such recording and shall provide the book, page number and date of recording.
L. Recording of the plan. Failure of the applicant to record the Definitive Plan at the Franklin County Registry of Deeds within six (6) months of its endorsement or to comply with the construction schedule of the performance agreement shall constitute sufficient cause for rescission of such Definitive Plan approval by the Planning Board, in accordance with the requirements of MGL C. 41 § 81-W, as amended.
M. Endorsement.
(1) Upon approval of the Definitive Plan, a majority of the Board shall endorse it. This shall be done following the twenty-day statutory appeals periods, provided
Town of Montague Page 32
that the Town Clerk notifies the Board that no appeal has been filed within this period. After the approved Definitive Plan has been endorsed, the applicant shall file with the Board one (1) reproducible copy, three (3) contact prints, and one (1) electronic copy in PDF form transferred through a medium specified by the Board, of said Definitive Plan.
(2) Approval of the Definitive Plan does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the Town of Montague of streets or easements within a subdivision.
(3) A failure by the applicant to request endorsement of the plan or failure by the applicant to provide an adequate performance guarantee within six months of the Planning Board’s vote of approval shall result in automatic rescission of the Definitive Plan approval.
§ 4.4. Subdivision standards in the Floodplain
All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If any part of a proposed subdivision is located within the Special Flood Hazard Area as defined by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) Flood Hazard Boundary Maps or within the 100-Year Floodplain as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate (FIRM) maps, it shall be reviewed to assure compliance with the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw and the following:
A. The proposed subdivision design is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public and private utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, shall be located and constructed outside of the Flood Hazard Area and the 100-Year Floodplain.
C. All primary and accessory structures shall be located outside of the Flood Hazard Area and the 100-Year Floodplain to the extent practicable. Any structures proposed within the Flood Hazard Area or 100-Year Floodplain must meet the requirements of the Town of Montague Zoning Bylaw.
C. Adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. Base flood elevation (the level of the one-hundred-year flood) data shall be provided for proposals greater than five (5) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, for that portion within the Flood Hazard Area or the 100-Year Floodplain.
Town of Montague Page 33
SECTION V
Design Standards
Except as herein noted, the provisions of the following documents shall be used as design standards. Where a difference between the standards and these Regulations exists, these Regulations shall be followed unless a waiver is granted by the Planning Board:
A. Streets, sidewalks, water systems, sanitary sewers, storm drain systems, public and private utilities and other infrastructure shall be constructed in accordance with the current editions of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” the “Supplemental Specifications to the Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” and the “Construction Standard Details” (“Standard Specifications”).
B. Roads shall be designed in accordance with the current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,” also known as the Green Book, or “Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low-Volume Local Roads (ADT = 400)” design manuals for 20 mile per hour design speed, or a greater speed, if appropriate, as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Road signs and pavement markings should be designed in accordance with the current “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices” (MUTCD), published by the Federal Highway Administration.
D. LID stormwater BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the Montague Stormwater System Policy, and the most current edition of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, the Massachusetts Clean Water Toolkit (also known as the Massachusetts Nonpoint Source Pollution Management Manual), or equivalent design guidelines and specifications approved by the Planning Board.
§ 5.1. Streets.
A. Location.
(1) All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that they will provide safe vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle travel. Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to the attractiveness of the street layout, in order to obtain the maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision. As far as practicable, streets should follow natural contours. Common driveways shall not be used to provide vehicular access to lots within a subdivision if, in the opinion of the Planning Board, they are being used to circumvent the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations or the Zoning Bylaws.
(2) The design and layout of the proposed subdivision shall conform, so far as is practicable, to the Development Guidelines contained in Appendix A, the LID
Town of Montague Page 34
Site Planning and Design checklist in Appendix B, and to the Montague Stormwater System Policy, Town Master Plan, Open Space and Recreation Plan, or Community Development Plan, as adopted by the Planning Board or the Town.
(3) Provision should be made, satisfactory to the Planning Board, for the proper projection of streets or for access to an adjoining property which is not yet subdivided or developed. A right-of-way from the end of all dead-end roads to an adjoining property must be part of the street layout and must be shown on the street acceptance plans. Such right-of-way shall provide for a future road or pedestrian path that will link future subdivisions unless there is compelling evidence that the adjoining property will never be developed as a subdivision.
(4) Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or to adjoining property shall not be permitted.
(5) Generally, it is preferred that new roads loop back to the existing road instead of being dead-end streets (see Dead-end streets below).
(6) Dead-end streets shall not be longer than eight hundred (800) feet unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board, a greater length is necessitated by topography or other special conditions. Whether temporary or permanent, dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a hammer head turnaround having a minimum radius of forty (40) feet. Alternatively, the developer may propose a cul-de-sac which shall include a landscaped center island and a one-way drive lane a minimum of 20 feet in width. Where site conditions are favorable, cul-de-sac islands shall be designed to treat and infiltrate stormwater runoff utilizing LID stormwater management techniques. A minimum island radius of twenty (20) feet and a property line radius of at least sixty (60) feet shall be provided. The road surrounding the island shall be a one way road twenty (20) feet wide.
B. Street Design Specifications.
(1) Roads shall be designed based on land uses and projected traffic volume generated by the development based on average daily trips (ADT) as determined in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s (ITE) “Trip Generation Manual,” and by expected future growth outside the development that will utilize the road. Streets shall be classified as one of the following:
(a) Industrial/Commercial Street: A street serving only commercial and/or industrial uses.
(b) Mixed-Use Street: A street serving a mix of residential, commercial, and/or light industrial uses.
(c) Residential Street: A street serving residential dwelling units expected to generate more than 400 ADT.
(d) Minor Residential Street: A street serving residential dwelling units expected to generate less than 400 ADT.
Town of Montague Page 35
Minimum Specifications Industrial/ Commercial Street Mixed-Use Street Residential Street Minor Residential Street
ROW width (feet)
60
60
50
40
Paved width (feet)1
24 - 30
24 - 30
24
20
Intersection angle
70°
70°
60°
60°
Street centerline off-set, same side of road (feet)
300
300
300
300
Street centerline off-set, opposite side of road (feet)
150
150
150
150
Stopping site distance (at 3.5 feet above pavement)
200
155
115
115
Curb radius (feet)
30
25
15
15
Centerline radius (feet)
300
180
100
100
Minimum grade
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
Maximum grade2
6%
8%
8%
8%
Curbing requirements
Yes, granite
Yes, granite
Determined by the Board
Determined by the Board
Tree belt, both sides of street (feet)
6
6
6
6
Sidewalk requirements3
One or both sides of street
Both sides of street
One or both sides of street
Determined by the Board
Bicycle facilities
Bike lanes, separated bike lanes, or multi-use path
Bike lanes, separated bike lanes, or multi-use path
Shared street or multi-use path
Shared street or multi-use path
1 Paved width for Industrial/Commercial and Mixed-Use Streets will depend on the presence of truck traffic, bike lanes, and on-street parking.
2 The Planning Board may modify these requirements where, in its opinion, unusual topography conditions so require.
3 A multi-use path may be substituted for one sidewalk.
(2) The subdivision road(s) shall be set back at least twenty-five feet (25) from any adjacent property lines that are not part of the subdivision.
E. Adequate Access from Public Ways.
(1) Where the street system within a subdivision does not connect with or have, in the opinion of the Planning Board, adequate access from a public way, the Planning Board may require, as a condition of approval, that such adequate access be
Town of Montague Page 36
provided by the subdivider, or that the subdivider make physical improvements to and within such a way in accordance with the provision of these regulations from the boundary of the subdivision to a public way (see Section 3.4).
(2) Where the physical condition or width of the public way from which a subdivision has its access is considered by the Planning Board to be inadequate to carry the traffic expected to be generated by such subdivision, the Planning Board may require the subdivider to dedicate a strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting way to a width at least commensurate with that required in a subdivision, and to make physical improvements to and within such public way to the same standards required within the subdivision. Any such work performed within such public way shall be made only with the permission of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such widening or construction shall be borne by the subdivider.
§ 5.2. Easements.
A. Easements for utilities shall be at the side or rear of lots wherever possible. They shall be contiguous from lot to lot. Easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width.
B. Where a subdivision is bisected by or adjacent to a watercourse, either natural or man-made, the Planning Board may require that there be a stormwater or drainage easement of at least twenty (20) feet in width to conform to the path of the watercourse and to provide for any construction related to that watercourse.
C. The Board may require an easement for watercourses that are not within a subdivision but may be affected by it.
§ 5.3. Natural features.
Natural features including large trees over 12 inches in diameter at breast height, watercourses, scenic vistas, locations of historic significance and similar community assets shall be preserved. To the extent feasible, land clearing, alteration of natural topography, removal of topsoil, destruction of vegetation, soil compaction, and cut and fill shall be minimized.
§ 5.4. Open spaces.
Before approval of a plan, the Planning Board may also require the plan to show protected open space suitable for passive recreation (e.g. walking trails) or a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Board may require that no building or structure be erected upon such area until the land is either purchased by the town or is deeded in gift to the town or to a neighborhood civic
Town of Montague Page 37
association. This land may be held in said status for a period of three (3) years, at which time, if the land is not deeded or purchased, it may be included in a new subdivision proposal.
§ 5.5. Drainage.
A. The storm drainage system shall be designed to meet the standards established in the most current edition of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s Stormwater Management Handbook and the Montague Stormwater System Policy. Low Impact Development (LID) techniques should be used whenever feasible to manage stormwater within the proposed subdivision.
B. The stormwater management system shall be designed so that the post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for a 2-year, 10-year, and 25-year 24-hour storm, based on the most recent rainfall data from the Northeast Regional Climate Center at Cornell University (http://www.nrcc.cornell.edu/). The system shall be designed so that there are no increased flooding impacts off-site from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event.
C. Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent practicable. The annual recharge from the post-development site should approximate the annual recharge from the pre-development or existing site conditions based on soil types.
D. Wherever possible, stormwater should be directed into the nearest part of the drainage system. Where storm drainage encroaches on privately owned land, a drainage easement shall be acquired by the developer.
E. No open water body or wetland shall be altered unless in compliance with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
F. Where a portion of a subdivision lies within an aquifer recharge area or other critical area, as defined by the MA DEP Stormwater Management Handbook, the proposed drainage should incorporate Best Management Practices for managing stormwater in Zone II or Interim Wellhead Protection Areas or critical areas, according to the Stormwater Management Handbook, as amended.
§ 5.6. Sewerage.
If a public sewerage system is available and the connection is feasible the subdivision should be connected through the construction of sewer pipes and related equipment such as manholes and connecting Y’s, in conformity with the specifications of the Town of Montague. Where a public sewerage system connection is not available or feasible, a private on-site sewerage system shall be designed and constructed in conformity with Title 5 of the Sanitary Code of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and subject to approval by and in
Town of Montague Page 38
conformity with the Town of Montague Board of Health rules and regulations. The Planning Board may require installation of so-called “dry sewers” in conformity with the specifications of the Town of Montague in any street where, in its estimation, sanitary sewers may become accessible within a period of two (2) years.
§ 5.7. Water.
Water pipes and related equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff valves, shall be constructed to serve all lots on each street in the subdivision in conformity with specifications of the applicable water district. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, existing public water mains are not reasonably accessible, the plan may be approved without provision of street water lines, provided:
A. Private on-lot water systems shall be located and constructed in accordance with the Board of Health Regulations governing private wells in the Town of Montague and in accordance with the setback and other requirements of Title 5 for private septic systems. Such water systems shall be subject to the approval of the Town of Montague and the Montague Board of Health.
B. In addition, a local water supply should be provided within the subdivision for fire fighting purposes as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief.
§ 5.8. Passive solar design.
In order to encourage energy conservation, and to allow for the maximum number of buildings to receive direct sunlight sufficient for the operation of solar energy systems for space, water, or industrial process heating and cooling, buildings should be oriented so that a building’s longest plane is positioned no more than 30 degrees off the east/west axis to the extent possible.
SECTION VI
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivisions
§ 6.1. Installation schedule.
The improvements required herein must be installed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board or their duly appointed representative. A schedule for installations of improvements should be filed with the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board. The Planning Board will provide the developer with checklists of required inspections. Failure to file such schedule, or otherwise to give adequate notice as to when improvements can be inspected, will significantly delay certification of such improvements and subsequent release of performance guarantee.
Town of Montague Page 39
§ 6.2. Clearing and grubbing of right-of-way.
A. No clearing or excavating shall be started on any part of the street until the Tree Warden has designated, in writing, those trees which are to remain in the tree belt. If the construction of a new subdivision road will impact a road designated as a local scenic road according to Chapter 40, Section 15C, review and approval by the Planning Board to cut or remove trees is required. The area within the drip line of trees to be preserved shall be protected during construction by fenders or boxes, and their root systems shall be disturbed as little as possible. Any trees recommended for preservation that are lost as a result of and/or during construction shall be replaced.
B. The entire area of each street or way shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, like material and all trees not intended for preservation.
§ 6.3. Foundation of roadway.
A. Subbase.
(1) Within the roadway area, including driveway aprons, sidewalks and grass strips, all material shall be removed to subgrade, and any unsuitable material below subgrade, in the opinion of the town-appointed engineer, shall be removed and shall be replaced with proper bankrun gravel and brought to proper compaction. The depth of the subgrade will be a minimum of sixteen inches but may be greater based on existing conditions as specified by the town-appointed engineer.
(2) Where fill is required, it shall be placed in uniform lift layers not deeper than eight (8) inches and shall be spread uniformly with the large stones at the bottom.
(3) Any gravel used as fill in the subbase shall be composed of hard, durable stone and coarse sand, practically free from loam and clay and containing no stone having a dimension greater than six (6) inches, and, when spread and compacted, shall present a stable foundation.
(4) Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to the proper density, and rolling shall continue until a firm, even surface true to line and grade is achieved. Any depressions shall be filled and rerolled, and any soft or unsuitable areas shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and rolled.
(5) The subgrade shall be shaped and finish graded at the required depth below and parallel to the proposed pavement surface, in conformance with the typical street cross section.
(6) Inspections shall be required after completion of the subgrade (see Section 7.1).
B. Gravel base.
Town of Montague Page 40
(1) The gravel base course shall consist of not less that eighteen (18) inches of well-compacted gravel placed upon the subgrade, for the entire width of the roadway, in layers not greater than six (6) inches deep.
(2) When spreading the gravel, care should be taken to rake forward and distribute the largest stones so they will be at the bottom of the gravel base course and evenly distributed.
(3) Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to the proper density, and rolling shall continue until a firm, even surface true to line and grade is achieved. Any depression that appears during or after rolling shall be filled with gravel and rerolled.
(4) The gravel used in the base course shall conform to the specifications of the subgrade (Subsection 6.3.A.(3)), except that it shall contain no stones having a dimension greater than four (4) inches. The top three (3) inches of gravel shall be screened or crushed with a maximum stone size of one (1) inch.
(5) The gravel base surface shall be shaped and finish graded at the required depth below and parallel to the proposed pavement surface, in conformance with the typical street cross section.
(6) Extreme care shall be taken to ensure that all trenches for utilities have been thoroughly compacted to prevent future settling. Subdrains shall be installed if necessary.
(7) Inspections shall be required before commencement and after completion of the gravel base (see Section 7.1).
§ 6.4. Surfacing of roadway.
A. The roadway and driveway aprons shall be paved the entire width, including under the berms, and the surface treatment shall be compacted bituminous concrete placed in two (2) layers.
B. The first layer or binder course shall be Class I bituminous concrete pavement, Type I-1, binder course mix, laid at a thickness of two (2) inches, in accordance with Section 460 of Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” latest edition.
C. The second layer or surface course shall be Class I bituminous concrete pavement, Type I-1, top course mix, laid at a thickness of one (1) inch, in accordance with Section 460 of Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” latest edition.
Town of Montague Page 41
D. The plant mix material shall be delivered to the site in a hot (minimum of 270 degrees) and easily workable condition when weather conditions are satisfactory so that it can be properly placed on the appropriate base. Irregularities in the existing foundation material shall be eliminated by the use of extra bituminous material.
E. All bituminous concrete shall be spread by an approved mechanical spreader in a uniformly loose layer to the full width required and to such thickness that each course, when compacted, shall have the required thickness and shall conform to grade and the typical street cross section. Hand spreading of bituminous concrete material will be allowed only for special areas which do not permit mechanical spreading and finishing.
F. Each course of bituminous material shall be rolled with a self-propelled, equally balanced, tandem roller weighing not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) tons. Places inaccessible to the power roller shall be compacted by means of hand or vibratory tampers. Any displacement caused by the roller shall be corrected by raking and adding fresh mixture where required.
G. Traverse joints shall be formed by laying and rolling against a form of the thickness of the compacted mixture placed across the entire width of the pavement. When the laying of the mixture is resumed, the exposed edge of the joint shall be painted with a thin coat (asphalt tack coat) of hot asphalt or asphalt cement thinned with naptha. The fresh mixture shall be raked against the joint and thoroughly tamped with hot tampers and rolled.
H. The final bituminous surface shall show no deviation greater than one-fourth (1/4) inch when tested with a sixteen-foot straightedge placed parallel to the center line of the surface course.
I. Finished roadway and driveway apron surfaces less than the required thickness or containing any soft or imperfect places will not be approved.
J. All roadways shall be brought up to the finish grade as shown on the Definitive Plan, and all manhole covers, gate boxes, gas drips and other access to underground utilities shall be set flush with the surface of the road, grass strip or sidewalk.
K. Inspections shall be required upon completion of the binder and surface courses (See Section 7.1).
§ 6.5. Curbs.
A. Curbing shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” and installed in accordance with the following specifications:
Town of Montague Page 42
(1) Industrial / Commercial Street and Mixed Use Street: Granite curb throughout.
(2) Residential Street: Granite curbs at intersections and steep grades and other locations, as determined by the Board.
(3) Minor Residential Street: As determined by the Board.
B. Curbing at an intersection shall include the full length of the curve, plus six (6) feet of tangent in each direction; curbing on steep grades shall mean on all grades in excess of 6%. Curbing may be required on minor streets where the Planning Board deems that special conditions of topography, drainage, alignment, or unusually high densities so require. All curb inlets shall be granite, of standard design.
C. Where curbing is required, perforated or invisible curbs (flush with the road) shall be allowed in areas where roadside swales, bioretention, or other Low Impact Development (LID) stormwater management features are proposed, and shall be approved by the Town Engineer before installation.
D. Open drainage with roadside swales is preferred in all situations where curbing is not required. Vegetated swales, bioretention, and other LID stormwater management techniques should be used whenever feasible to manage stormwater runoff from roads.
E. Inspections shall be required upon completion of curbs (see Section 7.1).
§ 6.6. Sidewalks.
A. Sidewalk of not less than five (5) feet in width shall be constructed between the roadway and the property line, and as close to the property line as practicable, as follows:
(1) Industrial / Commercial Street. For streets serving only industrial uses, one side; for streets serving commercial uses, both sides.
(2) Mixed Use Street: Both sides unless specified otherwise by the Planning Board.
(3) Residential Street: One or both sides, determined by the Planning Board.
(4) Minor Residential Street: Determined by the Planning Board.
B. To the maximum extent practicable, permeable paving (porous asphalt or pervious concrete) shall be used for sidewalks, provided the appropriate soil and slope conditions exist. Permeable sidewalks shall be designed according to University of New Hampshire Stormwater Center specifications for porous asphalt or pervious concrete. Impermeable sidewalk construction shall be of bituminous concrete or cement concrete upon a sub-base consisting of at least six inches of good gravel or crushed stone after compaction. No surface shall be laid until sub-base shall have been inspected and approved. Paving
Town of Montague Page 43
shall conform to the same requirements as for street surfaces, and meet requirements set forth in Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges,” latest edition. All sidewalks shall be designed to meet the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board and Americans with Disabilities Act standards.
C. Sidewalks shall be separated from the travelled way by a tree belt of varying width but at no place (except intersections) to be less than six feet. Sidewalks may meander as necessary to accommodate and protect existing topography, trees, ledge, and other site features. Sidewalks must connect with existing sidewalks on adjacent roadways. In the event there are no connections to be made, the sidewalk shall terminate with a ramp out to the pavement.
D. A multi-use path within the road right-of-way, or if outside of the right-of-way within an easement for the public use, may be authorized by the Planning Board in lieu of one sidewalk where sidewalks are required, and for Minor Residential streets. Paths shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet wide for Minor Residential and Residential streets, and ten (10) feet wide for Mixed Use or Industrial / Commercial streets. The path shall be continuous, with no breaks at streams or elsewhere, to allow users safe travel off of the roadbed. Paths shall include a secure bed of compacted gravel and be finished with asphalt, crushed stone, or gravel, provided drainage is adequate, and shall conform to the requirements of the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board and Americans with Disabilities Act standards.
E. Inspections shall be required upon completion of the sidewalks (see Section 210-7.1).
§ 6.7. Tree belts and trees.
A. Tree belts a minimum of six (6) feet wide shall be provided on each side of the roadway. When sidewalks are required, the tree belt shall be between the curb and the sidewalk with the trees planted along the center line of the tree belt. Except where LID stormwater management features are proposed, the top six (6) inches of the tree belt shall consist of good quality loam extending to the right-of-way, screened, raked, and rolled with lawn grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure adequate coverage, rolled when the loam is moist.
B. Stormwater management features utilizing LID techniques are encouraged within the tree belt when feasible to infiltrate and treat stormwater runoff from the sidewalk and roadway.
C. No utility poles, transformers, or similar items shall be placed in the tree belt unless a waiver is granted by the Planning Board.
D. Shade trees shall be on both sides of subdivision streets in the tree belt. There shall be one tree planted an average of every thirty (30) feet of street frontage along each lot and
Town of Montague Page 44
not less than two trees per lot. Any mature deciduous shade trees preserved in the tree belt or within five (5) feet of the Right of Way may be applied toward this average.
E. Street trees shall be deciduous native shade trees no less than three inch (3”) caliper (at a point 6” above the ground) at time of installation. Trees shall be single stemmed with a single, straight leader. No more than 35% of any one species shall be used throughout a subdivision. Species, size, and planting procedure for such trees shall conform to current practice of the Town in planting roadside trees.
F. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan showing existing and proposed street trees and other plantings.
G. Inspections shall be required after the installation of street trees and landscaping (see Section 7.1). Trees must survive one year after planting prior to the release of performance guarantees.
§ 6.8. Utilities.
All gas, telephone, electricity, cable antenna television, and all other conduits shall be installed underground within a grass strip along the edge of the right-of-way when space is available, or beneath the edge of the tree belt, with a minimum cover of three feet. When Low Impact Development (LID) stormwater features are proposed in the tree belt, utilities may be placed under the roadside edge. If located within a flood-prone area, as determined by the Planning Board, transformers, switching equipment or other vital components shall be flood-proofed and approved by the Planning Board or a Board-appointed engineer at the subdivider’s expense. If the Planning Board determines that undergrounding the utilities is impractical because of ledge, high groundwater or flooding, then the utility poles must be set back at least seven feet from the edge of the road or shoulder if any.
§ 6.9. Street signs.
Street signs of a design conforming to the type in general use in the Town shall be furnished, set in concrete and erected at all street intersections under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Highways, prior to the occupancy of any house on the street. Signs may be purchased through the Town of Montague Highway Department.
§ 6.10. Street lighting.
Street lighting shall be installed at intersections and along any street the Planning Board deems appropriate. Street lighting shall utilize LED bulbs and be designed with shielding that has full cut-off housing to avoid unnecessary glare or light pollution. In residential subdivisions, and
Town of Montague Page 45
commercial or industrial subdivisions where the Planning Board deems appropriate, street lighting shall be pedestrian-scale in design.
§ 6.11. Monuments and markers.
A. Permanent monuments of granite or concrete shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in direction or curvature of streets and at all points required by good engineering practice. Such monuments shall conform to industry standards or the standard specifications of the Superintendent of Highways and shall be set according to such specifications.
B. Iron rods or other markers suitable to the Planning Board shall be installed at every corner of each lot within the subdivision. Their locations shall be noted on the Definitive Plan.
C. No permanent monument or marker shall be installed until all construction which would disturb or destroy the monument or maker is completed.
D. Certification in writing shall be made by the registered engineer of the developer to the Superintendent of Highways that all monuments and markers have been properly set in accordance with the final plan. All monuments and markers shall be installed before final release of the security for the performance guarantee.
§ 6.12. As-built plans.
After final approval of all the roadways, utilities, stormwater drainage facilities, landscaping and any other improvements required by the Definitive Plan in the subdivision and before the final release of the performance guarantee, the applicant shall furnish the Planning Board with three (3) complete sets of as-built plans, certified by a registered professional engineer, which shall indicate that streets, stormwater management BMPs, storm drains, sewers, water mains and their appurtenances, and any other improvements required by the Definitive Subdivision Plan have been constructed in accordance with the Definitive Plan and are accurately located as shown upon the as-built plans. The location of all underground electric, telephone, and gas lines shall also be indicated on the as-built plans.
§ 6.13. Final cleanup.
After completion of construction and before release of the performance guarantee, the subdivider shall remove all temporary structures, debris, surplus materials and rubbish and shall otherwise leave the area in a neat and orderly appearance. Burning of the rubbish and waste material is prohibited.
Town of Montague Page 46
§ 6.14. Street acceptance.
The approval of a Definitive Plan by the Planning Board does not make any street shown thereon a public way. Existing laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and bylaws and procedures of the Town of Montague must be complied with for the acceptance of any street. Furthermore, such acceptance is at the discretion of Town Meeting and there shall be no presumption that a street shall be accepted as a public way by Town Meeting. The Applicant will be responsible for forming a Homeowner’s Association responsible for maintaining the street(s), including snow removal, and all associated improvements, including but not limited to lighting, sidewalks, stormwater BMPs, and street trees, in the event the Town does not accept the new subdivision street(s) as public ways. The ownership and maintenance of the streets and all associated improvements shall be permanently assured through an incorporated nonprofit Homeowners' Association, covenant or other land agreement through which each lot owner in the development is automatically a member and each lot is subject to a charge for a share of the maintenance expenses or through a comparable arrangement satisfactory to the Planning Board. Such land agreement documents shall be submitted with the Definitive Plan and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board and Town Counsel.
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 7.1. Inspections.
A. General requirement.
(1) Inspections shall be carried out at appropriate times during the development of the subdivision when the following stages of progress have been reached.
(a) Before clearing and grubbing, the Tree Warden shall designate those trees which are to be preserved in the tree belt.
(b) Inspection of site erosion controls prior to commencement of site work.
(c) The roadway shall be inspected at the stages of subbase, gravel base, binder course and surface course.
(d) The sanitary and storm drainage systems before the filling of utility trenches.
(e) Stormwater management BMPs prior to backfilling of any underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures; and evaluation of the system within 24 hours of a 2-year storm event, if possible.
Town of Montague Page 47
(f) Sidewalks shall be inspected upon completion of the subbase, permanent binder and finish courses.
(g) Curbs, loaming and seeding operations, and street trees may also be inspected by a Board-appointed engineer.
(2) At the completion of all improvements in the subdivision, the Board-appointed engineer shall make an inspection before final release of the performance guarantee.
B. A qualified engineer or surveyor chosen by the Planning Board shall carry out such inspections on behalf of the Town. The subdivider shall give the proper inspector at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice of the proper time for inspection.
C. Construction of streets and installation of utilities may be phased, provided that each section shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet in length.
D. Inspection costs shall be borne by the subdivider, and shall be paid to the satisfaction of the Planning Board before final release of the performance guarantee.
E. Each specified construction stage should be completed to the satisfaction of the inspector, in writing, before further work will be done. Further work performed without this approval will result in returning the construction to the status necessary to perform the required inspection.
F. The developer has the responsibility to ensure that the approved construction plans are implemented and construction criteria are met. Surveillance and field revisions by town officials and inspectors cannot be construed as fulfilling this responsibility.
§ 7.2. Permission required.
No building or structure shall be erected within a subdivision without permission from the Building Inspector, and no permit shall be issued except in compliance with any subdivision approval and related covenant, if applicable.
§ 7.3. Waiver of compliance.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 7.4. Fees.
Town of Montague Page 48
Expenses for advertising, notices, inspections and professional review will be borne by the applicant.
A. As provided by M.G.L. Ch. 44 §53G, the Montague Planning Board may impose reasonable fees for the employment of outside consultants, engaged by the Planning Board, for specific expert services. Such services shall be deemed necessary by the Planning Board to come to a final decision on an application submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to the requirement of: The Town of Montague Zoning Bylaws, Town of Montague Subdivision Regulations, Town of Montague Stormwater System Policy, or any other state or municipal statute, bylaw or regulation, as they may be amended or enacted from time to time. The Planning Board may also impose fees for other consultant services for the review of the plans, survey or inspections under any of the above-referenced laws or regulations.
B. Special Account. Funds received pursuant to these rules shall be deposited with the town treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction of the Planning Board without further appropriation as provided in G.L. Ch. 44 §53G. Expenditures from this account shall be made only in connection with a specific project or projects for which a consultant fee has been collected from the applicant. Expenditures of accrued interest may also be made for these purposes.
C. Consultant Services. In hiring outside consultants, the Planning Board may engage professional engineers, planners, landscape architects, wildlife scientists, lawyers, designers, or other appropriate professionals able to assist the Planning Board and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws and regulations. Specific consultant services may include but are not limited to analysis of applications, stormwater system designs, title searches, mapping of lot and/or municipal boundaries and/or right of way, and environmental or land use law. Services may also include on-site monitoring during construction, or other services related to the project deemed necessary by the Planning Board. The consultant shall be chosen by, and report only to, the Planning Board and/or its administrator.
§ 7.5. Severability.
The invalidity of any of the foregoing rules, regulations and requirements shall not affect the validity of the remainder. Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated by a new Commonwealth law or modification of an existing Commonwealth law shall automatically be brought into conformity with the new or amended law and shall be deemed to be effective immediately and the Town’s Subdivision Regulations will be amended in accordance with the procedures outlined in State law.
§ 7.6. Higher standard to govern.
Town of Montague Page 49
Whenever these rules and regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those prescribed by any local bylaw or other local regulation, the provision which imposes the greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
§ 7.7. Statutory rules and regulations.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made to MGL C. 41, § 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive.
Town of Montague Page 50
APPENDIX A
Development Guidelines by Landscape Type
The following provides criteria for categorizing land into four (4) landscape types, based on landform, vegetation and existing development. For each landscape type, guidelines are provided for development consistent with town goals and character. The layout and construction of ways within subdivisions should be designed to comply with these guidelines and so as to facilitate vegetative cover and building development consistent with them. Included in these guidelines are considerations beyond subdivision control, such as suggested building materials. These are included here as a reference, for possible implementation at the developer's option.
Developers who believe that alternative guidelines would better meet the general goals being sought are encouraged to state those alternative guidelines as a part of their plan submittal.
Open Plain
IDENTIFICATION -- Flat land generally cleared of trees, now cropland or fields.
OBJECTIVES -- To maintain the open sweep of the land; avoid shapeless suburbia.
BUILDING SITING -- Cluster tightly, avoid scattered structures, repetitive yard dimensions.
ROAD LOCATION -- Lanes in clusters possibly rectilinear, others curving in response to minor land features.
VEGETATIVE COVER -- Protect any existing tree belts, plant street trees within clusters; mow, plow, graze.
BUILDING DESIGN -- Strong colors and textures, wood preferred; variation in basic building designs encouraged.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS -- Agriculture encouraged.
Town of Montague Page 51
Wooded Plain
IDENTIFICATION -- Flat land, generally wooded.
OBJECTIVES -- To avoid "suburban" development character, protect forest ecology.
BUILDING SITING -- Cluster preferred; scattered buildings away from or on edges of clearings, screened from roads.
ROAD LOCATION -- Frequent curves, staggered intersections.
VEGETATIVE COVER – Preserve existing vegetative cover to the extent feasible. Clear underwood and only selectively clear trees in building envelope areas.
BUILDING DESIGN -- Less critical than in other areas.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS -- Better suited to development than most landscape types.
Mountain
IDENTIFICATION – Mountainous land and associated highlands, predominantly steep and wooded.
OBJECTIVES -- To protect the fragile mountain ecology, protect the visual quality of the town's backdrop.
BUILDING SITING -- Cluster on less steep portions and in land folds, away from crests.
ROAD LOCATION -- Follow contours, minimizing cuts and fills.
VEGETATIVE COVER -- Preserve existing cover to maximum degree possible.
BUILDING DESIGN -- Low structures, slope-following; no large, light surfaces, bright paint or exposed metal; muted color, soft form; wood, earth, weathered silvers, grays, browns.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS -- Extraordinary care necessary to avoid erosion; development generally undesirable.
Town of Montague Page 52
Village
IDENTIFICATION -- Land in the vicinity of concentrated development, whose character is established by existing development.
OBJECTIVES -- To continue and provide consistency with the pattern and character of existing development.
BUILDING SITING -- Compact clustering; avoid scattered structures.
ROAD LOCATION -- Short rectilinear segments in clusters, others curving in response to land features.
VEGETATIVE COVER -- Retain or plant street trees, preserve other trees where feasible.
BUILDING DESIGN -- Anything consistent with scale, texture and colors of nearby structures; wood preferred; variety in basic building designs encouraged.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS -- Better suited to development than most landscape types.
Town of Montague Page 53
APPENDIX B LID SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN CHECKLIST
The applicant must document specific LID site planning and design strategies applied for the project. If a particular strategy was not used, a justification and description of proposed alternatives must be provided. If a strategy is not applicable (N/A), applicants must describe why a certain method is not applicable at their site. SITE PLANNING STRATEGIES Incorporated into Project?
a. Natural vegetation has been retained to the maximum extent possible.
b. Cut and fill have been minimized.
c. Impacts to sensitive resources such as floodplains, steep slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, surface waters, and their riparian buffers has been avoided or minimized.
d. Impervious lot coverage has been minimized to the extent possible (not applicable to the Central Business and Historic Industrial Zoning Districts)
Explanation of constraints and/or proposed alternatives:
STREET LAYOUT STRATEGIES Incorporated into Project?
a. Street and driveway lengths are minimized, and avoid steep hillsides and important natural features.
b. Pavement width has been kept to the minimum requirements of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
c. Permeable pavement is used for sidewalks, overflow parking areas, or driveways, provided the appropriate soil and slope conditions exist.
Explanation of constraints and/or proposed alternatives:
Town of Montague Page 54
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES Incorporated into Project?
a. Vegetated roadside swales or bioretention areas are used to collect, hold, and treat runoff from roadways and parking lots. Where curbs are deemed necessary to protect the roadside edge, perforated (that allow runoff to flow into swales) or “invisible curbs” (flush with the road surface) are used.
b. Vegetated filter strips are used to filter and treat runoff from roadways, parking lots, and driveways.
c. Constructed wetlands are used for stormwater retention and pollutant removal.
d. Rain gardens or bioretention areas are used to collect, treat, and infiltrate runoff.
e. Runoff from roofs is discharged to lawn areas, rain gardens, and/or rain barrels.
Explanation of constraints and/or proposed alternatives:
SITE WORK STRATEGIES Incorporated into Project?
f. Clearing of the right-of-way will be limited to what is necessary to construct the roadway, drainage, sidewalk, and utilities, and to maintain site lines.
g. Permeability of soils that have been compacted by construction vehicles will be reestablished (for example, by rototilling lawn areas prior to seeding, etc.)
Explanation of constraints and/or proposed alternatives:

Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 1 of 7
Montague Planning Board
One Avenue A, Turners Falls, MA 01376 (413) 863-3200 Ext 207 Fax: (413) 863-3222 Email: planner@montague.net
RULES AND REGULATIONS
As of 6/18/2019
The Montague Planning Board in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 9 hereby adopts the following Rules
and Regulations, governing the organization and conduct of the Board.
ARTICLE I: GENERAL ORGANIZATION AND CONDUCT
Section 1: MEMBERS AND OFFICERS
The Montague Planning Board, herein after called the Board, shall consist of five members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. The members shall elect on a yearly basis, a Chair and Vice-Chair of the Board, as needed.
Section 2: THE CHAIR
The Chair shall preside at all meetings and shall exercise such powers as properly appertain to their office or as
may be delegated to the chair by the Board.
Section 3: THE VICE-CHAIR
In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall assume the responsibilities of the Chair.
Section 4: THE CLERK
The Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for mailing to the Board members, at least three working
days prior to each regular meeting, a notice of the meeting, the agenda of the meeting, and the minutes of the
previous meeting (s). The Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for keeping full and accurate records
of all regular and special meetings of the Board. The Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for
maintaining the official copy of the Board’s Rules and Regulations and all official policies set forth by the
Board.
Section 6: APPOINTMENTS
A majority of the Board shall:
-Appoint one of its members to serve on the Montague Capital Improvements Committee.
-Appoint one of its members to serve on the Franklin County Regional Planning Board.
-Appoint standing subcommittees as may be constituted
-Appoint or nominate Board members or qualified others to serve as Board representatives to such other
boards, committees, and task forces as authorized by state and local law.
Section 7: ATTENDANCE
Following two unexplained consecutive absences, the Board member will be contacted by the Chair to ascertain
the intentions of said member about their future attendance. If any member has more than 3 unexplained
absences a year, the Planning Board shall ask the Board of Selectmen for a replacement.
Section 8: AMENDMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
These Rules and Regulations may be added to, amended, or rescinded by a majority vote of the Board members
present at any regular meeting and a copy of the proposed amendment given to each member of the Board. 
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 2 of 7
Section 9: APPROVAL OF POLICY
A suggested policy can be presented to the Board in writing at any regular meeting. An item will become policy
after written presentation when voted upon favorable by a majority of Board members present at the following
successive regular meeting.
ARTICLE II: MEETINGS
Section 1: REGULAR MEETINGS
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held on that day or days of each month set by the Board at its annual
organizational meeting. Meetings shall be once a month at a minimum.
Section 2: ANNUAL ORGANIZATION
The annual organizational meeting of the Board shall be the first regular meeting of the Board in July of each
year.
Section 3: PROCEDURE
The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in Robert’s current edition of “Rules of Order” shall govern the
Board and its deliberations.
Section 4: SPECIAL MEETINGS
Special meetings of the Board may be called by:
1. The Chair
2. In the Chairs absence, the Vice-Chair
3. A majority of the Board
The Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for posting notice thereof at least 48 hours, including
Saturdays, but not Sundays or legal holidays, prior to such meeting in accordance with Chapter 39, Section
23A, of the General Laws.
The Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for notifying all members by email in such cases, if
possible. In all other cases the Clerk or the Board’s agent shall make reasonable effort to notify all members by
telephone. In all cases the Clerk or the Board’s agent shall be responsible for informing members of the agenda
of the meeting.
Section 5: ORDER OF BUSINESS
The order of business of regular meetings shall be:
1. Call to Order by Chair.
2. Approval of Meeting Minutes
3. Items listed on items
6. Adjournment.
Section 6: QUORUM
At any of the aforementioned meetings a quorum shall consist of 3 (three) voting members of the Board. In the
absence of any one of the full members of the Board, an Alternate member shall have full voting power, and can
help constitute the quorum. A number less than a majority may adjourn.
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 3 of 7
ARTICLE III: PUBLIC HEARINGS
Section 1: NOTICE
Notice of hearings shall be advertised as required by Chapter 40A, Section 11, including notice to all parties of
interest.
Section 2: SITE VISIT
The Board, or a designated subcommittee, may make a site visit to the property that is the subject of the
application. The applicant will be notified of the site visit. If the Board judges the application to be insignificant
in its impact, the Chair may waive the site visit.
Section 3: HEARING PROCEDURE
The Board shall schedule a public hearing within 65 days of the date of filing, unless the petitioner agrees in
writing to an extension of this time period. Any such written agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
All hearings shall be open to the public. The applicant shall appear on his/her own behalf or may be represented
by an agent. If the applicant or representative is not present and has not given advance notice of their inability to
attend, the Board may act based on the information before it, may continue the hearing or may declare the
petition withdrawn without prejudice, or may consider rebate of fees. Prior to opening the hearing, the Chair
shall:
1) Inquire whether any Board members, staff, or others need to recuse themselves from
participating in the hearing or make disclosures at that time regarding potential or perceived conflicts of
interest.
2) If applicable, declare that the provisions of the Mullin Rule are in effect per Town Meeting
authorization on 5/4/13, and summarize those provisions.
3) Describe the rules of conduct for the hearing, including but not limited to the following:
a) All persons must be recognized by the Chair before speaking;
b) Speakers must begin by identifying themselves by name, address, and any
pertinent affiliations;
c) All questions/comments/remarks should be directed to the Chair, and not to the
applicant, other speakers, staff, or others;
d) Presenters and speakers are expected to be brief and to the point—the Chair
shall determine time limits for individual presentations if necessary, to ensure that all citizens and
Board members have the opportunity to speak; and,
e) Speakers should focus on asking new questions or providing new information,
and avoid repeating previous remarks.
The Chair shall open the hearing and proceed to take testimony in the following order: a) applicant's
presentation; b) report on the site visit; c) information from Town staff; d) questions from the Board; e)
comments and questions from the public; f) applicant's response; g) final comments and questions from the
public, the applicant and staff.
The Chair shall then entertain a motion to close the public hearing or to continue the hearing to a date and time
certain. Once the hearing has been closed, deliberations leading to a decision will begin at that same session, or
will be postponed until later in the session or to a future date.
Written information from the applicant, staff, Town officials, or members of the public regarding an application
shall be submitted to the Planning Department prior to or at the public hearing. 
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 4 of 7
ARTICLE IV: SPECIAL PERMIT AND SITE PLAN REVIEW DECISIONS
Section 1: REVIEW CRITERIA
The Board shall use the review criteria found in Section 8 of the Zoning Bylaw
and any other applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw in reviewing and making a decision on applications
before it.
Section 2: VOTING REQUIREMENTS
a) Special Permit
The concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the Board participating and voting shall be required for any
affirmative decision on a Special Permit application.
b) Site Plan Review
When Site Plan Review is required without a Special Permit, approval requires a simple majority of the Board.
A public hearing is not required. Failure of the Board to act within sixty (60) days of submission shall constitute
an approval of the site plan.
Section 3: DECISION AND FINDINGS
The Board's written decision shall consist of either:
a) Approval of the application based on specific findings that the project meets all of the necessary sections of
the Bylaw.
b) Denial of the application based on a finding that either:
(i) insufficient information was submitted with the application in order for the Board to adequately
review the proposal; or
(ii) a determination, based on specific findings, that the project does not meet the applicable sections of
the Zoning Bylaw.
c) Approval of the application, subject to conditions, modifications and reasonable restrictions necessary to
ensure compliance with appropriate sections of the Bylaw.
The Board's decision shall be filed with the Town Clerk and mailed to the applicant within ninety (90) days of
the public hearing, unless extended by written agreement with the applicant, said agreement to be filed with the
Town Clerk.
Notice of the decision shall be made in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 11.
Section 4: WITHDRAWAL
An application may be withdrawn without prejudice by notice in writing to the Town Clerk, with a copy
submitted to the Planning Department, at any time.
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 5 of 7
ARTICLE V- CONSULTANT REVIEW FEE REGULATION (adopted 4/4/2000)
Section 1: NEED FOR OUTSIDE EXPERTISE
When reviewing a permit application,1
the Planning Board may determine that the assistance of outside
professional expertise is required due to the size, scale or complexity of a given project or its potential impact
on the health, safety and welfare of the Town. Determination of the need for outside review shall require a
majority vote of the members of the Board. When outside review is determined to be necessary, the Board will
require that the applicant pay all reasonable expenses for this purpose.
Section 2: NOTIFICATION OF APPLICANT AND ASSESSMENT OF FEES
The Board shall provide the applicant with a written estimate of the cost for outside review within twenty-one
(21) days of making a determination that such review is required. Notification of the services required and
estimated cost shall be hand-delivered or sent by certified mail. The applicant shall make an initial deposit in
the amount of this estimate within ten (10) days of receiving such notification.
If review funds charged are insufficient to cover the costs of such review, the Board may determine by 2/3 vote
that additional fees are necessary. Notification of the need for additional fees shall be given and payment
received in the same manner as that for the initial fee.
Failure to pay assessed review fees shall be adequate ground for denial of an application without prejudice.
Section 3: TYPES OF CONSULTANTS AND QUALIFICATIONS
In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, attorneys, designers or other
appropriate professionals to assist the Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all relevant laws,
bylaws and regulations. Assistance may include, but shall not be limited to application review, site inspection
and construction phase monitoring.
All consultants engaged pursuant to this section must meet the following minimum qualifications: an
educational degree in or related to the field at issue or at least three years of practice in the field at issue or a
related field.
The Board shall file notice with the Town Clerk of the selection of a consultant, with a copy of said notice to be
sent to the applicant at the same time. Such notification shall include the consultant’s name and address, field of
expertise and credentials.
Section 4: APPEAL OF CONSULTANT SELECTION
An applicant may appeal the outside consultant selected by the Planning Board to the Board of Selectmen
within seven (7) days of the time that notice of selection is filed with the Town Clerk. Grounds for appeal are
limited to claims that the consultant selected by the Board has a conflict of interest or does not possess the
minimum qualifications. Appeals shall be filed with the Town Clerk and a copy given to the Board of
Selectmen.

1
For the purposes of this section, permit application refers to any application for a special permit, site plan review, preliminary
subdivision plan or definitive subdivision plan.
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 6 of 7
The required time limits for action upon an application to the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration
of the administrative appeal. In the event that the Board of Selectmen does not make a decision within one
month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand.
Such administrative appeals shall not preclude further judicial review, if otherwise permitted by law, on the
grounds provided for in this section.
Section 5: ADMINISTRATION OF FEES
Fees collected from an applicant pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer who shall
establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this account may be made at the direction of the
Board with no further appropriation, but only for the purpose of review of the specific project for which the fees
were collected.
At the completion of a project, any excess amount in the special fee account for that project, including accrued
interest, if any, shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant’s successor in interest and a final report of said
account shall be made available to the applicant or to the applicant’s successor in interest. For the purposes of
this section, a project shall be considered complete when:
(1) A final Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector, or
(2) If no Certificate of Occupancy is required, by certification in writing by the Building Inspector that the
project is complete, or
(3) Approval of the project is denied and all appeal periods have elapsed without appeal being filed, or
(4) Applicant submits written notice to the Board that the application is withdrawn, or
(5) A majority of the Planning Board finds that outside review of the project is complete and votes to release
the funds.
The Town Account shall submit an annual report of all special accounts established pursuant to this section as
required by MGL Chapter 44 Section 53G.
ARTICLE VI- RULE REGARDING SECURITY (adopted 6/19/2019)
The following rule is adopted pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G½.
Section 1. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, require the provision of and thereafter hold security for the
performance of any obligation(s) by an applicant as a condition of or relative to any decision, special permit or
site plan approval issued by the Board. That security may, in the discretion of the Planning Board, be in the
form of cash, bonds, negotiable securities, sureties or other financial guarantees and in an amount determined
by the Planning Board (the “Security Funds”).
Section 2. In accordance with G.L. c. 44, §53G½ , the Security Funds will be deposited in a special account
established by the Town Treasurer, shall be kept separate and apart from other monies, and interest earned, if
any, shall be added to and treated as part of such Funds.
Section 3. The performance secured by the provision of such security and the standards for determining
satisfactory completion of such performance shall be set forth in the relevant decision, permit, or approval, the
applicable bylaws and regulations pursuant to which such decision, permit, or approval is issued, and the terms
of an agreement entered into by the Planning Board and applicant establishing the terms upon which such
security is given, held, and may be used.
Town of Montague is an Equal Opportunity Provider & Employer
Page 7 of 7
Section 4. The applicant may secure a determination of its right to return of the Security Funds by sending to
the Planning Board and the Town Clerk by certified mail a written statement signed by the applicant that the
secured obligation is complete. If the Planning Board determines upon receipt of such request that said
obligation has been completed, it shall release the interest of the Town in such Security Funds and return the
Security Funds to the person who furnished the same. If the Planning Board determines that the secured
obligation has not been completed, it shall specify in a notice sent by certified mail to the applicant and to the
Town Clerk within sixty (60) days the details wherein that secured work remains outstanding.
Section 5. In the event of a default by the applicant relative to a secured obligation, some or all of an applicant’s
Security Funds may be expended, without further appropriation, by the Planning Board in its discretion, to
complete such secured obligation. In event of such a default by the applicant, any unused funds will not be
returned to the applicant, but will be retained by the Town, pursuant to G.L. c.44, §53G½.
ARTICLE VII- ADOPTION
These rules and regulations are hereby adopted on 8/23/2011 by the Montague Planning Board, revised
06/18/2019.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Ron Sicard
Chairman of the Montague Planning Board

Montague Planning Board Adopted March 24, 2009
STORMWATER SYSTEM POLICY
Purpose.
The purpose of the stormwater policy is to ensure high water quality standards and address any potential water quantity problems associated with development and to:
A. Preserve hydrologic conditions that closely resemble pre-development conditions.
B. Prevent or reduce flooding and erosion by managing the peak discharge and volume of runoff.
C. Reduce the amount of suspended solids and other pollutants in order to maintain water quality
Applicability.
A Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted as part of any Environmental Impact and Site Plan Review application to the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board pursuant to Section 8 of the Zoning By-Laws of the Town of Montague. The Board may provide an applicant with Special Permit approval pending final Environmental Impact and Site Plan Review approval under this policy.
For details on Stormwater design and Best Management Practices applicants should review the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s Stormwater Management Handbook Volume I, II & III.
Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this policy, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) - For the purposes of stormwater management, structural, nonstructural, and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent or reduce non-point source pollutants from entering receiving waters.
COMBINED SEWER – A storm sewer or sanitary sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. See Montague Sewer Use Regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen dated September 12, 2005.
IMPERVIOUS AREA - Impermeable surface, such as pavement or roof tops, which prevent the infiltration of water into the soil.
INFILTRATION - The entry of water (from precipitation, irrigation, or runoff) into the soil.
OWNER - Shall mean the person or entity legally and lawfully possessing or controlling the land across which a particular stormwater management system will lay.
PEAK DISCHARGE - The maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a storm, usually in reference to a specific design storm event.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT - Development, rehabilitation, expansion on previously developed sites, provided that redevelopment results in no significant increase in impervious area and no net increase in the peak discharge for a 25-year 24-hour storm.
Stormwater System Policy
Montague Planning Board Adopted on March 24, 2009 page 2
STATISTICAL, 24-HOUR EVENT – Predicted precipitation over a 24-hour period from a storm that has a statistical frequency of occurring over a designated number of years. Storm events are usually modeled in 2, 10, 25 and 100-year periods.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") - Shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER - Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM - A conveyance system for the capture, treatment and discharge of stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS - Management standards to protect water bodies from the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) - Matter suspended in water or stormwater; when water is filtered for laboratory analysis, TSS are retained by the filter, dissolved solids pass through.
Submittal requirements for stormwater plans.
Twelve (12) copies of the stormwater management plan and three (3) copies of detailed drainage computations.
The applicant may request and the Board may grant waivers from any requirement judged to be unnecessary to review a particular plan. The Board may designate a staff person to review the plan and grant such waivers during the application process but shall reserve the right to overrule staff waivers upon a decision that the information or requirement is necessary to the plan.
A. Computations:
Pre- and post-development drainage calculations shall be completed for a 2-year, 10-year and a 25-year 24-hour storm event. The 100-year 24-hour storm event must be evaluated for downstream impacts (flooding). Peak discharge rates must be calculated using the point of discharge or the down gradient property boundary. Separate drainage calculation shall be submitted for each point of discharge of flow from the site.
B. Existing site characteristics:
(1) Location of all property boundaries.
(2) Topographic survey showing the existing contours including the area necessary to determine downstream analysis for the proposed stormwater management system.
(3) Soils investigation, including borings and test pits, for areas where construction of any small ponds and infiltration practices will occur.
(4) Description of all watercourses, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or locations into which stormwater flows.
(5) Delineation of the 100-year flood plain and all wetlands, if applicable.
(6) Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwater elevation (November to April) in areas to be used for stormwater retention, detention and infiltration structures.
C. Proposed site alterations:
Stormwater System Policy
Montague Planning Board Adopted on March 24, 2009 page 3
(1) Location of all existing and proposed: buildings, other structures and impervious surfaces.
(2) Any proposed changes to the existing contours.
(3) Location of all existing and proposed roads and utilities.
(4) Location of all existing and proposed stormwater management systems.
(5) Structural details of all components of the proposed stormwater management system. Notes on the plan specifying materials to be used, construction specifications, and details.
(6) Location of erosion and sediment controls and details of types used.
(7) Timing schedule and sequence of development including: land clearing, grubbing, and stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading and vegetative stabilization.
(8) Written Operation and Maintenance Plan of the stormwater management system to ensure that it functions as designed. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of all stormwater management systems and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance.
Stormwater management standards.
Redevelopment projects shall improve existing site conditions. The applicant must demonstrate that the stormwater system meets the stormwater management standards to the greatest extent practicable.
A. The stormwater management system shall be designed so that the post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed the pre-development discharges rates for a 25-year 24-hour storm.
B. Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent practicable. The annual recharge from the post-development site should approximate the annual recharge from the pre-development or existing site conditions based on soil types.
C. Stormwater Management Systems shall be designed to remove 80% of the average annual load (post-development conditions) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS). It is presumed that this is met when:
(1) suitable practices for source control and pollution prevention are identified in a long-term pollution prevention plan, and thereafter are implemented and maintained;
(2) structural stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) are sized to capture the required water quality volume as determined in accordance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook; and
(3) pretreatment is provided in accordance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook.
D. Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent negative impacts during construction.
Design Preferences.
A. Stormwater management systems are encouraged to incorporate the use of natural topography and land cover. The use of such features as natural swales and depressions as they exist prior to development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water are recommended.
B. All stormwater management systems shall be designed to provide an emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along its length and at any outfall.
Stormwater System Policy
Montague Planning Board Adopted on March 24, 2009 page 4
C. Public safety shall be anticipated in the design of a stormwater management system. The banks of detention, retention, and infiltration basins shall be sloped at a gentle grade into the water as a safeguard to personal safety, to encourage the growth of vegetation and to allow the alternative flooding and exposure of areas along the shore. Side slopes must be stabilized and planted with vegetation to prevent erosion and provide pollution removal.
D. The banks of detention and retention areas are encouraged to be designed with sinuous rather than straight shorelines, so that the length of the shoreline is maximized and offering more space for the growth of vegetation.
Expenses to be borne by owner; indemnification of Town.
All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection, use, and maintenance of the stormwater system shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection, use, and maintenance of the stormwater system. The owner shall further indemnify the Town from any loss or damage from stormwater backups, overflows, or blockages.
Installation requirements.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a stormwater management system, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall conform to good engineering practices, the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works.
Inspections and approvals.
The design engineer and the Town where required shall perform the following inspections and shall in writing either approve it or notify the applicant what respects there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan. The applicant shall promptly correct any portion of the work that does not comply with the approved plan.
A. Initial site inspection: Prior to approval of any stormwater management plan.
B. Erosion control inspection: After commencement of construction. To insure erosion control practices are in compliance with the approved plan.
C. Construction inspection: Prior to backfilling any underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures.
D. Final inspection: When all work of stormwater management system has been completed and the applicant has submitted as-built plans. The Town will provide final approval.
Maintenance responsibility.
The owner(s) of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this policy for a private stormwater management system, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams, structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other protective devices. Repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be done in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan.
Operation and maintenance agreement.
Stormwater System Policy
Montague Planning Board Adopted on March 24, 2009 page 5
A. A stormwater management plan is required and the applicant will be required to execute an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement with the Town binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the private stormwater management system.
B. The operation and maintenance agreement and the stormwater management plan shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner in the land records of the Franklin County Registry of Deeds.
Coordinated with any order of conditions from the Conservation Commission.
The stormwater management plan shall be coordinated with any Order of Conditions from the Montague Conservation Commission and requirements under the Wetlands Protection Act. Provisions of this policy do not replace any requirements from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the Montague Conservation Commission.
Performance security.
For phased projects, the Board may require a surety, cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security prior to approval. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management system. The bond so required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all the provisions of this policy and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the completed work, submission of “as-built” plans, and approval by the Town of the stormwater management system as being in compliance with the approved plan.
Invalidation clause.
Invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision in this policy shall not affect the validity of any other section, clause, sentence or provision of this policy, which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this policy is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
When effective.
This Policy shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage.
Passage.
Passed and adopted by the Montague Planning Board on the __24th _ day of _March, 2009_.
Passed and adopted by the Montague Zoning Board of Appeals on the ______ day of _(Month)_, __(Year)__.
