Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[At the 4-28-2014 ATM, by Art. 31 (General Bylaws) and Art. 33
(Zoning Bylaw), the Town voted to codify the Town of Medfield
Charter, Bylaws and regulations to create a more uniform
presentation, organized topical structure, read-friendly format to aid
searches and convenient format for inserting future amendments,
including renumbered outline format, and insertion of headings
and subheadings. Specific changes made during the course of the
codification project are indicated throughout the text by the
following histories: "Amended/Added 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32"
(General Bylaws); and "Amended/Added 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33"
(Zoning Bylaw).]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:3

ARTICLE II
Bylaw Enforcement
[Adopted as Art. XVII of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 1-1. Noncriminal disposition of Bylaws; enforcing persons.
Any Bylaw of the Town of Medfield, or regulation of its departments, boards,
commissions and committees, the violation of which is subject to a specific
penalty, may, in the discretion of the Town official who is the appropriate
enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided in noncriminal
disposition of certain violations (MGL c. 40, § 21D). "Enforcing person," as
used in this Bylaw, shall mean the Animal Control Officer, Conservation
Officer, Board of Health Agent, Inspector of Buildings, any police officer,
the Fire Chief, Plumbing and Gas Inspector, and such other officials as the
Board of Selectmen may from time to time designate, each with respect to
violation of Bylaws and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. If
more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may
be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
§ 1-2. Specific penalties.
Violation of any of the following Bylaw Sections of the Bylaws of the Town
of Medfield may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D;
for the purpose of this Section, the specific penalty which is to apply for
violation of each such Section shall be as listed below, and the municipal
officers or employees whose titles are listed under each Section shall be
deemed to be enforcing officers for each such Section.
Chapter Subject Fine
Enforcing
Officer
Chapter 90 Public drinking § 90-1: $200
§ 90-2: $200
Medfield police
officers
Chapter 100, Art. I Pooper scooper
provision
First offense:
$25
Second offense:
$50
Third and
subsequent
offenses: $100
Medfield Animal
Control Officer
or Medfield
police officers
Chapter 100, Art. II
[ATM 4-30-2007]
Dog Control
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
Chapter Subject Fine
Enforcing
Officer
§ 100-6, Penalty Fines for
violation of
§§ 100-3 and
100-5 (in any
calendar year)
First offense:
$50
Second offense:
$100
Third offense:
$150
Fourth and
subsequent
offenses: $200
Medfield Animal
Control Officer
or Medfield
police officers
Chapter 120 Gun discharge,
etc.
$300 Medfield police
officers
Chapter 160 Junk or pawn
shops
$200 Medfield police
officers
Chapter 180, Art. I Animal noise or
nuisance
First offense:
$35
Second offense:
$50
Third and
subsequent
offenses: $100
Medfield Animal
Control Officer
or Medfield
police officers
Chapter 190, Art. I Buildings under
control of Park
and Recreation
First offense:
$100
Second offense:
$200
Third offense
$300
Subsequent
offenses: $300
Park and
Recreation
Commission
designee or
Medfield police
officers
Chapter 200, Art. I Storing disabled
or unregistered
motor vehicle
First offense:
$75
Second offense:
$100
Third offense:
$150
Fourth and
subsequent
offenses: $250
Medfield police
officers or
Highway
Superintendent
§ 1-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 1-2
1:6
Chapter Subject Fine
Enforcing
Officer
Chapter 220 Public
solicitation
without permit
$50 Medfield police
officers
Chapter 230, Art. II Transfer station
regulations
First offense:
$25
Second offense:
$50
Third and
subsequent
offenses: $100
Park and
Recreation
Commission
designee or
Medfield police
officers
Chapter 240,
Streets, Sidewalks
and Public Places
Article II, Use
Restrictions
§ 240-3 Leaving objects
in public way
$50 Medfield police
officers
§ 240-4 Carrying
improper items
through Town
$50 Medfield police
officers or Board
of Health
Enforcement
Officer
§ 240-5 Leaving
improper waste
within Town
$50 Medfield police
officers or Board
of Health
Enforcement
Officer
§ 240-6 Public
performance or
meeting without
permit
$30 Medfield police
officers
§ 240-7A Vehicles upon
sidewalks
$30 Medfield police
officers
§ 240-7B Motorcycles, etc.
upon public
playing fields
$250 Medfield police
officers
§ 240-8 No playing in
street
$20 Medfield police
officers
§ 240-12 Signs in public
ways
$25 Medfield police
officers
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:7
Chapter Subject Fine
Enforcing
Officer
Article III Snow and ice
removal
$100 Medfield police
officers or
Highway
Superintendent
Article IV No pipes or
trenches in
public ways
$100 Medfield police
officers or
Highway
Superintendent
Chapter 260, Art. I Snow removal $100 plus cost
of towing and
storage
Medfield police
officers or
Highway
Superintendent
Chapter 260, Art. II,
§ 260-7
Handicapped
parking
First offense:
$15
Second offense:
$25
Third and
subsequent
offenses: $50,
plus cost of
towing and
storage
Medfield police
officers
Chapter 270, Art. I Water ban or
conservation
First offense:
$25
Second offense:
$50
Third and
subsequent
offenses: $100
Medfield police
officers,
Superintendent
of Public Works
or designee, or
any member of
the Water and
Sewerage Board
Chapter 290,
§§ 290-1, 290-13
Wetlands $300 per
offense
Medfield police
officers or
Conservation
Agent
§ 1-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 1-2
1:8
Chapter 10
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND COUNCILS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Senior tax work-off program — See Ch. 250,
Art. I.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:9

ARTICLE I
Administration
[Adopted as Art. II, Secs. 2, 8, 9, 14 through 17, and Art. III, Sec. 1,
of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 10-1. Town Counsel.
The Selectmen shall act as Town agents, and have authority as agents and
officers of the Town to appoint and employ a Town Counsel who shall act
as attorney and counsel for the Town and the various officers and boards
thereof, and to fix his or her compensation, to institute and prosecute suits
in the name of the Town, to defend suits brought against the Town, and to
compromise and settle suits and claims, unless otherwise ordered by special
vote of the Town.
§ 10-2. Committee organizational meeting.
It shall be the duty of the member designated as Chairman or first named
of any committee chosen by the Town to promptly call the members thereof
together for organization.
§ 10-3. Committee annual reports.
It shall be the duty of all committees appointed prior to the Annual Town
Meeting to make report at said meeting, unless otherwise directed, upon
matters referred to them.
§ 10-4. Recordkeeping.
All boards, standing committees, and officers of the Town shall cause
records of their doings and accounts to be kept in suitable books. Said
books shall be kept in their respective places in the Town offices and shall
not be removed therefrom. These books shall be open to the inspection of
the citizens of the Town at any reasonable time, but shall remain during
such inspection under the supervision of the Board, committee or officer
designated to keep charge thereof.
§ 10-5. Budgets and expenditures.
All boards, standing committees, special committees, or officers of the
Town, having charge of the expenditure of money, shall annually report
thereon in writing in such manner as to give the citizens a fair and full
understanding of the objects and methods of such expenditures, and shall
make therein such recommendations as they deem proper.
§ 10-6. Deadline for reports.
All reports shall be placed in the hands of the Board of Selectmen for
printing and publishing as soon as possible, not later than the 15th day of
January of each year.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:11
§ 10-7. Distribution of reports.
The Board of Selectmen shall annually cause to be distributed, not less than
three days before the Annual Town Meeting, among the taxpayers of the
Town, the reports of the officers of the various departments and boards of
the Town.
§ 10-8. Notification of appointment.
In addition to the duties required by law, the Town Clerk shall immediately
notify in writing all members of committees that may be elected or
appointed at any Town Meeting, stating the name of the committee and the
business upon which they are to perform.
§ 10-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 10-8
1:12
ARTICLE II
Conflicts of Interest
[Adopted ATM 4-26-1994 as Art. II, § 3, and Art. III, Sec. 13, of the
1926 Bylaws]
§ 10-9. Restriction on salaried positions and contracts.
No elected Town officer shall hold a salaried position under the board of
which he is a member; nor shall any contract for materials or property of
any kind, to an amount exceeding $100 in any one year, be made in behalf
of the Town by any such board with any of its members; provided, however,
that such contract may be made with any person who is the lowest bidder
in an open competition wherein written bids are called for.
§ 10-10. Restriction on managerial appointments. [Amended
4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 24]
No person who has served on an elected Town board may serve in a
managerial position under that board until two years after vacating the
board.
§ 10-11. Restriction on family member appointments.
No Town Board may appoint as an immediate and direct subordinate a
person whose immediate family member has served on that board within
the past 12 months.
§ 10-12. Supervision of family members restricted.
No Town official may immediately and directly supervise an immediate
family member.
§ 10-13. Effect on incumbents.
Any current office holder who might be adversely affected by §§ 10-10
through 10-12 shall be allowed to continue working.
§ 10-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-13
1:13

ARTICLE III
Council on Aging
[Adopted as Art. VIII of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 10-14. Establishment and purpose. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 32]
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Council on Aging in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8B, for the purpose of coordinating
or carrying out programs designed to meet the needs of the elderly in
cooperation with programs of the Department of Elder Affairs established
under MGL c. 19A, § 1 et seq.
§ 10-15. Membership and terms; compensation.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Council on Aging consisting of five
members, in such manner that no more than two terms shall expire in any
one year. The members of the Council shall serve without pay.
§ 10-16. Vacancies.
Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Council, by
reason of death, resignation, inability to act or for any other reason, the
vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Selectmen for the remainder
of the term.
§ 10-17. Organization and officers.
The Council on Aging, at its first annual meeting and, thereafter, annually
in April of each year, shall elect from its membership a President, 1st Vice
President, 2nd Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer. Each officer shall
hold office until the next annual election. In the event a vacancy occurs in
any of the offices above, the Council shall hold a special meeting for the
purpose of electing one of its members to fill such vacancy.
§ 10-18. Annual report.
The Council shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities to the
Town and shall send a copy thereof to the Department of Elder Affairs.
§ 10-19. Confidentiality of information.
The names, addresses, telephone numbers, or other identifying information
about elderly persons in the possession of the Council shall not be public
records, but the use of these records shall comply with MGL c. 19A, §§ 14
to 24, inclusive, as a condition of receiving a government contract, program
grant or other benefit, or as otherwise required by law.
§ 10-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-19
1:15

ARTICLE IV
Permanent Planning and Building Committee
[Adopted 4-30-2018 ATM by Art. 37]
§ 10-20. Municipal facilities.
There shall be a Permanent Planning and Building Committee (hereinafter
"Committee") responsible for overseeing the planning, prioritizing, design,
approvals, construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of all
buildings owned by the Town or constructed on land owned, leased, or
operated by the Town.
The Committee shall consist of five members appointed by a majority
vote of the Town of Medfield Board of Selectmen.
A.
Each member of the Committee shall be a resident in the Town of
Medfield. No member of the Committee shall be a paid employee of the
Town.
B.
Among the members, the Board of Selectmen should endeavor to
appoint a member with expertise in architecture, building engineering,
commercial or municipal construction, and/or construction law/
contracts. If volunteers with this expertise are not available for
appointment, the Board of Selectmen shall have the discretion to
appoint instead any individual meeting the qualifications set forth in
Subsection B.
C.
The Town Administrator or his/her appointed designee, the Town
Facility Manager and one member of the Town Warrant Committee each
shall be appointed as ex-officio members in addition to the five-member
Committee.
D.
E. Committee members shall serve a term of three years.
If a Committee member chooses to resign his or her term, the Board
of Selectmen shall appoint a replacement to complete the unexpired
portion of that term. Expiring terms shall end on June 30 of each
calendar year. A member may hold his or her seat after his or her term
expires until a successor is qualified.
F.
The Committee shall have supervisory authority and oversight for all
projects that fall under MGL c. 149, MGL c. 149A, MGL c. 30, § 39M,
and MGL c. 7C. The Committee may, with the consent of the Board
of Selectmen, delegate its authority to another governing board,
committee, commission or Town official should the Committee's
involvement be deemed unnecessary.
G.
The Committee, in consultation with the Town Facility Manager, shall
be responsible for assessing the current conditions of all Town facilities
and projecting their useful life.
H.
§ 10-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-20
1:17
The Committee shall be responsible for projecting the need to replace
and/or renovate existing facilities and maintain a Facilities Master Plan
with a prioritized list of future needs.
I.
The Committee shall, subject to Town Meeting project authorization
and appropriation, conduct feasibility studies and final designs, oversee
construction of projects, procure project management (if required),
procure design, architectural and engineering services as it deems
necessary or as required by law.
J.
Prior to commencement of a project or feasibility study, the relevant
user department shall designate up to two people to serve as ex officio
members to support the completion of the project or feasibility study
and represent the needs of that department.
K.
Any user department seeking to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge
a building under its jurisdiction shall file a project application with the
Board of Selectmen; if the Board of Selectmen determines that the
project should proceed, it shall refer the application to the Committee.
The Committee shall meet with the applicant department and if the
project is deemed viable by the Committee shall present its findings to
the Board of Selectmen for approval to start a feasibility study.
L.
If, after the completion of a feasibility study, it is deemed by the Board
of Selectmen that the proposed construction project is necessary, the
Committee shall conduct the final design process subject to Town
Meeting approval of all funding and review of projected budgets with
the Board of Selectmen and Warrant Committee.
M.
The Permanent Planning and Building Committee shall report its
progress on all capital projects on an as-needed basis or as requested
by the Board of Selectmen.
N.
§ 10-20 MEDFIELD CODE § 10-20
1:18
Chapter 15
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
§ 15-1. Authority; establishment.
Pursuant to the authority of MGL c. 44, § 55C, there is hereby created a
local municipal affordable housing Trust fund to be known as the "Medfield
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" (hereinafter "the Trust").
§ 15-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Trust shall be to provide for the preservation and
creation of affordable and community housing in the Town of Medfield for
the benefit of low and moderate income households.
§ 15-3. Composition.
There shall be a Board of Trustees of the Medfield Affordable Housing
Trust Fund, composed of one ex officio non-voting member and seven voting
members. The Town Administrator or the Town Administrator's designee
shall serve as the ex officio member. The voting members shall include: a
member of the Board of Selectmen (chosen by the Board of Selectmen),
a member of the Affordable Housing Committee (chosen by the Affordable
Housing Committee), and five members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall request nominations from the
Planning Board and the Warrant Committee and shall consider any such
nominations. The at large members shall be residents who would bring to
the Trust relevant experience in the fields of real estate, housing, banking,
finance, law, architecture, social services, or other applicable areas of
professional expertise. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Trustees
for terms not to exceed two years, except that three of the initial Trustee
appointments shall be for a term of one year, so as to allow staggered
terms. Said Trustees may be re-appointed at the discretion of the Board
of Selectmen. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the
remainder of the unexpired term. Any member of the Board of Trustees may
be removed by the Board of Selectmen for cause after the opportunity of a
hearing.
§ 15-4. Declaration of Trust.
The Trustees are hereby authorized to execute a Declaration of Trust and
Certificate of Trust for the Medfield Affordable Housing Trust Fund, to be
recorded with the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds and filed with the
Norfolk Registry District of the Land Court.
§ 10-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-5
1:19
§ 15-5. Powers.
The powers of the Board of Trustees, all of which shall be carried on in
furtherance of the purposes set forth in MGL c. 44, § 55C, and inclusive of
any future amendments to that section, and shall include the following:
To accept and receive real property, personal property or money, by
gift, grant, contribution, devise or transfer from any person, firm,
corporation or other public or private entity, including but not limited
to money, grants of funds or other property tendered to the Trust
in connection with any ordinance or Bylaw or any general or special
law or any other source, including money from MGL c. 44B; provided,
however, that any such money received from MGL c. 44B shall be used
exclusively for community housing and shall remain subject to all the
rules, regulations and limitations of that chapter when expended by the
Trust, and such funds shall be accounted for separately by the Trust;
and provided further, that at the end of each fiscal year, the Trust
shall ensure that all expenditures of funds received from said MGL c.
44B are reported to the community preservation committee of the city
or town for inclusion in the community preservation initiatives report,
form CP-3, to the department of revenue;
A.
To purchase and retain real or personal property, including, without
restriction, investments that yield a high rate of income or no income;
B.
To sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real
property at public auction or by private contract for such consideration
and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make such contracts
and enter into such undertaking relative to Trust property as the Board
deems advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or
contract;
C.
To execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers,
pledges, leases, covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases, grant
agreements, and other instruments sealed or unsealed, necessary,
proper or incident to any transaction in which the Board engages for
the accomplishment of the purposes of the Trust;
D.
To employ advisors and agents, such as consultants, accountants,
appraisers and lawyers, full-time or part-time staff, and to contract for
administrative and support goods and services, as the Board deems
necessary;
E.
To pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and
agents and to apportion such compensation between income and
principal as the Board deems advisable;
F.
To apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as
the Board deems advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking
funds for such purpose, and to create reserves for depreciation,
depletion or otherwise;
G.
§ 15-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 15-5
1:20
§ 15-6. Acts of Trustees.
A majority of Trustees may exercise any or all of the powers of the Trustees
hereunder, unless otherwise provided, and may execute on behalf of the
Trustees any and all instruments with the same effect as though executed
by all the Trustees. No Trustee shall be required to give bond. No license
of court shall be required to confirm the validity of any transaction entered
into by the Trustees with respect to the Trust Estate. Any borrowing by the
Trust shall require the prior approval of the Medfield Town Meeting.
§ 15-7. Funds paid to Trust.
Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, all monies
paid to the Trust in accordance with any zoning Bylaw, exaction fee, or
To participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger or similar
transactions; and to give proxies or powers of attorney with or without
power of substitution to vote any securities or certificates of interest;
and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of
property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation or
person;
H.
To deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee,
and to delegate to such committee such powers and authority with
relation thereto as the Board may deem proper and to pay, out of
Trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of such
committee as the Board may deem necessary and appropriate;
I.
To carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date
values;
J.
With Town Meeting approval, to borrow money on such terms and
conditions and from such sources as the Board deems advisable, to
mortgage and pledge Trust assets as collateral;
K.
L. To make distributions or divisions of principal in kind;
To comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise
adjust claims in favor or against the Trust, including claims for taxes,
and to accept any property, either in total or partial satisfaction of any
indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the provisions of this
act, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the Board
may deem appropriate;
M.
To manage or improve real property; and to abandon any property
which the Board determined not to be worth retaining;
N.
To hold all or part of the Trust property uninvested for such purposes
and for such time as the Board may deem appropriate; and
O.
P. To extend the time for payment of any obligation to the Trust.
Q. To take any other action relative thereto.
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:21
private contributions shall be paid directly into the Trust and need not be
appropriated or accepted and approved into the Trust. General revenues
appropriated into the Trust become Trust property and to be expended
these funds need not be further appropriated. All moneys remaining in the
Trust at the end of the fiscal year, whether or not expended by the Board
within one year of the date they were appropriated into the Trust, remain
Trust property.
§ 15-8. Meetings; quorum.
Meetings of the Board shall be held on a regular basis. Special meetings
may be called by the Chairperson or two Trustees. A Trust is a
governmental body for purposes of MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25, the Open
Meeting Law; notice of any meeting of the Trust Fund shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and posted in accordance with the Open Meeting Law. A
majority of the number of authorized Trustees shall constitute a quorum and
shall also be required to approve any motion.
§ 15-9. Custodian of funds.
The Treasurer/Collector shall be the custodian of the Trust Fund's funds and
shall maintain separate accounts and records for such funds. Any income
or proceeds received from the investment of funds shall be credited to and
become part of the Trust Fund. In accordance with MGL c. 44, § 55C, the
books and records of the Trust shall be audited annually by an independent
auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices or take any other
action relative thereto. Upon receipt of the audit by the Board of Trustees,
a copy shall be provided forthwith to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 15-10. Liability.
Neither the Trustees nor any agent or officer of the Trust shall have the
authority to bind the Town, except in the manner specifically authorized
herein. The Trust is a public employer and the members of the Board are
public employees for the purposes of MGL c. 268A. The Trust shall be
deemed a municipal agency and the Trustees special municipal employees
for purposes of MGL c. 268A.
§ 15-11. Taxes.
The Trust is exempt from MGL c. 59 and c. 62, and from any other
provisions concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by
property or income imposed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any
political subdivision thereof.
§ 15-12. Governmental body.
The Trust is a governmental body for purposes of the Open Meeting Law,
MGL c.30A, § 18-25.
§ 15-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 15-13
1:22
§ 15-13. Board of Town.
The Trust is a board of the Town of Medfield for the purposes of MGL
c. 30B and MGL c. 40, § 15A, but agreements and conveyances between
the Trust and agencies, boards, commissions, authorities, departments and
public instrumentalities of the Town shall be exempt from said MGL c. 30B.
§ 15-14. Compensation of Trustees.
Trustees shall not receive a salary, stipend, bonus or other means of
compensation for their service as a Trustee, nor shall they be eligible for
any benefits from the Town of Medfield. Trustees may be compensated
for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses for travel and other Trust-related
expenses. All such out-of-pocket expenses shall be fully documented with
receipts for expenses prior to payment by the Trust.
§ 15-15. Amendments.
The provisions of this Trust can only be amended by a vote of the Medfield
Town Meeting.
§ 15-16. Duration of Trust.
This Trust shall be of indefinite duration until terminated by a vote of
the Medfield Town Meeting. Upon termination of the Trust, subject to the
payment of or making provisions for the payment of all obligations and
liabilities of the Trust and the Trustees, the net assets of the Trust shall be
transferred to the Town of Medfield and held by the Board of Selectmen for
affordable housing purposes. In making any such distribution, the Trustees
may, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, sell all or any
portion of the Trust property and distribute the net proceeds thereof to
the Town of Medfield. The powers of the Trustees shall continue until the
affairs of the Trust are concluded. Once the Medfield Town Meeting has
voted to terminate the Trust, the Board of Selectmen shall have the power
to approve all financial transactions made on behalf of the Trust.
Chapter 20
CIVIL DEFENSE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 50.
§ 20-1. Department established; functions.
There is hereby established a Department of Civil Defense (hereinafter
called the "Department"). It shall be the function of the Department to
have charge of civil defense as defined in Section 1, Chapter 639, Acts
§ 15-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1
1:23
of 1950, and to perform civil defense functions as authorized or directed
by said Chapter or by any and all executive orders or general regulations
promulgated thereunder, and to exercise any authority delegated to it by
the Governor under said Chapter 639.
§ 20-2. Director of Civil Defense.
§ 20-3. Civil Defense Advisory Council.
There is hereby established a Civil Defense Advisory Council (hereinafter
called the "Council"). Said Council shall serve without pay and shall consist
of the Director of Civil Defense, such other department heads and such
other persons as the authority appointing said Director may deem
necessary. Such member of said Council as said appointing authority shall
designate shall serve as Chairman of said Council. Said Council shall serve
subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority and shall
advise said appointing authority and the Director on matters pertaining to
civil defense.
§ 20-4. Police aid to other cities and towns.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town
at the request of said city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms
of violence therein.
§ 20-5. Termination of Bylaw.
This Bylaw shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter
639, Acts of 1950, and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or
substitution thereof.
The Department shall be under the direction of a Director of Civil
Defense (hereinafter called the "Director"), who shall be appointed as
prescribed by law. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the Department, subject
to the direction and control of the appointing authority, and shall
receive such salary as may be fixed from time to time by the appointing
authority. The Director may, within the limits of the amount
appropriated therefor, appoint such experts, clerks, and other
assistants as the work of the Department may require and may remove
them, and may make such expenditures as may be necessary to execute
effectively the purposes of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950.
A.
The Director shall also have authority to appoint district coordinators
and may accept and may receive on behalf of the Town, services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant, or loan,
for purpose of civil defense, offered by the federal government or any
agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or corporation, subject to
the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency
making the offer. The Director shall cause appropriate records to be
kept of all matters relating to such gifts, grants, or loans.
B.
§ 20-1 MEDFIELD CODE § 20-6
1:24
§ 20-6. Interpretation.
All references to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in force, shall be
applicable to any act or acts in amendment or continuation of or substitution
for said Chapter 639.
Chapter 30
FINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
§ 30-1. Warrant Committee. [4-5-1981; amended ATM 4-30-1984;
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
§ 30-2. Fiscal year. [5-4-1981]
The financial year shall begin with the first day of July in each year and end
with the last day of June following.
A Warrant Committee of nine members shall be appointed by the
Moderator, three of which members shall be appointed each year for
three-year terms. It shall recommend the annual Town budget for vote
by the Town Meeting and fulfill all duties of a finance committee as
required by the Massachusetts General Laws. It shall hold a public
hearing not less than 30 days prior to the Annual Town Meeting to
inform the residents of the Town of its proposed recommendations
and to hear testimony and argument before publication of its final
recommendations. This hearing shall be attended by all elected and
appointed Town officers, unless they are deterred by illness or other
reasonable cause.
A.
Immediately upon drawing the warrant for a Town Meeting, the
Selectmen shall transmit a copy of the same to each member of the
Warrant Committee. Not less than one week prior to the Annual Town
Meeting, the Selectmen shall distribute to the households of the Town
a warrant report containing an explanation of each Article by its
petitioner and a recommendation by the Warrant Committee. A warrant
report shall be prepared in like manner by the Board of Selectmen for
each Special Town Meeting and may be placed in distribution to the
households of the Town at any time before the Special Town Meeting.
B.
§ 20-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:25
§ 30-3. Approval of expenditures.
No bill, charge or account against the Town shall be paid without the
approval, in writing, first obtained of the person, board or committee
contracting the same.
§ 30-4. Limits on expenditures. [Amended ATM 4-30-1984]
No Town officer having control of the expenditure of the public money shall
incur any debt or obligation on account of the Town in any department
beyond the amount appropriated therefor by the Town, except as provided
in Chapter 240, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places, § 240-2. No Order of
Warrant shall be drawn by the Board of Selectmen or other boards upon
the Treasurer without an appropriation by vote of the Town nor against
any appropriation in excess of the same, except that such payments may be
made as are required to protect the Town where it may be liable in actions
at law for damages.
§ 30-5. Disposition of unexpended appropriations.
Any portion of any appropriation remaining unexpended at the close of the
financial year shall revert to the Town Treasury, unless otherwise provided
by law.
§ 30-6. Disposal of personal property. [5-4-1981]
Town boards, committees, officers and departments may dispose of personal
property having a value of $1,000 or less belonging to the Town with the
approval of the Board of Selectmen when the property is no longer needed
by the Town.
Chapter 40
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 40-1. Town Clerk.
The Town Clerk shall have the custody of the Town Seal and shall keep
a true copy (in a book to be kept for such purpose alone) of all the deeds
or conveyances executed in behalf of the Town by any Town officer. It
shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to see that every conveyance to the
Town of any interest in real estate is properly recorded in the Registry
of Deeds.
A.
The Town Clerk shall furnish for publication in the Annual Town Report
an abstract of the official records of all Town Meetings held during the
preceding year. He or she shall also furnish for the same purpose an
abstract of the vital statistics for the preceding year.
B.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to safely keep all books, papers
and plans, and all records belonging to the Town. He or she shall, when
C.
§ 30-3 MEDFIELD CODE § 40-1
1:26
§ 40-2. Town Treasurer.
§ 40-3. Collector of Taxes.
§ 40-4. Assessors.
In addition to the duties required by law, the Assessors shall publish with
the Town Officers' Report for the year 1925, and on each succeeding fifth
properly requested, furnish all boards and committees with copies of all
votes affecting them.
The Selectmen shall appoint a Treasurer/Collector, commencing
October 1, 1990, for a term of three years. The individual appointed
shall be from one or more individuals nominated by a committee
consisting of one member of the Board of Selectmen, one member of
the Board of Assessors, and one member appointed by the Moderator
from the citizens of the Town, preferably with a knowledge of financial
management. [5-1-1990]
A.
All Town officers, whether elected or appointed by the Selectmen,
unless otherwise expressly ordered, shall on or before the fifth day
of each month pay to the Town Treasurer all sums collected by them
during the month previous.
B.
In addition to the duties required by law, the Town Treasurer shall in
his or her annual Town report state specifically the objects for which
the debt of the Town was increased, if any, during the preceding year.
C.
The Town Treasurer shall give bond to the Town in such sum, not less
than $20,000, as the Selectmen shall require and with sureties to their
satisfaction, for the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office.
D.
The Town Treasurer shall have the custody of all funds belonging to the
Town, except funds for which other provision is made by law, and he
shall pay no money from the treasury except upon a warrant signed by
the majority of the Selectmen.
E.
All bills, payrolls, vouchers, canceled notes and other evidence of
indebtedness of the Town which have been paid from the treasury
shall be properly filed and safely kept for such period of time as the
Selectmen shall determine from time to time, and as may be required
under state regulation. [5-4-1981]
F.
In addition to the duties required by the law, the Collector of Taxes
shall give bond to the Town in such sum, not less than $10,000, as
the Selectmen shall require, with sureties to their satisfaction, for the
faithful discharge of the duties of his or her office.
A.
The Collector of Taxes shall collect, under the title of Town Collector,
all accounts due the Town committed to said Collector by any board or
officer.
B.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:27
year and whenever at other times the Town shall instruct them so to do,
the full valuation and tax lists, both property and polls, assessed within the
Town or upon which taxes are paid to the Town.
§ 40-5. Superintendent of Highways. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 32]
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
The Superintendent of Highways shall keep an accurate account of all
money expended and all work done under his or her supervision upon
the public ways and bridges of the Town, a daily record of the number of
people, trucks and teams employed, the extent and nature of the work
done and the time spent in doing such work.
A.
A payroll shall be kept of the employees of the Department of Public
Works and of the owners of trucks and teams employed therein and a
detailed account of all parties furnishing materials therefor, the rate of
wages, the amounts and costs of materials furnished.
B.
§ 40-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 40-5
1:28
ARTICLE I
Police Chief
[Adopted as Art. IV, Secs. 1 and 2, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 50-1. Appointment, compensation and term of office. [ATM
4-25-1988]
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Chief of Police, who shall receive
such pay as the Board of Selectmen shall determine, unless otherwise
specially voted by the Town, and who shall hold said office until a successor
is appointed, subject to removal of said Board, as provided herein.
§ 50-2. Qualifications; hiring procedure. [ATM 4-25-1988]
§ 50-3. Removal, suspension or demotion. [ATM 4-25-1988]
The Personnel Board shall draft, and may from time to time amend, a
set of qualifications and procedures for selection of a Chief of Police,
one of which shall be at least seven years of police experience, except
that each year of supervisory experience in the rank of sergeant or
higher shall count for two years. The set of qualifications and
procedures shall be filed with the Town Clerk as a public record.
A.
Prior to making an appointment, the Selectmen shall cause notice of
the availability of the position to be posted in all places in the Town
where notices to employees are generally posted and to be advertised
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and in such other
publications as can reasonably be expected to give notice to qualified
applicants. At least 60 days after the publication of the first notice of the
availability of the position, the appointment shall be made by the Board
of Selectmen in accordance with the qualifications and procedures on
file with the Town Clerk, except that one or more of the qualifications
or procedures may be waived by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
Without written consent of the Police Chief, the Police Chief shall not
be discharged, removed, suspended for a period exceeding five days,
lowered in rank or compensation, nor shall the office or position be
abolished, except for just cause and for reasons specifically given to the
Police Chief in writing by the Board of Selectmen. At least three days
after the Selectmen have given the Police Chief a written statement
of the specific reasons for the contemplated action, the Police Chief
shall be given a full hearing before them or before a hearing officer
appointed by them for that purpose. Within 10 days after the hearing,
the Police Chief shall be given a written notice of the decision of the
Board of Selectmen stating fully and specifically the reasons therefor.
A.
A suspension of the Police Chief for a period not exceeding five days
may be made by the majority of the Board of Selectmen only for just
cause. Within 24 hours of suspension the Police Chief shall be given
written notice stating the specific reason for the suspension, which
B.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-3
1:29
notice will state that the Chief may, within 48 hours of receipt of the
notice, request in writing a hearing by the Board of Selectmen on the
question of whether there was just cause for the suspension. Such
a hearing shall be held within seven days of receipt of the written
notice from the Chief. Within seven days after the hearing, the Board
of Selectmen shall give the Chief written notice of its decision. By a
majority vote, the Board of Selectmen may find that the suspension was
for just cause, or may reduce the number of days of the suspension,
or may find that it was without just cause. If the suspension is found
to be without just cause, the Chief shall be deemed not to have been
suspended and shall be entitled to compensation for the period for
which suspension was in effect. If the number of days of suspension
are reduced by the full Board after hearing, the Chief shall receive
compensation based on the number of days restored.
Any hearing under this Section shall be public if requested in writing
by the Police Chief, who shall be allowed to answer the charges.
C.
The Police Chief may petition the Superior Court in Norfolk or any
successor court having similar jurisdiction for review of any decision
of the Board of Selectmen under this Section within 30 days following
receipt of the decision. Within 30 days of receipt of notice of the filing
of a petition for such review in the Norfolk County Superior Court,
the Board of Selectmen shall file a complete copy with the court of all
proceedings before them, certified by the Clerk of the Board, and they
may file an answer to any allegations in the petition. The review shall be
conducted by the court and shall be confined to the records, except that
in cases of alleged irregularities in procedure, not shown in the record,
testimony thereon may be taken in court.
D.
If application is made to the court for leave to present additional
evidence, and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the
additional evidence is material to the issues in the case, and that there
was good reason for failure to present it in the proceeding before the
Board of Selectmen, the court may order that the additional evidence
be heard by the Board of Selectmen upon such conditions as the court
deems proper. The Board of Selectmen may modify its findings and
decision by reason of such additional evidence, together with any
modified or new findings or decision.
E.
The court may affirm the decision of the Board of Selectmen if it
finds that the decision was justified, or remand the matter for further
proceedings before the Board of Selectmen, or the court may set aside
and reverse the decision if it determines that such decision is:
(1) In violation of constitutional provisions;
(2) In excess of the authority of the Board of Selectmen;
(3) Based upon an error of law;
(4) Made upon unlawful procedure;
F.
§ 50-3 MEDFIELD CODE § 50-3
1:30
§ 50-4. Reports.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to report in writing annually or at
such other times as are deemed necessary by the Board of Selectmen upon
all matters pertaining to the Department, with recommendations as to the
same, to the Board of Selectmen.
(5) Unsupported by substantial evidence;
Arbitrary or capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in
accordance with law.
(6)
If the court finds that the decision of the Board of Selectmen should
be reversed, the Police Chief shall be reinstated without loss of
compensation. The decision of the court shall be final and conclusive.
G.
Any notice required under this Section may be delivered by hand or
mailed to the address shown in the records of the Town. A certificate of
the person mailing the notice shall be proof of giving of notice.
H.
§ 50-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:31

ARTICLE II
Police Officers on Ambulance Duty
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 20, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 50-5. Duty status. [5-4-1981]
If police officers are called upon to staff the ambulance when they are off
duty, they shall be considered to go on duty when staffing the ambulance for
purposes of MGL c. 41, § 111F.
§ 50-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-5
1:33
Chapter 60
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
§ 60-1. Statutory provisions. [STM 9-25-2000]
Purchases of goods and services and contracts for professional services
shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 30B, as
may from time to time be amended.
§ 60-2. Bond required for certain contracts. [5-4-1981; amended
4-29-1991]
Every contract exceeding $10,000 shall be accompanied by a suitable bond
for the performance of the same, or by the deposit of money or security
to the amount of such a bond. Unless required by Massachusetts General
Laws, the awarding authority may waive this requirement.
§ 60-3. Authority to enter into contracts.
The Board of Selectmen may apply for and enter into contracts for grants
or gifts of funds from the federal government, the state government, a
charitable foundation, a private corporation, or an individual; provided,
however, that no contract calling for expenditures of funds by the Town
shall be entered into until such time as the funds have been appropriated
by vote of the Town. The School Committee shall have the same powers as
the Board of Selectmen regarding grants or gifts of funds for educational
purposes.
§ 60-4. Collective purchasing. [Adopted 1974 ATM by Art. 33]
The Town may join the Commonwealth in purchasing in quantity various
items, materials, supplies, or equipment, or authorize the Commonwealth
to make such purchase in its behalf, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 7,
§ 22A, as now or hereafter amended. Such purchases shall not be subject to
the requirements of Chapter 30, Finances, § 30-6, and Chapter 40, Officers
and Employees, § 40-2B, of the Bylaws of the Town of Medfield.
§ 60-5. Contracts exceeding three years. [4-30-1991]
Town boards, committees, officers and departments, with the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, may enter into contracts in excess of three years
for the purchase of goods and services.
§ 60-6. Authority to accept conveyances of land. [ATM 4-28-2008]
Whenever a decision of the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or
Conservation Commission provides for the conveyance of land, or any
interest therein, to the Town for nominal consideration, the Board of
Selectmen is authorized to accept said conveyance on behalf of the Town;
the Board of Selectmen's acceptance of any such conveyance of land or any
§ 50-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 60-6
1:34
interest therein on behalf of the Town at any time prior to the effective date
of this Bylaw is hereby ratified and affirmed.
Chapter 70
TOWN ELECTIONS AND MEETINGS
§ 70-1. Election dates and times; Annual Town Meeting date.
[Amended ATM 6-27-1966; ATM 4-28-1981; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art.
32]
§ 70-2. Notice of Town Meeting. [ATM 4-28-1981]
Notice and warning of Annual Town Meetings shall be given by attested
copies of the warrant calling the same in not less than five public places in
the Town at least seven days before the time of holding the meeting. Notice
and warning of Special Town Meetings shall be given by posting attested
copies of the warrant calling the same in not less than five public places in
the Town at least 14 days before the time of holding such meeting.
§ 70-3. Adjournment of Town Meeting. [ATM 3-21-1966; 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 32]
In the event that any Town Meeting shall not have been completed by 10:45
p.m., it shall be adjourned to a place and time determined by a majority
of the voters then present; however, the Moderator shall be authorized to
keep any such Town Meeting in session for any additional half-hour period,
if, in his or her opinion, the meeting will thereby be enabled to complete the
remaining business.
§ 70-4. Quorum for Town Meeting. [ATM 6-27-1966; 4-28-2014 ATM
by Art. 32]
The number of voters necessary to constitute a quorum at any Town
Meeting shall be 250, provided that a number less than a quorum may from
time to time adjourn the same.
§ 70-5. Reconsideration at Town Meeting. [ATM 4-30-1984]
A vote at any Town Meeting shall be subject to only one motion for
reconsideration and such motion shall require a two-thirds vote. Action
on a motion for reconsideration shall be postponed until the next session
The Annual Town Election for the election of officers and other matters
as may be voted on the official ballot shall be held on the last Monday
in March, each year. The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the last
Monday in April of each year.
A.
The polls for the election of Town officers and such other matters as
may be voted on official ballots shall be opened at 6:00 a.m. and be
closed at 8:00 p.m.
B.
§ 60-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:35
unless the current session has been declared to be the last. No motion for
rescission will be in order.
§ 70-6. Supermajority votes at Town Meeting. [ATM 4-28-1997]
When a two-thirds vote is required for passage of any matter at an Annual or
Special Town Meeting, the Moderator may declare that the matter passed,
if he concludes that the votes cast in favor of passage were two-thirds of the
votes cast, and no count of the votes need be taken even though the vote
in favor of passage was less than unanimous; but in declaring passage, the
Moderator shall expressly declare that at least two-thirds of the votes cast
were in favor of passage and said declaration shall be recorded by the Town
Clerk in the official minutes of the meeting. Nothing herein shall preclude
seven or more voters from questioning the declaration in accordance with
MGL c. 39, § 15, and thereupon a standing count shall be taken.1
§ 70-7. Age restrictions for Town Meeting. [STM 5-4-1982]
Any resident of the Town over 15 and under 18 years of age may attend
a Town Meeting, provided that, in the sole discretion of the Moderator,
there is sufficient room for such persons in addition to all registered voters
attending said meeting. Such persons shall be seated in an area to be
designated by the Moderator and shall not vote.
§ 70-8. Speakers at Town Meeting. [STM 5-4-1982; amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 30]
The time for speaking and the number of speakers shall be in the sound
discretion of the Moderator, subject to an appropriate motion to limit
discussion.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARM SYSTEMS
1. Editor's Note: Original Art. I, Sec. 3, of the Town Bylaws, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed ATM 6-2-2003.
§ 70-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 70-8
1:36
ARTICLE I
Burglar Alarms
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 25, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FALSE ALARM — Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the
Police Department requesting or requiring or resulting in a response on the
part of the Police Department when, in fact, there has been no unauthorized
intrusion, robbery, or burglary, or attempt threat. For the purpose of this
definition, activation of alarm systems by acts of God, including, but not
limited to, power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, and similar
weather or atmospheric disturbances, shall not be deemed to be a false
alarm.
§ 80-2. Emergency contacts.
Every alarm user shall submit to the Police Chief the names and telephone
numbers of at least two other persons who are authorized to respond to an
emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who can open the
premises wherein the alarm system is installed.
§ 80-3. Signaling device shut-off.
All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this Bylaw which use
an audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a device that will shut off
such horn or bell within 10 minutes after activation of the alarm system.
§ 80-4. Nuisances; record of violations.
Any alarm system emitting continuous and uninterrupted signal for more
than 15 minutes between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. which cannot be shut off
or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user
or those persons designated by him or her under § 80-2, and which disturbs
the peace, comfort or repose of inhabitants of a community, a neighborhood
or a considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system
is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving complaints
regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Police Chief or
his or her designee shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or members
of the alarm user's family, or those persons designated by the alarm user
under § 80-2 in an effort to abate the nuisance. The Police Chief or his or
her designee shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of all
complaints and time each complaint was made.
§ 80-5. Penalty assessments.
Upon receipt of five or more false alarms within a calendar year, the Police
Chief shall:
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:37
§ 80-6. Exceptions. [4-30-1990; amended 5-1-1990]
This Bylaw does not apply to automobile horns.
§ 80-7. Appeals. [4-30-1990; amended 5-1-1990; 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 32]
The user shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen within 10
working days after an order is issued or a fine is assessed under § 80-5.
§ 80-8. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
Except as herein provided for penalty assessments in § 80-5, whoever
violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines shall
be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or by
noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
For each offense, assess the user $25 as a false alarm service fee
and for any 10 or more false alarms shall assess the user $50 for
each offense. All fees assessed shall be paid to the Town Treasurer for
deposit to the general fund; and/or
A.
Order that further connections to the communications console in the
Police Department will be contingent upon the user equipping any
alarm system with a device that will shut off any audible horn or bell
within 10 minutes after activation of the alarm system.
B.
§ 80-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 80-8
1:38
ARTICLE II
Fire Alarms
[Adopted as Art. XV of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 80-9. Definitions.
When used in this Bylaw, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
CENTRAL STATION OPERATING COMPANY — A company equipped to
receive a fire alarm signal from each of its customers and which then
transmits to the Medfield Fire Department (MFD) the location of any such
alarm the central station operating company receives.
FALSE FIRE ALARM —
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any heat-activated, smoke-activated, flameenergy-
activated or other such automatic device capable of transmitting a
fire alarm signal to either a central station operating company or directly to
the MFD by way of a master box.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTION — The transmittal of a fire alarm
to a central station operating company or directly to the MFD by way of a
master box, which alarm is caused by improper installation of a fire alarm
system, a mechanically defective fire alarm system, lack of maintenance or
some other reasons that cause a fire alarm to sound even though there is no
actual fire or situation that reasonably could evolve into a fire.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM OWNER — An individual or entity who owns the title
to and/or has on his or her business or residential premises a fire alarm
system equipped to send a fire alarm signal to a central station operating
company or directly to the MFD by way of a master box.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Medfield Fire Department.
MASTER BOX OWNER — An individual or entity who has on his or her
business or residential premises a fire alarm system equipped to send a
fire alarm signal directly to the MFD by way of a master box, which is a
municipal fire alarm box.
§ 80-10. Connection to Fire Department using master box.
A. The operation of a faulty smoke or heat detection device.
B. Faulty control panel or associated equipment.
C. A water pressure surge in automatic sprinkler equipment.
D. Accidental operation of an automatic sprinkler system.
An action by an employee of the owner or occupant of the protected
premises or a contractor employed by the owner or the occupant,
causing accidental activation of the internal fire alarm system.
E.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-10
1:39
§ 80-11. Connection of central station operating companies to Fire
Department.
Before any fire alarm system is connected to the MFD, the master box
owner shall provide the Fire Chief with the following information:
The name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of the
master box owner;
(1)
(2) The street address where the master box is located;
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons or
businesses protected by the fire alarm system connected to the
master box;
(3)
The names, addresses and home and work telephone numbers of
at least two persons other than the owner who can be contacted
24 hours a day, who are authorized by the master box owner to
respond to an alarm signal and who have access to the premises in
which the master box is located; and
(4)
(5) Such other information as the Fire Chief may require.
A.
If, at the passage of this Bylaw, a fire alarm system has already been
connected to the MFD by way of a master box, the master box owner
shall comply with the requirements of this Section within 60 days
after the MFD has sent him or her notice by first class mail of the
requirements of this Section.
B.
If a master box owner fails to comply with this Section, the Fire Chief
may assess a fine of $50 for each day of noncompliance.
C.
Every central station operating company which has a direct connection
on the effective date of this Bylaw to the MFD shall pay the following
fees:
(1) Annual fee: $200.
A.
Before any central station operating company is connected with the
MFD, it shall provide the Fire Chief with the following information:
The name, address and telephone numbers of the central station
operating company;
(1)
The names, addresses, and home and work telephone numbers of
at least two persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, who
are authorized by the central station operating company to respond
to an alarm signal and who have access to the premises from
where the alarm signal is emitting to the central station operating
company;
(2)
The names, address, home and work telephone numbers, and
location of the premises of each customer of the central station
(3)
B.
§ 80-10 MEDFIELD CODE § 80-11
1:40
§ 80-12. Updating information.
§ 80-13. Fines for malfunctions.
operating company who has a fire alarm system equipped to send a
fire alarm signal to the central station operating company; and
(4) Such other information as the Fire Chief may require.
If, at the passage of this Bylaw, a central station operating company
already has a direct connection to the MFD, the central station
operating company shall comply with the requirements of this Section
within 60 days after the MFD has sent its notice by first class mail of
the requirements of this Section.
C.
If a central station operating company fails to comply with this Section,
the Fire Chief may assess a fine of $50 for each day of noncompliance.
D.
Every master box owner and every central station operating company
shall be responsible for updating the information herein required to be
provided to the Chief. If the information provided changes, the master
box owner and the central station operating company shall provide the
Fire Chief with the updated information and shall pay the fee, if any,
required by this Bylaw.
A.
If a master box owner or a central station operating company fails to
comply with this Section, the Fire Chief may assess a fine of $50.
B.
If there is a fire alarm system malfunction, as defined herein, the Fire
Chief may assess a fine against a fire alarm system owner for each
malfunction per fiscal year according to the following schedule:
First through third malfunction: no charge. Upon the recording of
the third false alarm by the Medfield Fire Department, the Fire
Chief shall notify the owner of the building, in writing and by
certified mail, of such fact, and at that time inform the owner of the
Medfield Fire Department's policy with regard to charging for false
alarms (send copy of the policy at this time).
(1)
(2) Fourth through sixth malfunction: $100.
(3) Seventh through 11th malfunction: $200.
(4) Each malfunction after the 11th: $300.
A.
Private fire alarm systems connected to the Medfield Fire Department
by other automatic means or through a central station system shall be
subject to the above conditions.
B.
Any false fire alarm which is the result of the failure of the property
owner, occupant or their agents to notify the Medfield Fire Department
of repair, maintenance or testing of the internal fire alarm system
C.
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-13
1:41
§ 80-14. Restrictions on tape dialers and similar automatic devices.
No fire alarm system shall be equipped with a tape dialer or similar
automatic telephone device which will transmit an alarm message to any
telephone lines of the MFD. If, at the passage of this Bylaw, a fire alarm
system is equipped with such a tape dialer or similar automatic telephone
device, the fire alarm system owner shall have 60 days, following the
approval of this Bylaw by the Attorney General, to disconnect such tape
dialer or similar automatic telephone device. If a fire alarm system owner
fails to comply with this Section, the Fire Chief may assess a fine of $50.
§ 80-15. Appeal procedure.
Any fire alarm system owner who is aggrieved by an action taken by the Fire
Chief under this Bylaw may, within 10 days of such action, file an appeal, in
writing, with the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Medfield (the Board).
After notice, the Board shall hold a hearing, after which it shall issue a
decision in which it affirms, annuls or modifies the action taken by the Fire
Chief, giving its reasons therefor. The Board shall send its decision to the
owner by first class mail within 10 days after the hearing. The decision of
the Board shall be a final administrative decision.
§ 80-16. Regulations and enforcement.
The Fire Chief may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to
implement this Bylaw. The Fire Chief is authorized to pursue such legal
action as may be necessary to enforce this Bylaw.
§ 80-17. Disposition of fines.
All fines assessed herein shall be payable to the Town of Medfield for
deposit in the general fund.
§ 80-18. Severability. [Added ATM 5-1991]
The provisions of this Bylaw shall be deemed to be severable, and if any
of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions.
within the protected premises shall cause a penalty to be assessed in
accordance with Subsection A.
Property owners will be billed once a month for the previous month's
malfunction activity. All fines assessed shall be paid to the Town
Treasurer for deposit in the general fund.
D.
If the bill is not paid within 30 days, a second notice will be sent. If
the bill is not paid after another 30-day period, a final notice will be
sent informing the owner and/or occupant that the master box will be
disconnected and the insurance company notified.
E.
§ 80-13 MEDFIELD CODE § 80-19
1:42
§ 80-19. Maintenance fees.
§ 80-20. Revolving fund.
And to further accept the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, to provide
for a Fire Alarm Revolving Fund to be used for fire alarm maintenance,
equipment or supplies funds not to exceed $5,000 to come from the
Maintenance Fee Account and to authorize the Fire Chief to expend from
said funds. The Town Accountant shall provide a quarterly accounting of
all transactions that occur within this revolving fund. Said accounting shall
be made to the Board of Selectmen and Warrant Committee within 30 days
following the close of such calendar quarter in writing.
Every master box owner whose fire alarm system is directly connected
to the Town of Medfield municipal fire alarm system shall be assessed
an annual maintenance fee of $180 per master box. This maintenance
fee shall be reviewed from time to time and may be adjusted to reflect
the cost of maintaining the municipal system. Any change in the
maintenance fee will be done with the approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
A.
B. Municipal buildings will not be assessed a maintenance fee.
Billing will take place on July 1 of the fiscal year, with payment due in
30 days.
C.
The fees that are collected for the maintaining of the municipal fire
alarm system shall be deposited in a revolving fund for said purpose.
D.
§ 80-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-20
1:43
Chapter 90
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 90-1. Public consumption prohibited; applicability to private
property.
No person within the limits of any public way or within any parked or
moving vehicle located upon a public way or a private way open to the
public shall consume alcoholic beverages, or have on his or her person an
open container of alcoholic beverages. The Board of Selectmen may make
this Section of the Bylaws applicable to any private way or parking area
upon written request from the owner or other party in control of such
private way or parking area. Fine: $200 (Medfield police officers).
§ 90-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever shall consume any alcoholic beverages, or have on his or her
person an open container of alcoholic beverages in any public building,
or on any public property, including parks, cemeteries, school houses and
school grounds, and public squares, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.
§ 90-3. Exception for Town-licensed activities.
The foregoing Section shall not apply to any activity duly licensed by the
Board of Selectmen under the applicable provisions of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
§ 90-4. Seizure of beverages.
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this Bylaw shall be seized
and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be
returned to the person entitled to lawful possession.
Chapter 100
ANIMALS
§ 80-20 MEDFIELD CODE § 90-4
1:44
ARTICLE I
Removal of Dog Waste
[Adopted ATM 4-26-1999 (Art. IV, Sec. 30, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 100-1. Removal required.
An owner or keeper of a dog shall remove the dog's feces when the dog
defecates on public property or private property of others.
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties.
Fines for violations of this Bylaw within each calendar year shall be $25
for the first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $100 for the third and
subsequent offenses.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:45

ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Adopted ATM 4-30-1991; amended ATM 4-30-2007 (Art. VII of the
1926 Bylaws)]
§ 100-3. Dog licenses.
§ 100-4. Impounding, release and disposition of dogs.
Every dog over the age of six months owned or kept within the Town
must be licensed annually by the owner or keeper prior to April 1 for
the 12-month period beginning April 1. Any person who fails to license
his or her dog prior to April 1 shall pay a late fee of $25 in addition
to the license fee. The fine for owning or keeping an unlicensed dog
shall be $100 for each year that the dog is unlicensed. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
A.
The failure of the Town Clerk to send an individual notice or reminder,
or of an owner or keeper to receive the same, shall not relieve the
owner or keeper of his or her obligations under this Bylaw.
B.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Animal Control Officer. It shall
be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to cause dogs to be impounded
for any of the following causes:
(1) If found without a license when a license is required by law;
(2) If found at large;
(3) For having bitten or injured or physically molested any person;
(4) For having bitten or injured any domestic animal;
For chasing any vehicle (including bicycles) on a public way or way
open to public traffic in the Town;
(5)
For repeatedly causing a nuisance such as, but not limited to,
barking, littering, or defecating on sidewalks.
(6)
A.
The owner or keeper may obtain the release of an impounded dog as
follows:
In the case of a violation of Subsection A(1), upon obtaining a
license as required by law and payment of a late filing fee;
(1)
In the case of a violation of Subsection A(2) through (6), inclusive,
upon agreement of the owner or keeper to undertake such
restriction or control of the dog as the Animal Control Officer shall
require;
(2)
In addition to compliance with Subsection B(1) and (2), all late fees
and fines, if any, must be paid before the dog is released.
(3)
B.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:47
§ 100-5. Restraint of dogs.
Any persons owning or harboring a dog shall not suffer or allow it to run at
large in any of the streets or public ways, or places in the Town of Medfield,
or upon the premises of anyone other than the owner or keeper, unless the
owner or occupant of such premises grants permission. No dog shall be
permitted in any public place or street within the Town of Medfield unless it
is effectively restrained by a chain or leash or is attended by a person able
to properly control its actions.
§ 100-6. Prohibited dog behavior. [Added 4-30-2018 ATM by Art.
382]
The owner, keeper, or person otherwise in control of a dog shall not cause
or permit a dog:
Not later than one day after the impounding of any dog, the owner
or keeper shall be notified, or if the owner or keeper of the dog is
unknown, or, after reasonable efforts, is not contacted, written notice
shall then be posted for 10 consecutive days on a K-9 bulletin board on
the outside of the Town Hall, describing the dog, date, place and time
of taking.
C.
Dogs impounded and unclaimed by the owner or keeper after such
a 10-day period may be sold to or given to new owners (with the
exception of selling for profit or selling for research), turned over to any
existing humane society within the Town, or mercifully put to death by
a veterinarian.
D.
A. To be unrestrained as required by § 100-5.
B. To be unlicensed when a license is required by law.
To be without current license and rabies vaccination tags when off the
owner's property.
C.
To bite, physically injure, assault or threaten any person, without
legally recognized justification or provocation.
D.
To bite or physically injure any domestic animal, without legally
recognized justification or provocation.
E.
To chase any motorist, bicyclist, or pedestrian on any public way, street,
or sidewalk or in any public place.
F.
To be off the property where the dog resides, if subject to a confinement
order.
G.
To be off the property where the dog resides, unmuzzled, if subject to a
muzzle order.
H.
2. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former § 100-6, Violations and penalties. See now
§ 100-8.
§ 100-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 100-6
1:48
§ 100-7. Confinement or muzzling. [Added 4-30-2018 ATM by Art.
383]
§ 100-8. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Added 4-30-2018
ATM by Art. 384]
To disturb the peace and quiet enjoyment of any residential
neighborhood by continuous or repeated barking, yelping, howling, or
whining, without legal justification.
I.
The Board of Selectmen may order a dog confined to the premises
where it resides or to other premises or to be muzzled when off said
premises if the Board finds, after a public hearing, that the dog has:
Bitten, physically injured or assaulted any person without legally
recognized justification or provocation.
(1)
Bitten or physically injured any domestic animal without legally
recognized justification or provocation.
(2)
Chased any motorist, bicyclist or pedestrian on any public way,
street, or sidewalk or any public place on at least two occasions.
(3)
A.
Said order may be in addition to or in lieu of any fine authorized by
§ 100-8. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Board of Selectmen
from utilizing the procedure contained in MGL c. 140, § 57, as amended
by Chapter 193 of the Legislative Acts of 2012, to determine that a
dog is a nuisance dog or a dangerous dog and from employing one or
another of the remedies specified in that statute.
B.
The owner, keeper and/or person otherwise in control of a dog shall
be subject to a fine for each violation of any section of this Article as
follows:
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second offense: $100.
(3) Third offense: $150.
(4) Fourth offense: $200.
A.
In the case of a continuing offense, each day shall constitute a separate
violation.
B.
The Medfield Police Chief and his or her designee, including the Animal
Control Officer, and any Medfield police officer shall have authority to
enforce the provisions of this Article.
C.
3. Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former § 100-7 as § 100-10.
4. Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former § 100-8 as § 100-11.
§ 100-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-9
1:49
§ 100-9. Statutory remedies; renumbering of sections. [Added
4-30-2018 ATM by Art. 38]
The provisions of this Article are intended to be in addition to and not in lieu
of those contained in MGL c. 140, § 136A et seq., as amended by Chapter
193 of Legislative Acts of 2012; nothing contained in this Article shall
deprive the Town from employing the remedies provided in those sections,
including but not limited to disposition of a dog found to be a dangerous
dog or nuisance dog, as provided in MGL c. 140, § 157, as amended. To the
maximum extent possible, the provisions of this Article shall be deemed to
be consistent with and/or supplementing those contained in MGL c. 140, as
provided in MGL c. 140, §§ 173 and 173A, as amended, and by renumbering
the two existing subsequent sections, § 100-7, Definitions, and § 100-8,
License fees, as §§ 100-10 and 100-11, respectively, and to authorize the
Town Clerk to renumber, re-letter, and/or take any other action necessary to
reformat this new Bylaw to fit within the Code of the Town of Medfield.
§ 100-10. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — A dog which is unaccompanied by a person able to properly
control its actions or unrestrained by a leash or chain.
§ 100-11. License fees.
License fees shall be as follows:
A. Unspayed female and male: $20.
B. Spayed female and male: $10.
Kennels.
(1) Up to four dogs: $25.
(2) Up to 10 dogs: $50.
(3) Over 10 dogs: $100.
C.
§ 100-9 MEDFIELD CODE § 100-11
1:50
Chapter 110
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 100-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-11
1:51

ARTICLE I
Floor Drains
[Adopted ATM 4-30-2007 (Art. IV, Sec. 33, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 110-1. Approval required; installation requirements.
Floor drains are prohibited in any building or structure used for an
industrial, commercial or other nonresidential purpose, except as provided
in this Bylaw.
§ 110-2. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Whoever violates this Bylaw shall be liable to pay a fine of $300; each day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This Bylaw
may be enforced against each owner, tenant and person in possession of
property to which the Bylaw applies. This Bylaw may be enforced by the
Medfield Police Chief or his or her designee, the Plumbing Inspector or his
or her designee, or the Board of Health or its agent, or the Superintendent
of Public Works or his or her designee.
A floor drain in such a building or structure shall only be permitted if it
is connected to the public sewer system with the prior approval of the
Plumbing Inspector or his or her designee.
A.
A person shall make application to the Plumbing Inspector or his or
her designee for a floor drain connection permit, providing such
information as may be required. Issuance of the permit shall be within
the discretion of the Plumbing Inspector or his or her designee, who
may impose such conditions as he determines to be necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B.
The installation of each floor drain and/or its connection to the public
sewer system shall be performed only by a licensed plumber in full
compliance with applicable federal and state statutes and regulations
and any conditions contained in the floor drain connection permit;
all work shall be performed under the supervision of the Plumbing
Inspector or his or her designee, who shall note his or her final approval
on the permit upon the completion of the connection.
C.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-2
1:53

ARTICLE II
Numbering of Buildings
[Adopted 3-16-1967 (Art. V of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 110-3. Numbers required. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
Street numbers shall be provided for each dwelling and each business,
industrial, and other building in the Town of Medfield by the owner of such
structures in accordance with the following.
§ 110-4. Materials and size.
The numbers shall be made of permanent weatherproof material, shall be
at least three inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the street or
roadway upon which the dwelling or building fronts.
§ 110-5. Location.
The numbers shall be placed on each structure or on a suitable support near
the main entrance to the structure so as to be visible.
§ 110-6. Assigned number.
The numbers shall be those assigned to each structure in accordance with
the street numbering survey completed by the Board of Selectmen on file in
the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 110-7. Duty to comply.
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner in the Town to obtain a
number assigned to his or her affected structure or structures within three
months of the effective date of this Bylaw.
§ 110-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This Bylaw shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Medfield either directly or through an inspector to be appointed by them.
Failure to comply with this Bylaw shall subject the offending property owner
to a fine not exceeding $10.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-8
1:55

ARTICLE III
Underground Utility Installations
[Adopted as Art. XI of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 110-9. Material.
All residential, commercial and industrial, electrical and telephone services
from the public utility supply point or handhold to the meter enclosure of
the building shall be installed underground within a rigid metal galvanized
conduit, approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or nonmetallic
conduit not smaller than schedule 40 PVC so approved, suitable for
underground installation, having a minimum inside diameter of at least
two inches or such larger diameter as may be necessary for the service
intended.
§ 110-10. Installation.
The conduit shall have all necessary sweep bends to make it one continuous
unit free from blockages. It shall be buried to a depth of not less than
24 inches below the surface of the ground and covered with at least four
inches of sand. If there is less than 24 inches of cover over the conduit,
it shall be encased in at least two inches of concrete. Prior to backfilling,
the completed installation shall be inspected and approved by the Town of
Medfield Wiring Inspector.
§ 110-11. Violations and penalties. [ATM 4-26-1994; 4-28-2014 ATM
by Art. 32]
Any person violating the provisions of this Bylaw shall, for each offense,
be punished by a fine of $50. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. This Bylaw shall be enforced by any Medfield
police officer or the Highway Superintendent.
§ 110-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-11
1:57

ARTICLE IV
Public Sewer Extensions
[Adopted ATM 4-27-1998 (Art. XIX of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 110-12. Town Meeting approval required.
There shall be no extensions of the public sewer system for new residential
construction in excess of 500 feet in any fiscal year unless approved by a
majority of voters present at an Annual Town Meeting or a Special Town
Meeting called for that purpose.
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:59

ARTICLE V
Stretch Energy Code
[Adopted 4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 34]
§ 110-13. Code enacted.
The Town has voted to amend the Code of the Town of Medfield, Chapter
110, Building Construction, by adding an Article entitled "Stretch Energy
Code," for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of
buildings for the effective use of energy, pursuant to Appendix 115.AA
of the Massachusetts Building Code, 780 CMR, the Stretch Energy Code,
including future editions, amendments or modifications thereto, with an
effective date of July 1, 2016, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and to authorize the Town Clerk to renumber or take any other
action necessary to format this new bylaw to fit within the codification of
the Town's existing bylaws.
§ 110-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-13
1:61
Chapter 115
CEMETERY AREAS
§ 110-13 MEDFIELD CODE § 110-13
1:62
ARTICLE I
Use of Cemetery Land and Facilities
§ 115-1. Use and control of cemetery land and facilities.
The Cemetery Commission is hereby authorized to promulgate written rules
and regulations, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, for the
proper conduct of persons while on Town cemetery land and facilities under
its control. Said rules and regulations, once promulgated, and after public
hearing and approval of the Board of Selectmen, shall be filed with the Town
Clerk and posted in a conspicuous place in or at each Town cemetery facility
under the Commission's control to which the general public has access.
§ 115-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in conduct prohibited by said rules and regulations
and not otherwise prohibited by Massachusetts General Laws or these
Bylaws shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense, $300 for the third offense and $300 for each subsequent
offense. In addition, repeated violations may result in suspension or
termination of access privileges. The Cemetery Commission or its designee
and the Medfield Police Department shall each have the authority to enforce
the provisions of this Bylaw.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:63
Chapter 117
DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 117-1. Purpose.
This Bylaw establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town
departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
MGL c. 44, § 53E1/2.
§ 117-2. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this Bylaw/ordinance without appropriation subject to the
following limitations:
§ 117-3. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
Bylaw shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 117-4. Procedures and Reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E1/2, and this Bylaw, the laws, charter
provisions, bylaws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern
the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditure and payment
of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and
authorized by this Bylaw. The Town Accountant shall include a statement on
the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures
charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular
report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee,
agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
§ 117-5. Authorized revolving funds.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
B.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,
or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the Board of Selectmen.
C.
A. Fire Alarm Revolving Fund.
§ 115-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 117-5
1:64
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Fire Alarm
Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Fire Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Fire Alarm
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all
of the charged and received by the Fire Department in connection
with fire alarm inspection and maintenance.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Fire Chief
may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Fire Alarm
Revolving Fund for fire alarm maintenance, equipment or supplies.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Fire Alarm Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal
years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
Ambulance Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Ambulance
Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Fire Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Ambulance
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all
of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged and received
by the Fire Department in connection with operation of Town
ambulance service.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Fire Chief
may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Ambulance
Revolving Fund for purchase and/or debt service on Town
ambulance(s).
(3)
Fiscal years. The Ambulance Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal
years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
B.
Advanced Life Support Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Advanced
Life Support Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Fire
Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Advanced Life
Support Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged and
received by the Fire Department in connection with Town
ambulance service.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Fire Chief
may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Advanced
Life Support Revolving Fund for payments for advanced life
support service in connection with Town ambulance service.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Advanced Life Support Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
C.
§ 117-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:65
Community Gardens Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Community
Gardens Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Medfield
Community Gardens Program.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Community
Gardens Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged and
received by the Town in connection with Medfield Community
Gardens Program.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Town
Administrator may incur liabilities against and spend monies from
the Community Gardens Revolving Fund for operation of Medfield
Community Gardens Program.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Community Gardens Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
D.
CENTER at Medfield Building Maintenance Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "CENTER at
Medfield Building Maintenance Revolving Fund" authorized for use
by the Council on Aging.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the CENTER at
Medfield Building Maintenance Revolving Fund as a separate
account and credit to the fund all of the fees, charges or other
receipts to be credited to the fund charged and received by the
Council on Aging in connection with rental or use of CENTER at
Medfield.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the COA
Director may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the
CENTER at Medfield Building Maintenance Revolving Fund for
building maintenance and repair in connection with operation of
the CENTER at Medfield.
(3)
Fiscal years. The CENTER at Medfield Building Maintenance
Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after
July 1, 2017.
(4)
E.
Library Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Library
Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Library Trustees.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Library
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all
of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged and received
by the Library photocopier printer services, rental or use of library
space, payment for lost or damaged books or materials.
(2)
F.
§ 117-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 117-5
1:66
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Library
Director may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the
Library Revolving Fund for purchase of equipment, furniture,
books or other materials in connection with operation of the library.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Library Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal
years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
Respite Care Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Respite Care
Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Council on Aging.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Respite Care
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all
of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged and received
by the Council on Aging Respite Care Program operation of the
Respite Care Program.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the COA
Director may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the
Respite Care Revolving Fund for operation of Respite Care
Program in connection with Respite Care Program.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Respite Care Revolving Fund shall operate for
fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
G.
Transfer Station Recycling Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Transfer
Station Recycling Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the
Transfer Station and Recycling Committee.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Transfer
Station Recycling Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit
to the fund all of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged
and received by the Town's recycling and SWAP programs in
connection with recycling and SWAP programs at the Transfer
Station.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Director
of Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies
from the Transfer Station Recycling Revolving Fund for operation
in connection with recycling and SWAP programs at the Transfer
Station.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Transfer Station Recycling Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
H.
I. Former State Hospital Property Revolving Fund.
§ 117-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:67
Chapter 120
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 120-1. Discharge prohibitions.
No person shall fire or discharge or shoot any firearm, rifle or shotgun as
defined in MGL c. 140, § 121, as may be amended from time to time, or any
bow drawn, held or released by mechanical means in the Town of Medfield.
§ 120-2. Exceptions.
To the extent not otherwise prohibited by law, the provisions of this Bylaw
shall not apply to the discharge of firearms, rifles or shotguns:
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the "Former State
Hospital Property Revolving Fund" authorized for use by the Town
Facilities Department.
(1)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Former State
Hospital Property Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit
to the fund all of the fees, charges or other receipts to be charged
and received by the Town in connection with rental or use of the
property.
(2)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Facilities
Director may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the
Former State Hospital Property Revolving Fund for property
maintenance, repair and/or security.
(3)
Fiscal years. The Former State Hospital Property Revolving Fund
shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
(4)
A. In the lawful defense of the person; or
B. For the humane dispatch of injured animals; or
By any person lawfully on a target, trap or skeet range established for
such purposes; or
C.
By any duly authorized peace officer acting in the proper performance
of duty; or
D.
By any duly authorized military personnel participating in scheduled
military exercises; or
E.
By any person using blank cartridges in theatrical performances or
sporting events, or including precomputation training or as authorized
by during the celebration of federal or state holidays; or
F.
By an owner or tenant of land (or if authorized by either, any member of
the immediate family or person permanently employed by such owner
or tenant), but only upon such land and for the limited purposes of:
G.
§ 117-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 120-2
1:68
§ 120-3. Fine. [ATM 4-26-1994; amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
Any person violating the provisions of this Bylaw shall, for each offense, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $300 for each offense. This Bylaw shall be
enforced by any Medfield police officer.
§ 120-4. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
Chapter 130
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Shooting a bird or other animal found to be damaging or posing
the imminent threat of damage to the property of such person or
persons; and
(1)
(2) Shooting domestic animals raised as livestock.
§ 120-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:69

ARTICLE I
Fire Lanes and Restricted Areas
§ 130-1. Blocking private ways prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block a private way with a vehicle or
any other means so as to prevent access by fire apparatus or equipment to
any multiple-family building, shopping center, hospital, school, professional
building, industrial complex or places of public assembly.
§ 130-2. Parking in fire lanes prohibited; designation of fire lanes.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle in any area designated as
a fire lane.
§ 130-3. Removal of vehicles in violation.
Any object or vehicle obstructing or blocking any fire lane or restricted area
may be removed or towed by the Town under the direction of a police officer
or fire official at the expense of the owner and without any liability to the
Town of Medfield.
§ 130-4. Signs and markings.
The owner of record of any building affected by these Sections shall provide
and install signs and road markings as provided in § 130-2. Said signs and
road markings shall comply with the following specifications:
Such fire lanes shall be designated by the Fire Chief and the Police
Department Safety Officer, and posted as such.
A.
Said fire lanes shall be a distance of 12 feet from the curbing of a
sidewalk in a shopping center, apartment and/or condominium complex
and similar locations. Where no sidewalk with curbing exists, the
distance and location shall be established by the Fire Chief along with
the Safety Officer.
B.
A. Signs shall be no less than 12 inches by 18 inches in size.
B. Signs shall be constructed of a rust-resistant metal.
Signs shall have a white in color background with four-inch, red in color
letters stating "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING - TOW ZONE."
C.
Any area designated as a fire lane shall be outlined with yellow painted
lines nine inches in width to enclose the fire lane. Within this
designated area, the words "FIRE LANE" shall be painted, also in
yellow, and shall be no less than three feet in height.
D.
The number of signs and road markings shall be designated by the Fire
Chief and Safety Officer.
E.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-5
1:71
§ 130-5. Violations and penalties. [8-13-1990]
Any person violating any of the foregoing Sections may, for each offense,
be punished by a fine of $50. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 130-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 130-5
1:72
ARTICLE II
Secured Key Access
[Added ATM 4-30-1990]
§ 130-6. Key box required; type and location.
Whenever, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, access to or within a structure
or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings, or where
immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the
Chief may require a key box containing master keys to be installed in an
accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the Chief of the
Medfield Fire Department and shall be located and installed as approved by
the Chief.
§ 130-7. Buildings requiring key boxes.
§ 130-8. Keys.
The building owner/manager shall provide:
§ 130-9. Violations and penalties.
Any building owner violating this Bylaw after receiving notice by the Fire
Department shall be subject to a fine of $50.
Buildings, general. All new commercial and/or manufacturing buildings
constructed after July 11, 1990, and all existing commercial and/or
manufacturing buildings which undergo remodeling costing in excess
of $1,000 after said date, shall be provided with master keys and key
boxes necessary for access to all portions of the premises. Such box and
keys shall be provided prior to occupancy and/or final inspection.
A.
Buildings with elevators. All buildings equipped with elevators shall be
provided with a master key and key box.
B.
A. Two sets of keys for entry to the building and portions of the premises.
Two sets of elevator control keys if elevators are equipped with Fire
Department bypass switches.
B.
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:73
Chapter 140
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 140-1. Authority.
This Bylaw is adopted by the Town of Medfield under its home rule powers,
its police powers to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and under
powers authorized by MGL c. 40, § 21, and MGL c. 148, § 9.
§ 140-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this Bylaw are, through regulation of the design,
construction, installation, testing and maintenance of underground
hazardous material storage facilities, to protect public health from the
contamination of public and private water supplies due to leakage from
such facilities, to protect the public safety from the dangers of fire and
explosion associated with such leakage, and to protect the general welfare
by preserving limited water supplies for present and future use.
§ 140-3. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Being out of service for a continuous period in excess of
six months, in the case of storage facility for which a license from the local
licensing authority is required under the provisions of MGL c. 148, § 13, as
amended, and for a period in excess of 24 months, in the case of any other
storage facility.
CATHODIC PROTECTION — A system that inhibits the corrosion of a tank
or components through either the sacrificial anode or the impressed current
method of creating a corrosion-inhibiting electrical current.
COMPONENTS — Piping, pumps and other related storage, conveyancing
and dispensing elements that, together with one or more tanks and any
cathodic protection or monitoring system, constitute a storage facility.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which the Bylaw is approved by a Town
Meeting, providing the Bylaw thereafter becomes effective under the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 32, as amended.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any liquid substance which, because of its
quantity, concentration, or its chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive,
toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in
combination with any other substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment,
when improperly stored, treated, transported, disposed of, used, or
otherwise managed, including, but not limited to, any liquid petroleum
product of any kind, and any combination or mixture that includes any liquid
petroleum product of any kind.
§ 130-9 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-3
1:74
LEAKAGE or LEAK — Any uncontrolled movement, measurable by a final
or precision test that can accurately detect a leak of 0.05 gallon per hour
or less, after adjustment for relevant or approved equipment, materials or
methods published by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
MONITORING SYSTEM — A full-time approved system installed between
the walls of double-walled tanks or inside a tank or in the vicinity of a
tank such as observation wells, visual or audible alarms or its equivalent;
which, for the purpose of early monitoring systems, shall consist of in-tank
equipment which provides continuous monitoring of any liquid from the
tank of 0.05 gallon per hour or equivalent leakage over a longer period of
time.
OBSERVATION WELL — A dug or drilled cased well which can be used for
detecting the presence of hazardous materials, which is drilled to a depth
intercepting the water table, and which is installed and maintained in an
approved manner.
OPERATOR — The lessee of a storage facility or the person or persons
responsible for the daily operation of a storage facility.
OUT OF SERVICE — Not in use, in that no filling or withdrawal is occurring.
OWNER — The person or persons or government entity having legal
ownership of a storage facility.
STORAGE FACILITY — One or more tanks, at a particular site, together with
its or their components used, or designed to be used, for the underground
storage of hazardous material, and shall include any cathodic protection or
monitoring system used, or designed to be used, for inhibiting or detecting
leaks of hazardous material from any element of the facility.
TANK — Any structure any part of which is used, or designed to be used, for
the underground storage of any hazardous material.
UL-LISTED — Included in a current list or report of approved equipment,
materials or methods published by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE — Where 10% or more of the tank volume
and its piping is below ground level, but shall not include storage in a
freestanding container within a building.
WATER SUPPLY — Any existing or potential source of potable water,
including both groundwater and surface water.
§ 140-4. Permits.
When a storage facility is owned by one person and operated by another
person, both persons shall be considered applicants and both shall sign
the application and the final permit that is issued.
A.
All permit applications and all final permits issued shall be signed as
follows:
If the applicant is a corporation, by an individual who is responsible
corporate officer of the corporation and who is authorized by the
(1)
B.
§ 140-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-4
1:75
§ 140-5. Permits for new storage facilities.
corporation, in accordance with proper corporate procedure, to
sign such documents on behalf of the corporation. The corporate
seal shall be included. As used in this Subsection B(1), the term
"responsible corporate officer" shall mean a President, Treasurer
or Vice President of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policymaking
or decision-making functions for the corporation.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership, by the general partner.
(3) If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, by the proprietor.
Construction under any permit granted pursuant to §§ 140-5A, 140-6A
and 140-7B shall be commenced within six months after the granting of
such permit by the head of the local fire department ("Fire Chief"), and
such construction shall proceed diligently to completion. Otherwise, the
issued permit shall lapse and a new application, if elsewhere permitted
by the terms of this Bylaw, shall be submitted to the Fire Chief.
C.
Subsequent to the effective date of this Bylaw, no storage facility shall
be installed unless the owner shall have first obtained a permit from
the Fire Chief. This permit shall be in addition to any license or permit
required by MGL c. 148, as amended, or by any regulations issued
thereunder. The fee for this permit, payable to the Town of Medfield,
shall be such sum as determined from time to time by the Fire Chief.
A.
Subsequent to the effective date of the Bylaw, no permit shall be
granted for a storage facility solely used for single- or two-family
residential consumptive use on the premises.
B.
The application for a permit shall be on a form obtained from the Town
Clerk (the completed application shall be submitted in quadruplicate
to the Town Clerk) and shall include the following information and
any other information that the Fire Chief may require, together with
an application fee payable to the Town of Medfield in such sum as
determined from time to time by the Fire Chief:
Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the
owner;
(1)
Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the
operator;
(2)
The number of tanks in the proposed facility and the capacity of
and the specific hazardous material to be stored in each proposed
tank;
(3)
The proposed type of construction and material for each tank
and its piping, together with the tank's US serial number, if any,
and a description of any provisions made for cathodic protection,
(4)
C.
§ 140-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-5
1:76
electrical isolation, and early detection of leaks through a
monitoring system;
The depth below ground level and the lowest and highest points of
each proposed tank; and
(5)
A statement that the materials of each tank and its piping are
guaranteed by their manufacturers to be compatible with the
specific hazardous material that the applicant proposes to store in
such tank.
(6)
The applicant shall furnish a certificate, signed by a qualified engineer,
that the proposed facility meets all the design and construction
requirements of this Bylaw and the minimum requirements set forth in
527 CMR 9.00, as amended.
D.
The applicant shall also furnish a plot plan of the site and the area
surrounding it, showing the location of each proposed tank and its
components and of any building on the site, and showing the
approximate location of any public or private well and of any body of
surface water within 500 feet of the proposed storage facility.
E.
The Town Clerk shall send the completed application to the Fire Chief.
A duplicate completed application shall be sent by the Town Clerk
to the Medfield Board of Health, Water Department and Conservation
Commission with a request for a recommendation of approval,
conditional approval or disapproval within 30 days upon receipt of such
request. In the event that a recommendation from such Town board(s)
is not received within said 30 days, then in such event, the Fire Chief
may assume that such Town board(s) approves of the application.
F.
If the Fire Chief determines that the proposed storage facility
constitutes a danger to a public or private water supply, whether by
reason of its proximity to a public or private well, aquifer, recharge
area, or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the Fire Chief
may deny the permit or may grant it subject to conditions which the
Fire Chief determines are necessary or desirable to protect such water
supply. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, such
requirements as, for example, a double-walled tank or other secondary
containment system, a monitoring system, testing at more frequent
intervals than would otherwise be required under § 140-13, or
continuing statistical analysis of daily inventory records. The Fire Chief
must deny a permit to any proposed storage facility which is located
within any watershed, floodplain, groundwater or aquifer protection
district.
G.
Any "person aggrieved" by a determination of the Fire Chief to issue,
conditionally issue or deny a permit pursuant to Subsection G may
appeal such determination to the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) or such other appropriate state agency
which regulates the underground storage of hazardous materials. For
the purposes of this Subsection H, an "aggrieved person" shall be any
H.
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:77
§ 140-6. Permits for existing storage facilities.
person as defined by 310 CMR 1.00. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 32]
The owner of every storage facility that has been installed prior to the
effective date of this Bylaw shall apply to the Fire Chief, within six
months of the effective date of this Bylaw, for a permit to maintain the
storage facility. The fee for this permit, payable to the Town of Medfield,
shall be such sum as determined from time to time by the Fire Chief.
Application shall be made on a form obtained from the Town Clerk (and
submitted in quadruplicate to the Town Clerk) and shall include, to the
extent available to the owner, the following information and together
with an application fee, payable to the Town of Medfield, in such sum
as determined from time to time by the Fire Chief:
Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the
owner;
(1)
Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the
operator;
(2)
The number of tanks in the facility and the capacity of and the
specific hazardous material stored in each tank;
(3)
The type of construction and material for each tank and its piping,
together with a description of any provisions made for cathodic
protection, electrical isolation, and early detection of leaks through
a monitoring system;
(4)
The depth below ground level of the lowest and highest points of
the tank;
(5)
(6) The date of installation of the tank; and
A description of any previous leaks, including approximate dates,
causes, estimated amounts, any cleanup measures taken, and any
measures taken to prevent future leaks.
(7)
A.
The owner shall also furnish evidence of the date of installation; such
evidence may include, but is not limited to, a copy of any license issued
by the local licensing authority or of any permit issued by the Fire Chief.
If no substantial evidence of installation is supplied, the tank shall be
presumed to have been installed 20 years prior to the effective date of
this Bylaw.
B.
The applicant shall also furnish a plot plan of the site and of the area
surrounding it, showing the approximate location of each tank and its
components and of any building on the site, and showing the location of
any public or private well and of any body of surface water within 500
feet of the storage facility.
C.
§ 140-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-6
1:78
§ 140-7. Replacement and modification of storage tanks.
The Town Clerk shall send the completed application to the Fire Chief.
The Town Clerk shall send a duplicate completed application to the
Medfield Board of Health, Water Department and Conservation
Commission. If any such Town board(s) considers that the continuing
use of the existing storage facility constitutes a danger to a public or
private water supply, then within a period of 30 days, such board or
boards may so notify the Town Clerk and Fire Chief of this danger.
D.
If the Fire Chief determines that maintenance of the existing storage
facility constitutes a danger to a public or private water supply, whether
by reason of its proximity to any public or private well, aquifer,
recharge area or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the Fire
Chief may deny the permit and prohibit the supply of any hazardous
material to any tank within such existing storage facility or may grant
a permit subject to such conditions as the Fire Chief deems necessary
or desirable to protect such water supply. The conditions may include,
but are not limited to, such requirements as, for example, cathodic
protection, line leak detectors, a monitoring system, more frequent
testing than would otherwise be required or continuing statistical
analysis of daily inventory records.
E.
Any "person aggrieved" by a determination of the Fire Chief to issue,
conditionally issue or deny a permit pursuant to Subsection E may
appeal such determination to the DEP or such other appropriated
state agency which regulates the underground storage of hazardous
materials. For the purpose of this Subsection F, an "aggrieved person"
shall be any person as defined by 310 CMR 1.00. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
F.
The term "substantial modification" shall mean any change in the
specific hazardous material to be stored in any tank at a storage facility
or the installation of any addition to, or change in, a storage facility
that alters its on-site storage capacity, significantly alters its physical
configuration, or alters its capacity to inhibit or detect leaks through
the use of cathodic protection or a monitoring system or any similar
device.
A.
There shall be no replacement of a tank or of its components or
substantial modification of any storage facility unless the owner has
first applied for and obtained a permit from the Fire Chief. The fee
for this permit, payable to the Town of Medfield, shall be such sum as
determined from time to time by the Fire Chief.
B.
Any application for a permit under Subsection A shall be on a form
obtained from the Town Clerk (the completed application shall be
submitted in quadruplicate to the Town Clerk) and shall include the
information required in § 140-5C, D and E, together with an application
fee, payable to the Town of Medfield as determined from time to time
by the Fire Chief.
C.
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-7
1:79
§ 140-8. Renewal of permits and change of ownership.
The owner of any new or existing storage facility for which a permit has
been issued under this Bylaw must apply to the Fire Chief for a renewal
of the permit at five-year intervals from the date on which the original
permit was granted. The fee for renewal of such permit, payable to the
Town of Medfield, shall be such sum as determined from time to time by
the Fire Chief. The application for renewal must include any changes in
the information required under §§ 140-5C and 140-6A. No application for
renewal may be denied except for violations of this Bylaw and in accordance
with the procedural requirements of § 140-16B.
§ 140-9. Storage facility lifetime.
Any application to add cathodic protection to an existing storage facility
using one or more steel tanks shall be accompanied by a design plan
prepared by an engineer licensed by the National Association of
Corrosion Engineers, the plan to include provisions for a test box to
allow measurement of electrical potential and current flow.
D.
The Town Clerk shall send the completed application to the Fire Chief.
The Town Clerk shall send a duplicate completed application to the
Medfield Board of Health, Water Department and Conservation
Commission with a request for a recommendation of approval,
conditional approval or disapproval within 30 days, upon receipt of
request. In the event that a recommendation from such Town board(s)
is not received within said 30 days, then in such event, the Fire Chief
may assume that such Town board(s) approves of the application.
E.
If the Fire Chief determines that the proposed replacement or
modification constitutes a danger to a public or private water supply,
whether by reason of its proximity to any public or private well, aquifer,
recharge area or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the Fire
Chief may deny the application or approve it subject to conditions that
the Fire Chief determines are necessary or desirable to protect such
public or private water supply.
F.
Any "person aggrieved" by a determination of the Fire Chief to issue,
conditionally issue or deny a permit pursuant to Subsection F may
appeal such determination to the DEP or such other appropriate state
agency which regulates the underground storage of hazardous
materials. For the purposes of this Subsection G, an "aggrieved person"
shall be any person defined by 310 CMR 1.00.
G.
No replacement or substantial modification shall be made except by
a contractor who has either been licensed by state authorities for
work on underground storage facilities or has been certified by the
manufacturer or a storage equipment association as qualified for that
purpose.
H.
§ 140-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-9
1:80
§ 140-10. Design and construction of tanks.
No storage facility solely used for single- or two-family residential
consumptive use on the premises shall remain underground for a period
in excess of 20 years from the date of installation or the date referred
to in § 140-6B hereinabove unless such storage facility shall satisfy one
of the two options set forth in § 140-13C hereinbelow.
A.
Any storage facility referred to in Subsection A shall be immediately
taken out of service pursuant to the provisions of § 140-16 herein
below; provided, however, that in the event that such storage facility
is otherwise in compliance with the terms and provisions of this Bylaw
(excluding annual testing pursuant to § 140-13D hereinbelow), then in
such event, such storage facility need not be taken out of service as
required by this Subsection B for a period of three years after the
effective date of this Bylaw.
B.
All new and replacement tanks shall be designed and constructed to
minimize the risk of corrosion and leakage, and their materials shall
be guaranteed by the tank manufacturer to be compatible with the
hazardous materials designated by the owner in the permit application
required under § 140-5A or under § 140-6A or in any application filed
under § 140-7B. Only the following tank construction systems shall be
approved:
(1) UL-listed fiberglass reinforced plastic (FRP) tanks;
UL-listed steel tanks provided with cathodic protection, a coal-tar
epoxy or urethane coating and electrical isolation, and equipped
with a test box to allow measurement of electrical potential and
current flow;
(2)
UL-listed steel tanks with bonded fiberglass coating, compatible
inner corrosion-resistant lining and electrical isolation, the
integrity of the outer coating to be verified by the manufacturer by
electrostatic testing and guaranteed by the manufacturer;
(3)
(4) UL-listed non-conductive stainless steel tanks; and
Any other "state of the art" type construction providing equal, or
better, protection against leakage than the above-mentioned tanks
and approved by the State Fire Marshal.
(5)
A.
All new and replacement tanks must be equipped with a metallic or
nonmetallic striker plate, at least 12 feet by 11 feet in area, at least 1/4
inch thick, and attached to the bottom of the tank, under each opening.
B.
All new and replacement piping of a storage facility shall:
Be protected against corrosion by use of noncorrodible materials
or by use of cathodic protection, and their materials shall be
guaranteed by the piping manufacturer to be compatible with the
(1)
C.
§ 140-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-10
1:81
§ 140-11. Installation of tanks.
hazardous materials designated by the owner in the permit
application required under § 140-5A or § 140-6A or an application
filed under § 140-7B;
Be designed, constructed and installed so as to allow testing for
tightness or replacement without the need for disturbing elements
of the storage facility other than the elements that are to be tested
or replaced.
(2)
The operator of a storage facility shall record, at least monthly, the
negative voltage of every cathodic protection system equipped with a
test box that is part of that facility. In addition, the owner shall have
every cathodic protection system inspected and tested, by a qualified
person, at least annually. If any such system does not have adequate
negative voltage, or is otherwise defective, the owner shall have the
system repaired promptly by a qualified person. For purposes of this
Subsection, the term "adequate negative voltage" shall mean a negative
voltage of at least 0.85 volt, if a copper-copper sulfate reference
electrode is used. Reference electrodes shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's directions.
D.
All new facilities with submersible pumping systems shall be equipped
with a line leak detector for each delivery line; and if any such facility
is used to store automotive fuel, it shall also be equipped with an
emergency shut-off valve under each dispenser. The shut-off valves and
leak detectors shall be tested by a qualified person upon installation
and at least annually thereafter. No suction pumping system shall be
equipped with any check valve in the piping except at the tank end,
and any such check valve shall be so installed that it may be tested or
replaced without disturbing other elements of the storage facility.
E.
Every new tank shall be equipped with an overfill prevention system.
If a tank is filled by gravity flow, it must be equipped with a float vent
valve or other device that provides equal or better protection from
overfilling. If the tank is filled under pressure, it must be equipped with
a combined audible and visual high-level alarm. Any such system shall
be tested by a qualified person upon installation and at least annually
thereafter.
F.
Every monitoring system shall be installed by a qualified person. Those
equipped with an automatic audible or visual alarm shall be tested by
a qualified person upon installation and at least annually thereafter.
Those without such an automatic alarm system shall be checked by the
operator for the evidence of leak at least monthly and shall be inspected
by a qualified person at least annually.
G.
No new or replacement tank or component shall be installed, whether it
is part of a new or existing storage facility, unless the owner has given
at least one week's notice of its installation to the Fire Chief; and no
A.
§ 140-10 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-11
1:82
§ 140-12. Inventory control.
new or replacement tank or component shall be buried or concealed
until it has been inspected for damage and external defects, tested for
tightness under Subsection E and approved by the Fire Chief or the
Chief's designee.
No new or replacement tank or component shall be installed except
by a contractor who has been either licensed by state authorities for
that purpose or certified in writing by the manufacturer or storage
equipment association as qualified for the purpose. The contractor
shall, prior to any installation, submit to the Fire Chief a copy of such
license or certificate.
B.
The installation of a new or replacement tank or component, including
anchoring of the tank whenever water-saturation of any part of the
excavation can reasonably be anticipated, shall be carried out in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, accepted
engineering practices; provided that the backfill material for FRP tanks
shall be pea gravel or crushed stone and that the backfill material under
all other tanks shall be either pea gravel or clean, noncorrosive sand,
free of cinders, stones and other foreign material, the material under
the tank to be compacted and contoured to the shape of the tank before
the tank is installed, the balance to be thoroughly compacted.
C.
Any damage to the exterior of a tank or its coating shall be repaired
before the tank is covered. The owner shall notify the Fire Chief of such
repaired damage and the Fire Chief shall make note of it in its records
for that tank.
D.
Every new or replacement tank and its piping shall be tested,
separately, at the owner's expense, prior to being buried. The tank shall
be tested by air pressure at not less than three, and not more than
five, pounds per square inch. The piping shall be tested hydrostatically
to 150% of the maximum anticipated pressure of the system or tested
pneumatically, after all joints and connections have been coated with
a soap solution, to 100% of the maximum anticipated pressure of the
system, but not less than 50 pounds per square inch at the highest point
of the system. After the tank and piping have been fully buried, any
paving installed and the tank filled with the hazardous material to be
stored therein, the tank and its piping shall again be tested, separately,
at the owner's expense, by any final or precision test not involving air
pressure, that can accurately detect a leak of 0.05 gallon per hour
or less, after adjustment for relevant variables such as temperature
change and tank end deflection, and that is approved by the State Fire
Marshal. The owner shall furnish the Fire Chief with a certified copy
of the results of all testing required by this Subsection, which the Fire
Chief shall keep with the records for the storage facility. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
E.
§ 140-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-12
1:83
The provision of this Section shall apply to all tanks used for the storage
of automotive fuel and to all tanks used for the storage of waste oil or
other waste petroleum products.
A.
The operator of every new and existing storage facility designated
in Subsection A shall prepare, reconcile and maintain daily inventory
control records for each tank and for each combination of
interconnected tanks with a common level of product (hereinafter, a
"combination") for the purposes of prevention and early detection of
leaks. The preparation, reconciliation and maintenance of such records
shall be done in accordance with the provisions of 527 CMR 5.06(3), as
amended, with the following additions and modifications.
At the close of each calendar month, the operator shall determine
for that month and for each tank or combination the number of
days in which any amount of product was dispensed and the
number of days in which a loss of product was recorded.
(1)
An "abnormal loss of product" shall mean a loss not explainable by
spilling, temperature variations or other causes as provided in 527
CMR 5.06(3)(D) or a loss recorded on 70% or more of the days,
during any calendar month, in which any amount of product was
dispensed from a tank or combination.
(2)
In the event of any abnormal loss of product, the following steps
shall be taken:
The operator shall, within 24 hours, notify the owner, the Fire
Chief;
(a)
The owner shall, within three working days, have the steps
taken, for that tank or combination of its components, that are
outlined in § 140-13A(1); or
(b)
The owner shall, within three working days, submit the daily
inventory records of that tank or combination, for that month,
for a leak detection statistical analysis by an professionally
qualified person who has been approved by the Fire Chief;
and the person performing such analysis shall promptly submit
certified copies of the results to the Fire Chief and to the
owner; and if the Fire Chief, on the basis of such results,
determines that there is a probability of a leak in that tank
or combination, or in its components, the Fire Chief shall so
notify the owner, and the owner shall, within three working
days, have the steps taken that are outlined in § 140-13A(1)
with respect to that tank or combination and its components.
(c)
(3)
An abnormal gain of water shall be a gain in the water level inside
any tank of more than one inch in a 24-hour period during which
no product has been added.
(4)
B.
§ 140-12 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-12
1:84
§ 140-13. Testing for tightness.
In the event of any abnormal gain of water, the owner shall, at
the owner's expense, have the water removed from the tank and
disposed of in a manner approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) and have the water level checked
25 hours later, during which time no product shall be added. If
there is again an abnormal gain of water, the owner shall promptly
have the steps taken that are outlined in § 140-13A(1). [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
(5)
Apart from abnormal gains of water, the owner of any tank in which
water has accumulated to a depth of three inches or more shall, at
the owner's expense, have the water removed and disposed of in a
manner approved by DEP. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
(6)
For every storage facility covered by the inventory control
requirements of this Section, the owner shall, at least annually and
at the owner's expense, submit the daily inventory records of the
most recent calendar month for a leak detection statistical analysis
by any professionally qualified person who has been approved by
the Fire Chief for that purpose. The person performing such an
analysis shall promptly submit certified copies of the results of
that analysis to the owner and to the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief
shall keep its copy with the records of that facility. If the Fire
Chief determines, on the basis of that analysis, that there is a
probability of a leak from any tank or its components in that facility,
the owner shall, within three working days, take the steps outlined
in § 140-13A(1) with respect to that tank and its components, or,
in the case of a combination, with respect to each tank and its
components.
(7)
The Fire Chief, in addition to state public safety officials, shall have
access to all inventory records required by this Section.
(8)
Probability of leak.
If the probability of a leak is indicated by inventory control
procedures under § 140-12 or by a monitoring system or by a line
leak detector or by the malfunctioning of a suction pump or by the
presence of hazardous material or hazardous material fumes in or
around the surrounding area, or otherwise, the owner shall, within
three working days, have the following steps taken at the owner's
expense:
Have the readily accessible physical facilities on the premises
carefully inspected for evidence of leakage;
(a)
If the inspection does not confirm a leak, and if the piping
can be tested without the need for excavation, have the piping
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 140-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-13
1:85
tested in accordance with the provision of Subsections G and
H;
If the testing fails to confirm a leak or if the piping cannot be
tested without excavation, have the tank tested in accordance
with the provisions of Subsections G and H; and
(c)
If that testing fails to confirm a leak, excavate and have the
piping tested in accordance with the provision of Subsection G
and H.
(d)
If the inspections and testing outlined above fail to confirm a leak
and if there is continuing evidence of a probable leak, the Fire
Chief may order the owner and operator to take the steps outlined
in § 140-14.
(2)
If any of the testing specified in Subsection A discloses a leak, the
operator and owner shall comply immediately with the requirements
of § 140-14, and the Fire Chief may direct the owner, at the owner's
expense, to have all other tanks on the premises and their components
tested in the same manner.
B.
The provisions of Subsections D and E shall not be applicable to any
storage facility satisfying one of the two following options:
The installation and maintenance of an approved monitoring
system installed by a qualified person; or
(1)
The installation of an approved double-walled tank with interstitial
space monitoring system and liquid removal port.
(2)
C.
The owner of every storage facility (except single- or two-family
residential consumptive use on the premises) shall have each tank and
its piping tested in accordance with the provisions of Subsections G and
H at the owner's expense, during the 10th, 13th, 15th, 17th and 19th
year, and annually thereafter.
D.
With respect to any tank to which the inventory control requirements of
§ 140-12 are applicable, the Fire Chief shall require the owner to have
it and its piping tested promptly, at the owner's expense, whenever
the operator fails to maintain the daily inventory records properly or
fails to perform the required monthly calculations of abnormal loss,
or whenever the owner fails to comply with the annual leak detection
statistical analysis requirement under § 140-12B(7).
E.
The Fire Chief may require the owner of any existing tank to have it
and its piping tested, at the owner's expense, in any case in which the
owner has failed to make timely application for a permit as required
under §§ 140-4 through 140-9.
F.
Except for testing performed on a tank and its piping prior to their
being covered, a tank shall be tested by a final or precision test,
not involving air pressure, that can accurately detect a leak of 0.05
G.
§ 140-13 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-13
1:86
§ 140-14. Response to leaks.
gallon per hour or less, after adjustment of relevant variable such as
temperature change and tank end deflection, and that is approved by
the State Fire Marshal. Piping shall be tested hydrostatically to 150%
of the maximum anticipated pressure of the system.
All tests shall be administered by qualified persons approved by the
Fire Chief, and any such person shall notify the Fire Chief prior to
administering a test.
H.
The person performing any test under this Section shall promptly
supply the owner and the Fire Chief with certified copies of all test
results for a tank and its piping. The Fire Chief shall keep its copy with
the records of that storage facility.
I.
In the event of a leak, whether determined by testing or otherwise, the
following steps shall be taken:
The operator shall immediately notify the owner, the Fire Chief
and the Office of Incident Response of the Department of
Environmental Protection (OIR-DEP); [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM
by Art. 32]
(1)
The owner shall promptly verify that the Fire Chief and OIR-DEP
have been notified and shall immediately notify same if not done so
by the operator; [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
(2)
If testing has confirmed that the source of the leak is the piping for
a particular tank, the operator shall take that tank out of service
immediately;
(3)
If testing has confirmed that the source of the leak is a particular
tank, the operator shall within 24 hours cause that tank to be
emptied of all its contents;
(4)
If testing has failed to determine the source of the leak within a
storage facility, the operator shall within 24 hours cause the entire
storage facility to be emptied of its contents.
(5)
A.
Until the arrival of a representative of OIR-DEP, the Fire Chief shall
take charge of all emergency procedures and shall verify that all steps
required under Subsection A have been taken. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 32]
B.
The owner and the Fire Chief shall cooperate with OIR-DEP in all
efforts to identify the source of the leak, to contain it, and to restore
the environment, including any groundwater or surface water that
may have been contaminated by the leak, to a condition and quality
acceptable to DEP. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
C.
The Fire Chief shall determine whether any tank or its components
that have been identified as the source of a leak shall be removed and
D.
§ 140-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-14
1:87
§ 140-15. Tank repair and relining.
replaced or may be repaired, and shall notify the owner of its decision.
In making its decision, the Fire Chief shall consider all factors affecting
the degree of risk to public health and safety from a subsequent leak,
including, but not limited to, the location of the tank and the specific
nature of the contents.
No underground tank which has leaked as a result of corrosion shall be
relined.
A.
The Fire Chief shall determine whether any tank or its components
that have been identified as the source of a leak shall be removed,
replaced and/or repaired and shall notify the owner of his or her
decision. In making his or her decision, the Fire Chief shall consider all
factors affecting the degree of risk to public health and safety from a
subsequent leak, including, but not limited to, the location of the tank
and the specific nature of the contents.
The Fire Chief shall also be governed by the following conditions
on the repair, by relining, of any steel tank:
It must have a minimum design shell thickness of 0.18 inch
(seven-gauge);
(a)
(b) It must have no open seam or split;
It must have less than 10 holes with none larger than 1/2 inch
in diameter and no more than two within a one-foot radius; and
(c)
It must meet all the standards of the lining manufacturer for
structural soundness.
(d)
(1)
Adherence to the above conditions shall be determined after the
interior surface of the tank has been peened by a hammer.
(2)
B.
Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Bylaw, if the Fire Chief
permits the repair of any leaking tank, the Fire Chief shall require
that the tank and its piping be tested at the owner's expense and in
accordance with provisions of § 140-13G and H, prior to being restored
to service, at two-year intervals for 10 years and annually thereafter.
C.
Any repair of a tank or replacement or repair of components shall
be performed by qualified technicians, following the manufacturer's
directions, and, in the case of relining of a steel tank, following the
recommendations of American Petroleum Institute Publication 1631
First Edition, 1983 or any subsequent edition as it may appear.
D.
If the Fire Chief determines that a tank and its components shall be
removed, the owner shall first obtain a permit from the Fire Chief,
pursuant to MGL c. 21O, § 1, as amended. Any removal shall be
completed within 90 days after the Fire Chief has notified the owner of
its decision.
E.
§ 140-14 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-15
1:88
§ 140-16. Tanks abandoned or temporarily out of service.
§ 140-17. Enforcement.
The owner or operator, jointly and severally, shall be responsible for all
costs (including, without limitation, all costs and expenses incurred in
enforcing the provisions of this Bylaw) of reclaiming, recovering and
properly disposing of any hazardous material that has leaked and for
all costs of restoring the environment, including any groundwater or
surface water that has been contaminated, to a condition and quality
acceptable to DEP, whether such costs have been incurred by the
owner, operator, the Town, DEP or by any other person or entity.
F.
If the owner of a tank, which either is located under a building and
cannot be removed from the ground without first removing the building
or is so located that it cannot be removed from the ground without
endangering the structural integrity of another tank, decides to
abandon it, the owner shall promptly notify the Fire Chief of this
decision and, subject to the directions of the Fire Chief, have all the
hazardous material removed from the tank, by hand pump if necessary,
and the tank filled with sand or other insert material prescribed by the
Fire Chief.
A.
Except as provided in Subsection A, no tank may be abandoned in
place. Any owner of a tank that has in fact been out of service for a
period of time constituting abandonment, as defined in § 140-3, shall
immediately obtain a permit from the Fire Chief pursuant to MGL
c. 21O, § 1, as amended, and, subject to the directions of the Fire
Chief, shall have the tank either removed or filled in conformance with
existing codes. The hazardous material within the tank, if any, shall be
disposed of at the owner's expense as directed by the Fire Chief.
B.
The owner of a tank that is licensed under MGL c. 21O, as amended,
and that the owner has decided to take out of service for a period of
less than six months, shall promptly notify the Fire Chief and the Board
of Health of the decision and, subject to the directions of the Fire Chief,
have all the hazardous material removed from the tank, and disposed
of as directed by the Fire Chief, all tank openings properly secured
and the tank filled with water. Before any such tank may be restored
to service, the owner shall notify the Fire Chief and have the water
removed and disposed of in a manner approved by DEP. The Fire Chief
may require that the owner have the tank and its piping tested, at the
owner's expense, in accordance with the provisions of § 140-13G and H.
C.
Any owner or operator who violates any provision of this Bylaw shall be
subject to a fine of $30 for each offense. The liability hereunder of the
owner and operator shall be joint and several. Each day during which
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The fine(s)
provided in this Subsection A may be waived upon demonstration by
the owner and/or operator of continuing and good faith efforts at
A.
§ 140-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-17
1:89
§ 140-18. Variances.
The Fire Chief may, after a public hearing, vary the application of any
provision of this Bylaw, unless otherwise required by law, when, in his or
her opinion, the applicant has demonstrated that an equivalent degree of
protection will still be provided to public and private water supplies and to
the public health and public safety. Notice of the hearing shall be given by
the Fire Chief, at the applicant's expense, at least 10 days prior thereto, by
certified mail to all abutters to the property at which the owner's storage
facility is located and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town. The notice shall include a statement of the variance sought and
the reasons therefor. Any grant or denial of a variance shall be in writing
and shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the grant or denial.
§ 140-19. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this Bylaw shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
Chapter 150
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 210.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 310.
compliance. This Bylaw may be enforced pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D,
as amended, by a local police officer or any other officer having police
powers. Upon request of the Fire Chief and the Board of Selectmen,
the Town Counsel shall take such legal action as may be necessary to
enforce this Bylaw.
In the event of any violation of this Bylaw by the owner or operator of
a storage facility, the Fire Chief, instead of or in addition to requesting
enforcement under Subsection A, may revoke or suspend the owner's
permit or may require more frequent testing than would otherwise be
required under § 140-13; and if a permit is revoked or if a storage
facility has been installed or maintained without a permit, the Fire
Chief may order that the storage facility be removed from the ground.
Before revoking or suspending an owner's permit, or requiring removal
of a storage facility from the ground, the Fire Chief shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed action; shall give the owner at least 10 days’
notice of the hearing by certified mail; and shall make its decision in
writing with a brief statement of the reasons for its decision. The owner
and operator, jointly and severally, shall be responsible for all costs and
expenses incurred in enforcing the provisions of this Bylaw.
B.
§ 140-17 MEDFIELD CODE § 140-19
1:90
ARTICLE I
Historic Districts
[Adopted 4-25-1989 (Art. XIV of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 150-1. Title.
This Bylaw shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Districts Bylaw
Under the Authority of Massachusetts Laws, Chapter 40C, as Amended."
§ 150-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to promote the educational, cultural, physical,
economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation and
protection of the historical assets of Medfield, including buildings, sites and
districts of historical and architectural interest; through the maintenance
of such landmarks of the history of Medfield, the Commonwealth and the
nation, and through the development of appropriate uses and settings for
such buildings and places.
§ 150-3. Historic district boundaries.5
John Metcalf Historic District. The boundaries are hereby established
as shown on the official Historic District Map filed, as most recently
amended, with the Massachusetts Historical Commission on April 23,
2004, and also filed with the Town Clerk and recorded at the Norfolk
County Registry of Deeds, which map accompanies and is hereby
declared to be part of this Bylaw. [ATM 4-29-1996; ATM 4-26-2004]
A.
Hospital Farm Historic District. The boundaries are hereby established
as shown on the official Historic District Map filed with the
Massachusetts Historical Commission on January 18, 1994, and also
filed with the Town Clerk and recorded with the Norfolk County
Registry of Deeds, which map accompanies and is hereby declared to
be a part of this Bylaw. [ATM 4-29-1996]
B.
Clark-Kingsbury Farm Historic District. The boundaries are hereby
established as shown on the official Historic District Map filed with the
Massachusetts Historical Commission on January 4, 1997, and also filed
with the Town Clerk and recorded with the Norfolk County Registry of
Deeds, which map accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of
the Bylaw. [ATM 4-28-1997]
C.
Town Center Historic District. The boundaries are hereby established
as shown on the official Historic District Map filed with the
Massachusetts Historical Commission on January 13, 2000, and also
filed with the Town Clerk, which map accompanies and is hereby
declared to be a part of this Bylaw; and by amending the Town's official
Historic District Map to add said district with the boundaries shown
on the map filed with the Massachusetts Historical Commission on
D.
5. Editor's Note: See also the historic district maps included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:91
§ 150-4. Membership of Historic District Commission.
January 13, 2000, a copy of which is printed in the Warrant Report, but
excluding therefrom parcels #10, 12, 14, 16, 17 and 19 shown on said
map, said map as further amended to be filed with the Town Clerk, and
recorded in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds as required by MGL c. 40C,
§ 3. [ATM 4-24-2000]
The Medfield Historic District Commission, hereinafter referred to as
the "District Commission," shall consist of five members and alternates
appointed by the Selectmen.
A.
The membership of the District Commission shall be made up as
follows:
One member from two nominees submitted by the Medfield
Historical Society;
(1)
One member, if possible, from two nominees submitted by the
chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering the area;
(2)
One member, if possible, from two nominees submitted by the
Massachusetts Board of Realtors;
(3)
One member, if possible, from two nominees submitted by the
Medfield Planning Board.
(4)
B.
If the membership cannot be appointed as designated above, these
positions shall be filled without designation: two additional members
without designation.
C.
D. All nominees shall be residents of the Town of Medfield.
One member, if possible, shall be a resident of or owner of real estate
in the John Metcalf Historic District.
E.
When the District Commission is first established, two members shall
be appointed for one-year terms, two members shall be appointed for
two-year terms, and the remaining members and the two alternates
shall be appointed for three-year terms, and all members shall serve
until a successor is appointed and confirmed. At the expiration of their
terms, the Selectmen shall appoint successors for three-year terms in
the manner described in the preceding subsections. Vacancies for any
unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner as in the original
appointment.
F.
The District Commission shall elect annually a Chairman and Vice-
Chairman from its own number and a Secretary from within or without
its number.
G.
Alternates shall have all the powers and duties of regular members
when called to serve by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the District
Commission.
H.
§ 150-3 MEDFIELD CODE § 150-4
1:92
§ 150-5. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following words and phrases shall include the
meanings indicated below:
ALTERING — Shall include the term "rebuilding, "reconstructing,"
"restoring," "removing," and "demolishing."
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals or property.
CONSTRUCTING — Shall include the terms "building," "erecting,"
"installing," "enlarging," and "moving."
DISTRICT — The historic districts established and described in
§ 150-3.[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
DISTRICT COMMISSION — The Medfield Historic District Commission
acting as such.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Such portion of the exterior of a
building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way or
public park, including but not limited to the architectural style and general
arrangement and setting thereof, the kind and texture of exterior building
materials, or other materials applied to exterior surface and the type and
style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior
fixtures.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials other than a building, including
but not limited to a sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway, tennis court
and swimming pool.
§ 150-6. Administration of historic districts.
No building or structure within the historic districts shall be constructed,
demolished, moved or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural
features and no building shall be moved into an historic district unless the
District Commission shall first have issued a certificate of appropriateness,
a certificate of hardship or a certificate of nonapplicability with respect to
such construction, alteration or movement. The Building Inspector shall not
issue a permit within an historic district unless one of the certificates noted
above has first been issued by the District Commission or the proposed
improvement is exempted from these provisions by § 150-7.
§ 150-7. Exemptions to review.
I. All members and alternates shall serve without compensation.
In accordance with MGL c. 40C, § 8, the authority of the District
Commission is not extended to the review of the following: [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
A.
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:93
§ 150-8. Commission powers; rules and regulations; grants and
appropriations; changes in district boundaries.
Temporary structures or signs, subject, however, to such conditions
as to duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar
matters as the District Commission may reasonably specify.
(1)
Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures, or
any one or more of them, that do not substantially change the grade
level.
(2)
Storm doors, storm windows, screens, window air conditioners,
lighting fixtures, antennas and similar appurtenances, or any one
or more of them.
(3)
(4) Color or type of paint or roofing.
Signs used for residential occupation or professional purposes
which are not more than one foot square in area, provided that:
(a) Only one such sign is displayed for each building or structure;
The sign consists of letters painted on wood containing only
the name and occupation of an occupant on the premises
without a symbol or trademark; and
(b)
(c) If illuminated, are illuminated only indirectly.
(5)
Signs used in connection with nonresidential purposes, which are
not more than 12 square feet in area, consist of letters painted
on wood without symbols or trademark and, if illuminated, are
illuminated only indirectly.
(6)
Reconstruction of a building, structure or exterior architectural
feature which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or
other disaster, provided that the exterior design is substantially
similar to the original and is begun within one year thereafter and
carried forward with due diligence.
(7)
Even though the preceding statements are listed as exemptions, the
Historic District Commission recommends that it be consulted in an
advisory capacity to aid property owners in choosing cost-effective and
the most aesthetically pleasing materials to suit their needs for their
historic property. The District Commission would like to be considered
and given an opportunity to make recommendations.
B.
The District Commission shall have all the powers of an Historic District
Commission as described in MGL c. 40C. The District Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, not
inconsistent with MGL c. 40C, or with the purpose of this Bylaw.
A.
The District Commission may receive and accept appropriations, grants
and gifts for the furthering of the purposes of this Bylaw. It may
B.
§ 150-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 150-8
1:94
§ 150-9. Duties of Commission.
The District Commission shall act at all times with a clear understanding of
the needs of the residents of a Medfield historic district or districts to enjoy
the progress of contemporary life in the use of their homes and properties.
The District Commission shall coordinate historic preservation activities,
and oversee the preparation and implementation of historic preservation
plans of Medfield. The District Commission shall provide informational
assistance to owners of historic structures on matters pertaining to
preservation of those structures in Medfield.
§ 150-10. Appeals from Commission determination. [ATM 6-2-2003]
§ 150-11. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this Bylaw be for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other
section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
establish an historic marker program, public guides, maps and other
appropriate publications to illustrate historical and architectural
resources of historic districts and to acquire and maintain historic
properties.
The District Commission shall propose changes in Medfield historic
district boundaries as it deems appropriate. MGL c. 40C will guide the
procedures for these activities.
C.
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the District Commission
may, within 20 days after the filing of the notice of such determination
with the Town Clerk, file a written request with the District Commission
for a review by a person or persons of competence and experience in
such matters, designated by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council
(MAPC).
A.
The finding of the person or persons making such review shall be filed
with the Town Clerk within 45 days after the request, and shall be
binding on the applicant and the District Commission, unless a further
appeal is sought in the Superior Court as provided in MGL c. 40C,
§ 12A.
B.
§ 150-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-11
1:95

ARTICLE II
Demolition Delay
[Adopted ATM 4-26-1994 (Art. XVI of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 150-12. Intent and purpose. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 23]
This Bylaw is adopted for the purpose of protecting the archeologic,
historic, and aesthetic resources of the Town of Medfield by surveying,
preserving, rehabilitating, researching, or restoring whenever possible,
buildings, structures, or archeological sites which constitute or reflect
distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, or historic resources of
the Town, thereby promoting the public welfare and preserving the cultural
heritage of Medfield.
§ 150-13. Definitions. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 23]
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION — An application for a demolition permit filed by the owner
of record of the premises, or the holder of a bona fide purchase and sale
agreement for such premises. The application must be signed by both the
applicant and (if different) the owner of record at the time of application. An
applicant may withdraw an application without prejudice at any time prior
to a decision by the Commission.
ARCHEOLOGICAL PROTECTION DISTRICT — The Archeological
Protection District is composed of shaded and labeled areas shown on the
included map entitled "Archeological Protection District, Town of Medfield,
Massachusetts."
COMMISSION — The Medfield Historical Commission.
COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the Town of Medfield.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit issued by the Commissioner as
required by the State Building Code for the demolition, partial demolition,
or removal of a building or structure.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURE — Any building, structure, or
archeological site which is:
PREFERABLY PRESERVED — Any historically significant structure
individually or in context which, because of the important contribution
Importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or
with the architectural, cultural, political, economic, social history of the
Town of Medfield, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or the United
States of America; or which is
A.
Historically or architecturally important by reason of period, style,
method of construction, or association with a particular architect or
builder, either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings or
structures.
B.
§ 150-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-13
1:97
made by such structure to the Town's historical or architectural resources,
is in the public interest to preserve, rehabilitate, or restore.
PREMISES — The parcel of land on which an historically significant
structure exists; or the site itself due to its archaeological significance.
§ 150-14. Regulated buildings, structures, and sites. [Amended
4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 23]
The provisions of this Bylaw shall apply to only the following buildings,
structures, and sites:
§ 150-15. Procedure. [Amended ATM 4-26-1999; ATM 6-2-2003;
4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 23]
Buildings, structures, or sites listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Register of Historic Places.
A.
Buildings, structures, or sites which in whole or in part were
constructed 50 or more years prior to the date of the application for the
demolition permit.
B.
Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of this Bylaw shall not apply
to any building, structure, or site located in a local historic district and
subject to regulation under the provisions of MGL c. 40C.
C.
Archeological sites located within the boundaries of the Archeological
Protection District.
D.
Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit for a building,
structure or site regulated by this Bylaw, the Commissioner shall
forward a copy thereof to the Commission. No demolition permit shall
be issued at that time.
A.
Within 14 days of receipt of the application by the Commission, the
chairperson of the Commission shall post the date for a meeting of the
Commission at which the application shall be heard. The hearing shall
take place no fewer than 28 days and no more than 49 days after the
receipt of the application from the Commissioner. The Commission shall
give public notice of the hearing by publishing at least 14 days before
the hearing an announcement in a local newspaper of the time, place,
and purpose of the hearing. The Commission shall also mail a copy
of said notice to the applicant, to all abutters, to the owner of record
(if different from the applicant), to all abutters, to the owners of all
properties deemed by the Commission to be affected by the proposed
demolition, to the Medfield Historic District Commission, and to any
others the Commission deems entitled to notice.
B.
If, after the hearing, the Commission determines that the proposed
demolition of the building, structure, or site would not be detrimental
to the purposes protected by this Bylaw, the Commission shall notify
the Commissioner within 10 days of such determination. Upon receipt
C.
§ 150-13 MEDFIELD CODE § 150-15
1:98
of such notification, or after the expiration of 15 days from the hearing
if he has not received such notice, the Commissioner shall, subject to
the requirements of the State Building Code and any other applicable
laws, Bylaws, rules and regulations, issue the demolition permit.
If the Commission determines that (1) the building, structure or site is
a historically significant structure (as defined in § 150-13), and (2) the
demolition of this historically significant structure would be detrimental
to the historical or architectural resources of the Town, such
historically significant structure (and its premises) shall be declared a
preferably preserved historically significant structure.
D.
Upon a determination by the Commission that the historically
significant structure (and its premises) which is the subject of the
application for a demolition permit is a preferably preserved historically
significant structure (and premises), the Commission shall notify the
applicant and the Commissioner. No demolition permit may be issued
for at least 18 months after the date of such determination by the
Commission.
E.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commissioner may issue a demolition
permit for a preferably preserved historically significant structure after
receipt of written advice from the Commission to the effect that either
of the following applies:
The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood
that either the owner or some other reasonable person or group
is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate, or restore said
structure; or
(1)
The Commission is satisfied that for at least six months the owner
has made continuing, bona fide, and reasonable efforts to locate
a purchaser to preserve, rehabilitate, and restore the subject
historically significant structure, and that such efforts have been
unsuccessful; or
(2)
The Commission has determined that the proposed demolition may
be conducted in a manner that is not detrimental to the historical,
architectural or archaeological resources of the Town.
(3)
F.
No demolition permit for a preferably preserved historically significant
structure shall be granted until all approvals are in place for
subsequent development. Approvals include but are not limited to
building permits, zoning variances or special permits (if necessary),
licenses, easements and subdivisions of the premises of any kind. All
appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded before
the demolition permit may be granted.
G.
Demolition permits are valid for six months, in accordance with state
statute. If the building, structure or site is not demolished within six
months, the Commission may issue an extension, or it may require the
applicant to reapply.
H.
§ 150-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-15
1:99
§ 150-16. Building, earth removal, subdivision, and open space
residential permits.
§ 150-17. Enforcement, remedies and appeals.
A decision by the Commission is made in relation to the party filing
the application only, is nontransferable, and expires two years from
the date of the decision. If demolition has not occurred prior to the
expiration of the decision, a new application for a demolition permit
must be filed prior to any subsequent demolition.
I.
If a building, structure, or archaeological site is determined to be a
preferably preserved historically significant structure (as defined in
§ 150-13), the owner shall be responsible for properly securing such
building or structure, if vacant, or site to the satisfaction of the
Commission. Should the owner fail to properly secure such building,
structure, or site, a subsequent destruction of such building, structure,
or site at any time during the period of the demolition delay through fire
or other cause which could have been prevented by properly securing
such building, structure, or site, shall be considered a voluntary
demolition in violation of this Bylaw under § 150-17B.
J.
Upon receipt of an application for a building permit, an earth removal
permit, a subdivision permit, or an open space residential zoning permit
for property located within the Archeological Protection District, the
permit granting authority shall direct the applicant also to supply the
Commission with a copy of the application for review and
recommendation. Failure of the Commission to respond within 30 days
of its receipt of the application shall be deemed to signify its lack of
opposition to the project.
A.
If the Commission finds that the proposed construction poses a serious
threat to the Town's archeological resources, it can recommend that
the permit granting authority require that the applicant make adequate
provision for the safeguarding of said archeological resources. Such
adequate provisions might include, but are not limited to, surveys
and resource preservation plans completed in cooperation with the
Commission and/or the state archeologist.
B.
The Commission and the Inspector are each authorized to institute any
and all proceedings in law or in equity as they deem necessary and
appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this Bylaw
or to prevent a violation thereof.
A.
No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon
which an historically significant structure has been voluntarily
demolished in violation of this Bylaw for a period of two years after the
date of the completion of such demolition.
B.
Appeals. Decisions made by the Commission may be appealed to the
Selectmen within 21 days. Within 30 days of its receipt of an applicant's
C.
§ 150-15 MEDFIELD CODE § 150-17
1:100
§ 150-18. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, or part of this Bylaw be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph, and
part shall continue in full force and effect.
appeal, the Board of Selectmen shall schedule a public hearing; the
Board of Selectmen shall provide written notice thereof to the
applicant, the Historic Commission, and to immediate abutters and
the Board shall provide notice to the public by publication once in a
newspaper of general circulation. [Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art.
40]
At that public meeting, the Board of Selectmen shall review the record
of the Historic Commission's proceedings, including meeting minutes
and any documents. Based upon its review, the Board of Selectmen
shall determine if a reasonable factual basis exists to support the
Historic Commission's finding that the property or structure is
"historically significant" and should be "preferably preserved." If the
Board of Selectmen determines that a reasonable factual basis exists,
it shall uphold the Historic Commission; if the Board of Selectmen
determines there is not a reasonable factual basis, it shall direct that
the demolition delay be lifted. [Added 4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 40]
D.
§ 150-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-18
1:101
Chapter 160
JUNK, OLD METAL AND SECONDHAND ARTICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 220.
§ 160-1. License required.
No person shall collect, deal in, or operate a business for the purchase, sale
or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles within the limits of the
Town, unless licensed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 160-2. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
Chapter 170
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 150-18 MEDFIELD CODE § 160-2
1:102
ARTICLE I
Revocation or Denial for Failure to Pay Taxes
[Adopted 5-5-1987 (Art. III, Sec. 9(B), of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 170-1. List of parties in default. [Amended 4-30-2018 ATM by Art.
28]
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as the "Tax Collector," may periodically furnish to
each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as
the "licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals
and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise,
hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has neglected or refused to pay
any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges
for not less than a 12-month period, and that such party has not filed in good
faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or pending petition
before the appellate tax board.
§ 170-2. Authority to deny, revoke or suspend licenses or permits.
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried
out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished
to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to
any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other
proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or
revoked under this Section shall not be reissued or renewed until the
licensing authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that
the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the
municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:103
§ 170-3. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 170-4. Waiver of action.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his or her immediate
family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted
in or on said property.
§ 170-5. Exceptions. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
This Bylaw shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
License or Permit Statutory Citation
Open burning MGL c. 48, § 13
Sales of articles for charitable purposes MGL c. 101, § 33
Children work permits MGL c. 149, § 69
Clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverage licenses
MGL c. 140, § 21E
Dog licenses MGL c. 140, § 137
Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses MGL c. 131, § 12
Marriage licenses MGL c. 207, § 28
Theatrical events, public exhibition permits MGL c. 140, § 181
§ 170-3 MEDFIELD CODE § 170-5
1:104
Chapter 175
MARIJUANA AND TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
§ 175-1. Public consumption prohibited.
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol, as defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended, while
in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs,
bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public
building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area
owned by or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or
other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place
accessible to the public.
§ 175-2. Violations and penalties.
This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, enforcement by criminal indictment or
complaint pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21, or by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer. The
fine for violation of this Bylaw shall be $200 for each offense. Any penalty
imposed under this Bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed
under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
§ 175-3. Marijuana not medically prescribed prohibited. [Added
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 48]
Consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of marijuana establishments
as defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1(j), to include all marijuana cultivators,
marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana
retailers or any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, are
prohibited within the Town of Medfield.
Chapter 180
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 80.
Animals — See Ch. 100.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 220.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:105

ARTICLE I
Animals
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 6, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 180-1. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
No person shall keep any bird, fowl, dog or other animal which repeatedly
barks, howls or makes other noises which disturb the peace and quietness
of any reasonable person of normal sensitivities in the Town.
§ 180-2. Fines. [ATM 4-26-1994]
Fine:
A. First offense: $35.
B. Second offense: $50.
Third and subsequent offenses: $100 (Medfield Animal Control Officer
or Medfield police officers).6
C.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 180-3, Violations and penalties, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 31. See now Art. IV of this
Chapter.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:107

ARTICLE II
Automobile Service Stations
[Adopted ATM 4-24-1989 (Art. IV, Sec. 23, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 180-3. All-night gas stations.
For the purpose of controlling and abating noise, no automobile service
station within the Town shall conduct business between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.7
7. Editor's Note: Former § 180-5, Violations and penalties, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 31. See now Art. IV of this
Chapter.
§ 180-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:109

ARTICLE III
Retail Stores
[Adopted ATM 4-30-1990 (Art. IV, Sec. 24, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 180-4. Restrictions on the hours of operation of retail stores.
For the purposes of controlling and abating noise and illumination and to
protect and promote the nighttime tranquility, no person shall sell at retail
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. No store or place of
business engaged in retail sales shall be open for the transaction of retail
business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. For special
events, the Selectmen may grant an exception to the provisions of this
Section.8
8. Editor's Note: Former § 180-7, Violations and penalties, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 31. See now Art. IV of this
Chapter.
§ 180-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:111

ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Operations and Activities
[Adopted 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 31]
§ 180-5. Prohibited noise.
Except in the case of an emergency, the following commercial uses and
activities, which are determined to generate or involve excessive and/or
unreasonable noise, shall be prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
§ 180-6. Exceptions.
A. Operation of earthmoving or other heavy vehicles or equipment;
Start up or idling of any diesel-engine-equipped vehicle having a gross
vehicle weight in excess of 15,000 pounds, or diesel-powered
equipment;
B.
Construction, demolition or alteration of any building or structure,
including excavation and other site work;
C.
Operation of any wood/brush chipper, pneumatic-powered equipment,
tool or hammer, chainsaw, power mower, trimmer, blower or other
construction, forestry or landscape equipment;
D.
This Bylaw shall not apply to the following:
(1) Snow removal; and
Individual property owners personally performing regular
maintenance on their residential property.
(2)
A.
The Building Commissioner or his or her designee may grant a waiver
from the foregoing prohibitions upon prior application, if he or she
determines that good construction practice requires that the proposed
work be performed during the prohibited time period.
B.
§ 180-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-6
1:113

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Penalties
[Adopted 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 31]
§ 180-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Whoever violates Chapter 180, Articles II through IV, of this Bylaw shall
be subject to the following fines:
(1) For the first offense: $50;
(2) For the second offense: $100;
(3) For the third offense $150; and
(4) For each subsequent offense: $150.
A.
The Police Department, the Building Commissioner or designee shall
each have authority to enforce the provisions of this Section.
B.
§ 180-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:115
Chapter 190
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 180-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 180-7
1:116
ARTICLE I
Use of Town Facilities
[Adopted ATM 4-25-2011 (Art. IV, § 34, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 190-1. Use of buildings and facilities under control of Park and
Recreation Commission.
The Park and Recreation Commission is hereby authorized to promulgate
written rules and regulations for the proper conduct of persons while
in or at Town buildings and facilities under its control. Said rules and
regulations, once promulgated, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
posted in a conspicuous place in or at each Town building or facility under
the Commission's control to which the general public has access.
§ 190-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in conduct prohibited by said rules and regulations
and not otherwise prohibited by Massachusetts General Laws or these
Bylaws shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense, $300 for the third offense and $300 for each subsequent
offense. In addition, repeated violations may result in suspension or
termination of access privileges. The Park and Recreation Commission or its
designee and the Medfield Police Department shall each have authority to
enforce the provisions of this Bylaw.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:117
Chapter 200
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 190-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 190-2
1:118
ARTICLE I
Storage of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 19, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 200-1. Storage on private property restricted.
No person, other than one holding a license under the provisions of MGL c.
140, shall permit an unregistered motor vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain
on his or her property for more than three weeks unless permission to
do so has first been given in writing by the Board of Selectmen after an
investigation by the Board of Health and a written certification by them that
the same does not constitute a hazard to the public health as a harboring
place for insects and rodents.
§ 200-2. Exception.
This Bylaw shall not apply to the storage of motor vehicles or parts thereof
inside buildings.
§ 200-3. Fines.
Fine (Medfield police officers or Highway Superintendent):
§ 200-4. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
A. First offense: $75.
B. Second offense: $100.
C. Third offense: $150.
D. Fourth and subsequent offenses: $250.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:119
Chapter 210
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 150.
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 310.
§ 210-1. Penalty for violation of state law provisions.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 15C, as amended, the Scenic Roads Act,
any violation of said law shall be punishable by a fine of $300 for each
offense. Each five-foot break or portion thereof in a wall or the cutting of
each tree of two-inch diameter or greater shall be considered a separate
offense.
Chapter 220
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk, old metal and secondhand
articles — See Ch. 170.
Noise — See Ch. 180.
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
§ 220-1. License required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this Bylaw
to engage in such business within the Town without first obtaining a license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw. This Bylaw shall
not apply to any person exempted under MGL c. 101, or to any person
exempted by another General Law, nor shall this Bylaw be construed to
prevent route salesmen or other persons having established customers to
whom they make periodic deliveries from calling upon such customers or
from making calls upon prospective customers to solicit an order for future
periodic route deliveries.
§ 220-2. Definitions.
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person who, for himself or herself, or
for another person, firm or corporation, travels by foot, automobile or any
§ 200-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 220-2
1:120
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street, taking or attempting to lease or take orders for retail sale
of goods, wares, merchandise or services, including, without limitation, the
selling, distributing, exposing for sale or soliciting of orders for magazines,
books, periodicals or other articles of a commercial nature, the contracting
of all home improvements, or for services to be performed in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for retail sale a
sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance
payment on such retail sales.
§ 220-3. Application; fee.
§ 220-4. Investigation and issuance of license; display.
Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall investigate the
applicant's reputation as to morals and integrity. After an investigation of
the applicant's morals and integrity, the Board of Selectmen shall hold a
public hearing on said application within 14 days or at its next meeting and
shall reach a decision and shall endorse on such application its approval or
disapproval. If denied, an applicant may petition for reconsideration within
seven days. Such license, when issued, shall contain the signature of the
Board of Selectmen or its designee and shall show the name, address, and
photograph of said licensee, the date of issuance and the length of time
the same shall be operative, as well as the license number. The Police
Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued for a period of six
Applicants for a license shall file with the Board of Selectmen or its
designee, on a form issued by the Board of Selectmen or its designee, a
written application signed under the penalties of perjury containing the
following information:
Name of applicant and local and permanent home address of
applicant;
(1)
(2) Height, weight, eye and hair color;
(3) Social security number;
(4) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
(5)
The name and home office address of the applicant's employer, or
if self-employed, it shall so state; and
(6)
If operating a motor vehicle, the year, make, model, motor number,
registration number, state of registration, vehicle's owner and
address.
(7)
A.
At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall pay a fee of
$10.
B.
§ 220-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:121
years. Solicitors and canvassers, when engaged in the business of soliciting
or canvassing, are required to display an identifying badge issued by the
Police Department, by wearing said badge on an outer garment. Each
licensee is required to possess an individual license.
§ 220-5. Enforcement; transfer of license.
The police officers of the Town shall enforce this Bylaw. No license shall be
transferred.
§ 220-6. Revocation of license.
The Chief of Police is hereby vested with the jurisdiction over the revoking
of licenses. Any person aggrieved by such revocation may appeal to the
Board of Selectmen within seven business days, and a hearing will be
scheduled for one of the next two regularly scheduled meetings of the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 220-7. Expiration of license.
Each license issued under the provisions of this Bylaw shall continue in
force from the date of its issue to the expiration date noted on the license.
§ 220-8. Renewal of license.
A license issued under the provisions of this Bylaw may be renewed by
the Chief of Police. An applicant requesting a renewal of a license must
apply in person for such license renewal, and provide such information as is
required to obtain an initial license.
§ 220-9. Misrepresentation prohibited.
No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempted from license, may
misrepresent, in any manner, the buyer's right to cancel as stipulated
by MGL c. 93, c. 93A and c. 255D. No solicitor or canvasser, licensed
or exempted from license, may use any plan, scheme or ruse which
misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call in
order to gain admission to a prospective buyer's home, office, or other
establishment with the purpose of making a sale of consumer goods or
services.
§ 220-10. Trespassing.
It shall be unlawful for any canvasser or solicitor to enter the premises of a
resident or business who has displayed a "no trespassing" or "no soliciting"
sign or poster. Further, it shall be unlawful for canvassers or solicitors to
ignore a resident's or business person's "no solicitation" directive or remain
on private property after its owner has indicated that the canvasser or
solicitor is not welcome.
§ 220-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 220-11
1:122
§ 220-11. Violations and penalties. [ATM 4-26-1994]
Any person violating any provisions of this Bylaw shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of $50 for each and every offense. (Medfield
police officers)
Chapter 230
SOLID WASTE
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:123

ARTICLE I
Transfer Station
[Adopted ATM 4-27-1987 (Art. II, Sec. 7, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 230-1. Authority to establish and to promulgate rules and
regulations.
The Selectmen may provide a transfer station for the collection of such
deposits to be disposed of outside of the Town or otherwise by the Town
or by private contractors. The Selectmen are authorized to set rates and
charge residents, businesses, private contractors and others for the use of
the transfer station and to make such regulations as they find necessary for
the proper operation of the facilities.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:125

ARTICLE II
Transfer Station Regulations
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 31, of the 1926 Bylaws; amended ATM
4-24-2000; STM 9-25-2000]
§ 230-2. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the Town of Medfield transfer station regulations in any one
calendar year shall be punishable by a fine as follows:
§ 230-3. Enforcement.
This provision may be enforced by any Medfield police officer or by the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designees.
A. First offense: $25.
B. Second offense: $50.
C. Third and subsequent offense: $100.
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:127
Chapter 235
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Water — See Ch. 270.
Wells and cesspools — See Ch. 280.
Wetlands — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 310.
§ 230-3 MEDFIELD CODE § 230-3
1:128
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 235-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to establish minimum requirements and
controls to protect and safeguard the environment, natural resources,
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds
within the Town's jurisdiction from the adverse impacts of soil erosion,
sedimentation, and stormwater runoff. This Section seeks to meet that
purpose through the following objectives:
§ 235-2. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURE — The normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural or aquacultural use as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act9 and its implementing regulations.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application.
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls, resting on its own foundations and designed for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.
DETENTION — The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a
stormwater management facility with the goals of controlling peak
discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface
runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Medfield Department of Public Works, or his
designee.
To eliminate or reduce the adverse effects of soil erosion and
sedimentation;
A.
B. To minimize stormwater runoff from any development;
To minimize nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff
from development;
C.
D. To provide for groundwater recharge where appropriate; and
To ensure controls are in place to respond to objectives in Subsections
A and B and that these controls are properly operated and maintained.
E.
9. Editor's Note: See 310 CMR 10.00 et seq.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:129
EASEMENT — A legal right granted by a landowner to a third party grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The flow of water from the ground surface down into the
soil.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — Any structure or device designed to infiltrate
retained water to the ground. These facilities may be above grade or below
grade.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity that changes the volume or
peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface, including:
grading, digging, cuffing, scraping, excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving construction, substantial removal of vegetation, any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
LANDOWNER/OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including
those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person
holding propriety rights in the land.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM
SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Medfield.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conduit or waterway, and shall
include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of water to aquifers.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement
exceeding one acre in area where existing land use is high-density
commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
RESOURCE AREA — Any area protected under the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act,10Massachusetts Rivers Act,11 or Medfield Conservation
Commission regulations.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan required to be
submitted as part of this Bylaw as detailed in Article II, § 235-12.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including but not limited to land preparation such
as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
10.Editor's Note: See 310 CMR 10.00 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See the Rivers Protection Act, Chapter 258 of the Acts of 1996.
§ 235-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-2
1:130
excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan required to be submitted as
part of this Bylaw as detailed in Article III, § 235-15.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water resulting from precipitation that flows
overland.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, rivers and streams.
WATERWAY — A channel, either natural or man-made, that directs surface
runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
§ 235-3. Applicability.
This Bylaw shall apply to all activities that result in a land disturbance
activity of one or more acres of land or that will disturb less than one
acre of land but is part of a larger common plan of development or sale
that will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land. No
person shall perform any activity that results in a land disturbance activity
of an acre or more of land without an approved soil erosion and sediment
control plan and stormwater management plan. Normal maintenance and
improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural use, as defined by the
Wetland Protection Act Regulation 310 CMR 10.4, are exempt. In addition,
as authorized in the Phase II Small MS4 General Permit for Massachusetts,
stormwater discharges resulting from the above activities that are subject
to jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act12 and demonstrate
compliance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy as
reflected in an order of conditions issued by the Town of Medfield
Conservation Commission are deemed to be in compliance with this Bylaw.
§ 235-4. Statutory authority.
Chapter 235 is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and
the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 235-5. Responsibility for administration.
The Director shall administer, implement and enforce Chapter 235. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated in
writing by the Director to employees or agents.
12.Editor's Note: See 310 CMR 10.00 et seq.
§ 235-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:131
§ 235-6. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the
purpose of Chapter 235. Failure by the Director to promulgate such rules
and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this
Bylaw.
§ 235-7. Inspections; submission of final plans.
The Director, or designated agent, shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the owner or person responsible for the
implementation of the plan wherein the work fails to comply with
the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as described in Article II,
§ 235-12, or stormwater management plan, as described in Article III,
§ 235-15, as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling work bearing civil engineer registered as a professional engineer
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall be maintained at the site
during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the permittee
shall notify the Department of Public Works at least two working days
before each of the following:
(1) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(2) Start of construction.
(3) Completion of site clearing.
(4) Completion of rough grading.
(5) Installation of stormwater controls.
(6) Close of the construction season.
(7) Completion of final landscaping.
A.
The person responsible for the implementation of the plan shall make
regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the
inspection schedule outlined on the approved soil erosion and sediment
control plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine
the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional
control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form
and submitted to the Department of Public Works at the time interval
specified in the approved permit.
B.
The Director, or designated agent, shall enter the property of the
applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure
the validity of the reports filed as noted above.
C.
The applicant shall submit an as-built plan for the stormwater controls
after the final construction is completed. The plan must show the final
design and specifications of all stormwater management systems and
must be prepared by a professional engineer.
D.
§ 235-6 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-8
1:132
§ 235-8. Project changes.
The permittee, or his or her agent, shall notify the Director in writing of any
change or alteration of a land-disturbing activity authorized in either the
soil erosion and sediment control plan or the stormwater management plan
before any change or alteration occurs. If the Director determines that the
change or alteration is significant, based on the design requirements listed
in this Bylaw and accepted construction practices, the Director may require
that an amended soil erosion and sediment control plan and/or stormwater
management plan application be filed. If any change or deviation from these
plans occurs during a project, the Director may require the installation of
interim measures before approving the change.
§ 235-9. Fees.
The appropriate application fee as established by the Director must
accompany each application. Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G, as amended,
applicants shall pay review fees, as determined by the Director, sufficient
to cover any expenses connected with any public hearing, review of the soil
erosion and sediment control plan, and site inspection.
§ 235-10. Surety.
Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G 1/2, as amended, the Director may require
the permittee to post a surety before the start of any land disturbance or
construction activity. The surety shall be in an amount deemed sufficient
by the Director to protect the Town's interests and ensure that the work
will be completed in accordance with the permit. If the project is phased,
the Director may release part of the surety as each phase is completed in
compliance with the permit but the surety may not be fully released until
the Director has received the final inspection report and issued a certificate
of completion.
§ 235-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Director, or an authorized employee or agent, shall enforce Chapter
235, regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and
may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Suspension of construction or site alteration activity. In the event that
the activity at a site violates the conditions as stated or shown on
the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan or stormwater
management plan in such a manner as the Director determines to
adversely affect the environment, public welfare/health and municipal
facilities, then the Director may suspend work until the violation is
corrected.
A.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this Bylaw or any
regulation permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Director may
seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
B.
§ 235-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-11
1:133
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
Orders.
The Director, or an authorized employee or agent, may issue a
written order to enforce the provisions of this Bylaw or the
regulations thereunder, which may include:
(a) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist; and
(b)
(c) Remediation of contamination.
(1)
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of contaminations is required, the order shall set a deadline by
which the abatement or remediation must be completed. The order
shall also state that, should the violator or property owner fail
to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline,
the Town of Medfield may, at its option, undertake the work, and
expenses shall be charged to the violator. Within 30 days after
completing all measures necessary to abate the violation or to
perform remediation, the violator and the property owner will be
notified of the costs incurred by the Town of Medfield, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the
Director within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of
the time in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a
decision of the Director affirming or reducing the costs, or from a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall
become a special assessment against the property owner and shall
constitute a lien on the owner's property for the amount of said
costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the
statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at
which the costs first become due.
(2)
C.
Criminal penalty. Any person, who violates any provision of this Bylaw,
or any regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Director may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D. The
penalty for the first violation shall be $100. The penalty for the second
violation shall be $200. The penalty for the third violation shall be $300.
Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
E.
§ 235-11 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-11
1:134
Appeals. The decision or orders of the Director shall be final. Further
relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in Chapter 235 are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
G.
§ 235-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-11
1:135

ARTICLE II
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 235-12. Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan at the same scale as the site plan,
which meets the design requirements of this Bylaw, shall be prepared and
submitted to the Department of Public Works. The plan shall include, but
not be limited to, the items listed below and, at a minimum, be designed
to provide sufficient information to evaluate the effectiveness and
acceptability of measures proposed for soil erosion and sediment control
during construction to protect the environment, public welfare/health, and
municipal facilities and utilities. The following information shall be detailed
on the plan:
Name, address and telephone number of owner, civil engineer and
person responsible for implementation of the plan.
A.
B. Property lines.
C. Location of all existing and proposed building and impervious surfaces.
Location of all existing and proposed stormwater utilities, including
structures, pipes, swales and detention basins.
D.
Soil erosion and sediment control provisions, including explanation of
technical basis used to select the practices chosen to minimize on-site
erosion and prevent off-site sediment transport, including provisions to
preserve topsoil and limit disturbance.
E.
Design details for both temporary and permanent erosion control
structures.
F.
The Director may require any additional information or data deemed
appropriate and/or may impose such conditions thereto as may be
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
Bylaw and regulations for the preservation of public health and safety.
G.
An attached vicinity map showing the location of the site in relationship
to the surrounding area's watercourses, water bodies and other
significant geographic features, and roads and other significant
structures.
H.
I. Suitable contours for the existing and proposed topography.
A clear and definite delineation of any areas of vegetation or tree
disturbance. Note all vegetation that is to be removed and all
vegetation that is to be saved.
J.
A clear and definite delineation of any wetlands, natural or artificial
water storage detention areas, and existing drainage ditches on the
site.
K.
§ 235-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:137
§ 235-13. Performance standards.
A construction project shall be considered in conformance with this Section
if construction means and methods have been effective in preventing soils
or other eroded matter from being deposited onto adjacent properties,
rights-of way, public storm drainage system, or wetland or watercourse. The
design, testing, installation, and maintenance of soil erosion and sediment
control operations and facilities shall adhere to the standards and
specifications contained in the Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment
Control Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas, dated March 1997,
reprint 2003, as it may be amended from time to time, and in accordance
with the latest version of the current edition of the Massachusetts
Stormwater Handbook, and EPA's current Construction General Permit
(CGP).
§ 235-14. Review and approval.
A description of construction and stockpile and/or excess materials
removed from the site expected to be stored on site. The plan shall
include a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these
materials, including storage practices to minimize exposure of the
materials to stormwater.
L.
A sequence of construction for the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping.
Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of
clearing, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
M.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan review is triggered by a
site development plan and/or a building permit application or other
activity that falls within the jurisdiction of this Bylaw. Applicants shall
be referred by the permit-issuing agency to the Department of Public
Works to conduct the soil erosion and sediment control plan review.
Activities that fall within the jurisdiction of this Bylaw that do not
require a permit from any Town department are not exempt from this
provision. In this situation, the applicant must seek a soil erosion and
sediment control plan review directly from the Department of Public
Works.
A.
The Department of Public Works will review each soil erosion and
sediment control plan to determine its conformance with the provisions
of this Bylaw. The Department of Public Works shall, in writing:
(1) Approve the plan as submitted; or
Approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
(2)
B.
§ 235-12 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-14
1:138
Disapprove the plan, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.
(3)
Approval of the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall remain in
effect for a term of one year. After one year, the owner must apply to
the Director for an extension, which will be approved at the Director's
discretion and in accordance with the Director's requirements.
C.
§ 235-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-14
1:139

ARTICLE III
Post-Construction Stormwater Management
§ 235-15. Stormwater management plan.
A stormwater management plan at the same scale as the site plan,
which meets the design requirements of this Bylaw, shall be prepared
by a licensed civil engineer and submitted to the Department of Public
Works. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the items listed
below and, at a minimum, be designed to provide sufficient information
to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the
potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing
stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that
all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall
be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. The minimum
information, in addition to the name, address and telephone number
of the owner, licensed civil engineer and person responsible for
implementation of the plan, submitted for support of a stormwater
management plan shall be as follows:
(1) Locus map.
Drainage area map showing drainage area and stormwater flow
paths.
(2)
(3) Location of existing and proposed utilities.
Location of all existing and proposed stormwater utilities, including
structures, pipes, swales and detention basins.
(4)
(5) Topographic survey showing existing and proposed contours.
Soils investigation, including borings or test pits, for areas where
construction of infiltration practices will occur.
(6)
Description of all watercourses, impoundments, and wetlands on or
adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows.
(7)
(8) Delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains, if applicable.
Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwater
elevation (November to April) in areas to be used for stormwater
retention, detention, or infiltration.
(9)
Existing and proposed locations, cross sections, and profiles of all
brooks, streams, drainage swales and the method of stabilization.
(10)
(11)Location of existing and proposed easements.
Proposed improvements, including location of buildings or other
structures, impervious surfaces and storm drainage facilities, if
applicable.
(12)
A.
§ 235-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-15
1:141
§ 235-16. Standards.
Control of stormwater runoff shall meet the requirements of the Town
of Medfield's Subdivision of Land Stormwater Management Regulations,
§ 310-5.2C, and performance standards for both flood control and nonpoint
source pollution reduction as defined in the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Policy and Handbook, current edition, as amended. All
assumptions, methodologies and procedures used to design stormwater
treatment practices and stormwater management practices shall
accompany the design. All activities, project design, stormwater treatment
practices and stormwater management practices should aim to minimize
stormwater runoff, maximize infiltration and recharge, where appropriate,
and minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff.
§ 235-17. Review and approval.
Structural details for all components of the proposed drainage
systems and stormwater management facilities.
(13)
Timing schedules and sequences of development, including
clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading, and
vegetative stabilization.
(14)
(15)Operation and maintenance schedule.
Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction
specifications, and details.
(16)
(17)Location of areas to be cleared of more than 50% of the vegetation.
The applicant should review the scope of work of the proposed project
with a representative of the Department of Public Works to determine
the requirements of the stormwater management plan. The Director
may waive any section or all of the stormwater management plan if he
or she determines that the activity involved has a de minimus impact on
the Town's stormwater management plan.
B.
A stormwater management plan review is triggered by a site
development plan and/or a building permit application or other activity
that falls within the jurisdiction of this Bylaw. Applicants shall be
referred by the permit-issuing agency to the Department of Public
Works to conduct the stormwater management plan review. Activities
that fall within the jurisdiction of this Bylaw that do not require a permit
from any Town department are not exempt from this provision. In this
situation, the applicant must seek stormwater management plan review
directly from the Director.
A.
The Director will review each stormwater management plan to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this Bylaw. The
Director shall, in writing:
(1) Approve the plan as submitted; or
B.
§ 235-15 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-17
1:142
§ 235-18. Operation and maintenance plans.
An operation and maintenance plan (O&M Plan) is required at the time
of application for all projects. The maintenance plan shall be designed
to ensure compliance with the permit in all seasons and throughout the
life of the system. The Director shall make the final decision of what
maintenance option is appropriate in a given situation. The Director will
consider natural features, proximity of site to water bodies and wetlands,
extent of impervious surfaces, size of the site, the types of stormwater
management structures, and potential need for ongoing maintenance
activities when making this decision. The O&M Plan shall identify and
include all required documents, including, but not limited to, maintenance
agreements and stormwater management easements. All documents shall
be submitted to Town Counsel for review and must be in a form satisfactory
to Town Counsel. The operation and maintenance plan shall remain on file
with the Department of Public Works and shall be an ongoing requirement.
The O&M Plan shall include:
Approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
(2)
Disapprove the plan, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.
(3)
Approval of the stormwater management plan shall remain in effect for
a term of one year. After one year, the owner must apply to the Director
for an extension which will be approved at the Director's discretion and
in accordance with the Director's requirements.
C.
A. The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
Maintenance agreement(s). The maintenance agreement shall include:
The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the person(s)
responsible for operation and maintenance.
(1)
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and
emergency repairs.
(2)
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures, including
swales and ponds, and the estimated life span of the system.
(3)
(4) A list of easements with the purpose and location of each.
(5) The signature(s) of the owner(s).
A provision requiring a documentation submittal to Department of
Public Works confirming when maintenance has been satisfactory
completed.
(6)
B.
C. Stormwater management easement(s).
§ 235-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:143
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the
property owner(s) as necessary for:
(a) Access for facility inspections and maintenance.
Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the
one-hundred-year storm event.
(b)
Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to structures
requiring regular cleanout.
(c)
(1)
Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used
for off-site stormwater control, unless the Director grants a waiver.
(2)
Easements shall be recorded with the County Registry of Deeds or
Land Court prior to issuance of a certificate of completion by the
Director.
(3)
Changes to operation and maintenance plans.
The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify
the Director of changes in ownership or assignment of financial
responsibility.
(1)
The maintenance schedule in the maintenance agreement may
be amended to achieve the purposes of this Bylaw by mutual
agreement of the Director and the responsible parties.
Amendments must be in writing and signed by all responsible
parties. Responsible parties shall include owner(s), persons with
financial responsibility, and persons with operational responsibility.
(2)
D.
§ 235-18 MEDFIELD CODE § 235-18
1:144
Chapter 240
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 190.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 210.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 235-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-18
1:145

ARTICLE I
Administration
[Adopted as Art. II, Secs. 4 and 23, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 240-1. Notice of repairs. [5-4-1981]
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen, when they decide to rebuild or
extensively repair any street or way, and as long before such rebuilding or
repair as is practicable, to give notice in writing of such proposed action to
the Water and Sewerage Board and to such other officers of the Town, if
any, as may be likely to have occasion to open such ways or streets.
§ 240-2. Relocation of street lights.
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to relocate and change streetlights
whenever they shall determine that such relocation or change is necessary
for the safety and general welfare of the public.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:147

ARTICLE II
Use Restrictions
[Adopted as Art. IV, Secs. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 32, of the
1926 Bylaws]
§ 240-3. Leaving objects in public way.
No person without permission from the Selectmen shall place or cause to
be placed upon any public way or sidewalk any object in a manner which
obstructs the safe passage of pedestrians or vehicles and allow the same to
remain for more than one hour, or more than 10 minutes after being notified
to remove the same by a constable, police officer or the Selectmen. Fine:
$50 (Medfield police officers).
§ 240-4. Carrying items through Town. [ATM 4-26-1994]
No person shall carry in or through any of the streets, squares, courts,
lanes, avenues, roads, places or alleys, within the Town of Medfield, any
house dirt, ashes, garbage, or house offal, either animal or vegetable, or
any grease or bones, or any refuse substances from any of the dwelling
houses or other buildings or places in the Town, except upon such terms
and conditions as the Board of Health may deem the health and interest of
the Town requires. Fine: $50 (Medfield police officers or Board of Health
enforcement officer).
§ 240-5. Leaving waste within Town. [ATM 4-26-1994]
No person shall, without the permission of the Board of Health, throw into,
or leave in, or upon any street, court, square, pond or body of water or
vacant lot within the limits of the Town, where it would be offensive and
injurious to health, any dead animal, dirt, sawdust, soot, ashes, cinders,
shavings, hair, shreds, manure, oyster, clam or lobster shells, wastewater,
rubbish or filth of any kind, or any refuse, animal or vegetable matter
whatsoever. Fine: $50 (Medfield police officers or Board of Health
enforcement officer).
§ 240-6. Public performances or meetings.
No person or persons shall play or perform on any musical instrument, sing,
parade, hold a public meeting, make a public address, march or congregate
in any public way or public place, except in connection with a funeral, or
in connection with rights constitutionally granted, without a written permit
from the Board of Selectmen. Fine: $30 (Medfield police officers).
§ 240-7. Vehicles upon sidewalks or public playing fields.
No person shall ride or otherwise use roller skates, in-line skates,
skateboard, bicycle, unicycle, or any other similar devices, except a
wheelchair or a children's hand carriage, over or upon any public
A.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7
1:149
§ 240-8. Playing in street restricted. [ATM 4-24-1995]
No person shall play at any game of ball, or football, or throw balls or stones
or snowballs within any of the public ways, so as to endanger the public.
Fine: $20 (Medfield police officers).
§ 240-9. Structures overhanging sidewalks.
No person shall place or maintain any structure or object over any sidewalk
without a permit from the Board of Selectmen; no such structure or object
shall be less than seven feet from the ground in the lowest part, nor extend
beyond the line of the sidewalk.
§ 240-10. Gates; vegetation overhanging public ways. [ATM
5-1-1990]
No owner or occupant of property shall permit any gate leading to premises
abutting on any public way in the Town to swing outwardly upon said public
way; nor shall any such owner or occupant permit any bushes, shrubs, trees
or other vegetation to overhang any public way, including sidewalks, so as
to impede free passage upon such way.
§ 240-11. Interference with emergency lights.
No person shall, without proper authority, extinguish or remove any light or
sign placed to denote an obstruction or defect in a street or way.
§ 240-12. Signs in public ways. [ATM 4-26-2004]
No person shall attach or otherwise post any commercial sign within any
public right-of-way or upon any building, pole, post, or other structure or
any tree located therein, provided that the Board of Selectmen, upon prior
application, may permit a local municipal body or nonprofit organization
to place a public notice at a designated location(s) within the public way;
provided, further, that such notice shall be mounted upon a moveable
signboard and shall contain only a description of the event or activity, the
date, time, and place, and the name of the sponsoring body or organization.
Fine: $25 (Medfield police officers).
sidewalk or footpath so as to endanger the public. Fine: $30 (Medfield
police officers). [ATM 4-24-1995]
No person shall drive a motorcycle or other vehicle on any public
playing field or playground without permission from Town officials
with jurisdiction over the property, except motorized wheelchairs. Fine:
$250 (Medfield police officers).
B.
§ 240-7 MEDFIELD CODE § 240-13
1:150
§ 240-13. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 240-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-13
1:151

ARTICLE III
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 11, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 240-14. Premises open to public.
No owner, tenant, occupant or agent in charge of an estate used wholly or in
part for stores, offices or places of public resort shall place any snow or ice
on a sidewalk on which such store, office or place of public resort abuts, nor
suffer any snow or ice to remain thereon for more than five hours between
sunrise and sunset. If snow or ice, through weather conditions, is evenly
spread over a sidewalk and frozen thereto so as to be difficult to remove, it
may remain until it can be more easily removed, if the sidewalk be kept in
safe condition by sanding or otherwise.
§ 240-15. Placing snow on ways open to public prohibited. [ATM
4-26-1994]
No person shall cast or plow snow into a public way or private way open
to the public, or plow snow across such a way to the other side. Fine: $100
(Medfield police officers or Highway Superintendent).
§ 240-16. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 240-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16
1:153

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 14, of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 240-17. Permit required.
No person, other than a duly authorized officer or employee, shall dig a
trench or lay a pipe in, or in any way disturb the earth or materials on, in
or under any street or public way without a permit in writing given by the
Board of Selectmen upon application by said person made to said Board;
and whenever such a permit is so issued, the person or persons to whom
it shall be issued shall file with said Board a plan of the same, showing the
location and elevation of such pipe, drain or other structure, said plan to be
of such size and standard as said Board may require. Fine: $100 (Medfield
police officers or Highway Superintendent).
§ 240-18. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 240-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-18
1:155

ARTICLE V
Driveways
[Adopted 10-19-1959 (Art. IV, Sec. 22, of the 1926 Bylaws)]
§ 240-19. Permit required for construction or alteration.
No driveway or other access to a public street shall be constructed or
altered at the point of intersection with such street unless a written permit
is first obtained from the Highway Superintendent. No building permit shall
be issued for the construction of a new building or structure unless such
access permit has first been obtained.
§ 240-20. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 240-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-20
1:157
Chapter 250
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council on Aging — See Ch. 10, Art. III.
§ 240-20 MEDFIELD CODE § 240-20
1:158
ARTICLE I
Senior Tax Work-Off Program
[Adopted ATM 4-24-2000]
§ 250-1. Program established.
The Board of Selectmen shall designate the Council on Aging to administer
a Senior Tax Work-Off Program in accordance with the provisions MGL
c. 59, § 5K, in accordance with the following local rules and procedures.
§ 250-2. Hourly rate for volunteer services.
The hourly rate at which the volunteer services are to be credited shall be
the minimum wage of the Commonwealth in effect at the time the services
are provided.
§ 250-3. Maximum amount of tax reduction. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 32]
The maximum amount by which the real property tax obligation of any one
volunteer may be reduced in any given tax year shall not exceed $1,000, or
such other maximum amount as may from time to time be established by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 250-4. Age qualification.
A volunteer must have reached 60 years of age by the July 1 of the fiscal tax
year for which the tax credit is given.
§ 250-5. Income eligibility.
There shall be no income eligibility for participation in the program.
§ 250-6. Application of credits.
Tax credits may be applied only towards real property which the volunteer
occupies as a principal residence and has property tax liability.
§ 250-7. Town officials or employees ineligible.
Elected officials serving on any Town board, committee or commission or
individuals who are or were compensated, full-time employees of the Town
during the fiscal year for which the tax credit is sought shall be ineligible to
participate in the program.
§ 250-8. Number of participants.
The Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Council on Aging, shall
determine annually the maximum number of residents who may participate
in the program and shall advise the Board of Assessors of this number prior
to the start of the fiscal year for which tax credits are to be given.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9
1:159
§ 250-9. Eligible services.
The Council on Aging shall have the sole discretion to review and approve
volunteer services to be included in the program and to place and/or assign
eligible residents to perform such services. To assist them in making these
decisions, the Council on Aging may solicit requests for volunteer services
from the various Town departments.
§ 250-10. Certification of hours served; application of credit.
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
The Council on Aging will certify the amount of volunteer services
performed by each participating taxpayer to the Medfield Board of
Assessors on or before December 1 of the year for which tax credits are to
be given. Upon timely receipt of this certification, the Board of Assessors
shall credit the real property tax obligations of the participating taxpayers
in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per taxpayer, or such other maximum
amount as may from time to time be established by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. A copy of each taxpayer's certification will be given to that
taxpayer. This credit shall be in addition to any exemption or abatement for
which the volunteer may otherwise be eligible.
§ 250-11. Statutory authority.
All of these procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 59, § 5K, as they may from time to time be amended.
§ 250-9 MEDFIELD CODE § 250-11
1:160
Chapter 260
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storage of motor vehicles — See Ch. 200, Art.
I.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 210.
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
§ 250-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11
1:161

ARTICLE I
Removal of Vehicles Interfering with Snow Plowing Operations
[Adopted as Art. VI of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 260-1. Removal authorized; liability for costs.
Any vehicle interfering with plowing of snow or removing ice from any way
may be removed by the Highway Superintendent or other officer having
charge of ways to some convenient place, including in such term a public
garage, and the cost of such removal and of the storage charge, if any, shall
be imposed upon the owner of such vehicle.
§ 260-2. Violations and penalties. [ATM 4-26-1994]
Fine: $100 plus cost of towing and storage (Medfield police officers or
Highway Superintendent).
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:163

ARTICLE II
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted as Art. X of the 1926 Bylaws]
§ 260-3. Unauthorized parking prohibited. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 32]
No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or like means of
transportation in a designated parking space that is reserved for vehicles
owned and operated by disabled veterans or by handicapped persons unless
said vehicle bears the distinctive number plates or placards authorized by
MGL c. 90, § 2, or bears the official identification of a handicapped person
issued by any jurisdiction.
§ 260-4. Requirements for spaces. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art.
32]
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way
or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for
businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational
facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings, or for any other place
where the public has right of access as invitees or licensees shall reserve
parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and
operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears
the distinguishing license plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, according to
the following formulas:
Number of Parking Spaces in Area
More Than
But Not More
Than
Number of Required
Handicapped Spaces
15 25 1
25 40 5% of such spaces, but not less
than 2
40 100 4% of such spaces, but not less
than 3
100 200 3% of such spaces, but not less
than 4
200 500 2% of such spaces, but not less
than 6
500 1,000 1 1/2% of such spaces, but not less
than 10
1,000 2,000 1% of such spaces, but not less
than 15
2,000 5,000 3/4 of 1% of such spaces, but not
less than 20
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:165
Number of Parking Spaces in Area
More Than
But Not More
Than
Number of Required
Handicapped Spaces
5,000 1/2 of 1% of such spaces, but not
less than 38
§ 260-5. Sign requirements for spaces; size; access. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of §§ 260-3 and
260-4 shall be identified by use of above grade signs with white lettering
against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking:
Special Plate Required. Unauthorized Vehicles May Be Removed At Owner's
Expense"; shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway;
and shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person. In accordance with
MGL c. 40, § 21, cl. 23(b), the spaces shall be at least eight feet wide,
not including the cross-hatch access aisle as defined by the Architectural
Access Board established in MGL c. 22, § 13A. The cross-hatch access aisle
abutting a handicapped parking space shall be considered part of the
handicapped parking space to which it abuts to provide individuals who use
wheelchairs or other mobility aids with sufficient space to enter and exit
their vehicles. No person shall park in the cross-hatched access aisle.
§ 260-6. Unauthorized vehicles or blocking access prohibited.
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 32]
Unauthorized vehicles shall be prohibited within parking spaces, including
the cross-hatch areas, designated for use by disabled veterans or
handicapped persons as authorized by §§ 260-3 and 260-4 or in such a
manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designated for use by handicapped
persons as a means of egress to a street or public way.
§ 260-7. Violations and penalties. [ATM 4-26-1994]
The penalty for violation of this Bylaw shall be as follows (Medfield
police officers):
(1) First offense: $15.
(2) Second offense: $25.
Third and subsequent offenses: $50 plus cost of towing and
storage.
(3)
A.
The vehicle may be removed according to the provisions of MGL c. 30,
§ 22D.
B.
§ 260-4 MEDFIELD CODE § 260-7
1:166
Chapter 270
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 235.
Wells and cesspools — See Ch. 280.
Wetlands — See Ch. 290.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:167

ARTICLE I
Water Conservation: Water Use Restriction and Ban
[Adopted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 3313]
§ 270-1. Authority.
This Article is adopted by the Town of Medfield under its police powers
to protect public health, safety and welfare and implements the Town's
authority to regulate, limit and prohibit water use. This Article also
implements the Town's authority under MGL c. 40, § 41A, conditioned upon
a declaration of water supply emergency issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 270-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or water ban by providing for enforcement of any dulyimposed
prohibitions, restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions
imposed by the Town or by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 270-3. Application and exemptions.
§ 270-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MEDFIELD WATER SUPPLY — The system of Town-owned wells and pipes
used to distribute drinking water and provide fire protection as well as all
sources for said water, including subsurface aquifer(s).
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or
other entity located in Medfield and who is connected to the Medfield water
supply.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the Town pursuant to § 270-5 of this Article.
WATER BAN — A state of elevated water restrictions declared by the Town
pursuant to § 270-7 of this Article.
Water supply conservation measures apply to public water supply users
only.
A.
Commercial agricultural users shall be exempt from all provisions of
this Article. The Town of Medfield is exempt from all provisions of this
Article to extent required to protect public assets.
B.
13.Editor's Note: This Article also repealed former Art. I, Water Conservation, adopted as Art.
IV, Sec. 29, of the 1926 Bylaws, as amended.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-5
1:169
§ 270-5. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
As required by the Town's Water Management Act permit, the Board of
Selectmen, upon recommendation of the Board of Water and Sewerage,
shall declare a state of water supply conservation no later than the first
Monday in June through, at the earliest, the second Monday in September
each year. Outdoor water use restrictions outlines in § 270-6 shall be
applicable to all water users of the public water system regardless of
any person's responsibility for paying water bills for water used at any
particular facility. The Board of Selectmen may extend the state of water
supply conservation if they determine that a shortage of water exists,
or may reasonably be determined to be imminent, and that conservation
measures are appropriate to ensure the safe and adequate supply of water
to all water consumers.
§ 270-6. State of water supply conservation restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water conservation shall include, but not be
limited to, one or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or
requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the public
supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be
included in the public notice required under § 270-9.
§ 270-7. Declaration of water ban.
If the Board of Selectmen, upon recommendation of the Board of Water and
Sewerage, make a specific finding that the shortage of water exists because
of a clear and imminent threat to the aquifer(s) underlying Medfield, such
threats to include severe drought or environmental pollution, the Board
of Selectmen may elevate the state of water supply conservation to a
water ban, either partial or total. The applicable restrictions, conditions or
requirements shall be included in the public notice required under § 270-9.
§ 270-8. Water ban restricted water uses.
One day per week outdoor watering. Outdoor watering using sprinklers
or automated irrigation systems is restricted to one day.
A.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is prohibited between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
B.
A declaration of a partial water ban may include, but not be limited to,
one or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements
limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the public supply. The
applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in
the public notice required under § 270-9.
Prohibition on the use of sprinklers and automatic sprinkler
systems.
(1)
Limitation on outdoor watering to handheld watering of vegetable
and flower gardens.
(2)
A.
§ 270-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-8
1:170
§ 270-9. Public notification of state of water supply conservation or
water ban; notification of DEP.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed
by the Town as part of a state of water supply conservation or water ban
shall be published on the official Town of Medfield website, or by such other
means reasonably calculated to reach and inform users of water of the state
of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed under § 270-6 or
§ 270-8 shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification
of the state of water supply conservation shall also be simultaneously
provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 270-10. Termination of state of water supply conservation or
water ban; notice.
A state of water supply conservation or water ban may be terminated by
the Board of Selectmen, upon recommendation of the Board of Water and
Sewerage, upon their determination that the water supply shortage no
longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a state of water supply
conservation or water ban shall be given in the manner provided in § 270-9.
§ 270-11. State of water supply emergency; compliance with DEP
orders.
If the Department of Environment Protection declares a state of water
supply emergency under MGL c. 21G, § 15-17, no person shall violate any
provision, restriction, requirement or condition of any order approved or
issued by the Department intended to bring about an end to the state of
emergency.
§ 270-12. Posting of notice of private irrigation wells.
Persons who have private wells for lawn irrigation must prominently display
signs visible to the public that include the following phrase "PRIVATE WELL
WATER IN USE." Signs must be displayed whenever the irrigation system is
in use. False posting is prohibited.
§ 270-13. Violations and penalties.
Prohibition on handwashing of exterior building surfaces, parking
lots, sidewalks, driveways and patios.
(3)
Prohibition on washing of vehicles, except in commercial car
washes.
(4)
(5) Mandatory water use reductions by commercial/industrial users.
A declaration of a total water ban may include a total ban on outdoor
water use, with or without stated exceptions; the applicable
restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public
notice required under § 270-9.
B.
§ 270-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-13
1:171
§ 270-14. Enforcement authority.
The Board of Selectmen and their designee(s), Director of Public Works
and his designee(s), Medfield Police Department, Building Commissioner,
Conservation Agent, and Board of Health Agent shall each have authority to
enforce the provisions of this Bylaw.
Any violation of this Bylaw shall subject the violator to a fine as follows:
(1) First violation (within calendar year): a written warning.
(2) Second violation: a fine of $50.
(3) Every violation thereafter: a fine of $200.
A.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a new and separate
offense.
B.
§ 270-13 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-14
1:172
ARTICLE II
Public Water Supply System
[Adopted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 34]
§ 270-15. Water Department access.
As provided in MGL c. 165, § 11D, a water customer shall provide access
to the Water Department during regular business hours and, in the event
of an emergency, at all other times, to permit Water Department employees
or contractors to inspect, test, repair and/or replace the water service or
any component thereof or the water meter for the premises. In the event of
a water customer's failure to provide access, the Director of Public Works
or his designee shall transmit a written request for access to the customer,
specifying the purpose and date(s) and time(s); if the water customer fails
to provide access at the requested date(s) and time(s); or within 30 days
following receipt of the written request, whichever is later, then the water
customer shall be liable for a fine of $25 per day for each day thereafter,
until the water customer provides the requested access. This provision may
be enforced by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.
§ 270-16. Authority of Board of Water and Sewerage to promulgate
regulations. [Added 4-30-2018 ATM by Art. 3914]
The Board of Water and Sewerage is hereby authorized to promulgate
written regulations governing the operation of the public water supply
system and the regulation of its customers/consumers. Said regulations,
once promulgated, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and posted in a
conspicuous place in or near its offices in the Town House to which the
general public has access.
§ 270-17. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-30-2018 ATM by Art.
39]
Any person who engages in conduct prohibited by said regulations and not
otherwise prohibited by Massachusetts General Laws or these Bylaws shall
be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense,
$300 for the third offense and $300 for each subsequent offense; in the
case of continuing offense, each day shall constitute a separate offense. The
Board of Water and Sewerage, DPW Director or his or her designee and
the Medfield Police Department shall each have authority to enforce the
provisions of this Bylaw.
14.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former §§ 270-16 through 270-25 as §§ 270-18
through 270-27, respectively.
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:173

ARTICLE III
Water Pollution Abatement
[Adopted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 38]
§ 270-18. Purpose.
§ 270-19. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Bylaw, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Medfield Department of
Public Works, its employees or any agents designated by the Medfield
Department of Public Works to enforce this Bylaw.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), as hereafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or Commonwealth from any source.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance,
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system or
a watercourse, including, without limitation, sewage, process wastewater,
or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets,
Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of
impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies;
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
A.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm
drain system and watercourses is necessary for the protection of the
Town of Medfield's water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the
public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
B.
The objectives of this Bylaw are:
To prevent pollutants from entering the Town of Medfield municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) or watercourses;
(1)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4 and watercourses;
(2)
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(4)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
(5)
C.
§ 270-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-19
1:175
regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted,
or approved before the effective date of this Bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system or a watercourse that is not composed entirely of stormwater,
except as exempted in § 270-19.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. "Impervious
surface" includes, without limitation, roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
and rooftops.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Medfield.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter,
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
§ 270-19 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-19
1:176
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
STORMWATER — Runoff from precipitation or snow melt, and surface
water runoff and drainage.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL or WASTE — Any material which,
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that, during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the Commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and
groundwater.
§ 270-20. Applicability.
This Bylaw shall apply to all water entering the municipal storm drain
system or going, directly or indirectly, into a watercourse or waters of the
Commonwealth, that will be generated on any developed or undeveloped
lands except as explicitly exempted in this Bylaw.
§ 270-21. Prohibited activities; exemptions.
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, spill, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the
A.
§ 270-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-21
1:177
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), onto an impervious
surface directly connected to the MS4, or, directly or indirectly, into a
watercourse or waters of the Commonwealth.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
B.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
municipal storm drain system without prior consent from the
authorized enforcement agency.
C.
Exemptions.
(1) Discharge or flow resulting from fire-fighting activities;
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from
the prohibitions of non-stormwater, provided that the source is not
a significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain
system or, directly or indirectly, to a watercourse or waters of the
Commonwealth:
(a) Waterline flushing;
Flow from potable water sources, with the exception of
landscape irrigation and lawn watering;
(b)
(c) Springs;
(d) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(e) Diverted stream flow;
(f) Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater (e.g.,
sump pump), provided that where a pump intake exists inside
a structure, the operator seeks a permit from the authorized
enforcement agency prior to discharge and thereafter
discharges in accordance with the requirements of the permit
and applicable laws and regulations to be issued by the
authorized enforcement agency;
(g)
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, or air-conditioning condensation;
(h)
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than
one ppm chlorine), provided the water is allowed to stand for
one week prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a
way as not to cause a nuisance;
(i)
(2)
D.
§ 270-21 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-21
1:178
§ 270-22. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The authorized enforcement agency may suspend municipal storm drain
system access to any person or property without prior written notice when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of
pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the authorized enforcement agency may take
all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
§ 270-23. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage
system or waters of the Commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure containment and cleanup of the release. In the event of a
release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify
the municipal Fire and Police Departments. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency no later than the next business day. The reporting
person shall provide written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or inperson
notifications within three business days thereafter. If the discharge
of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility
owner or operator of the facility shall retain on site a written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
(j) Discharge from street sweeping;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the
authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test;
(k)
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the
authority of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with
the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable
laws and regulations; and
(l)
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received
from the authorized enforcement agency as necessary to
protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
(m)
§ 270-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-24
1:179
§ 270-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The authorized enforcement agency shall enforce this Bylaw, and any
associated regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders
and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this Bylaw, or any
associated regulations, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the
authorized enforcement agency may seek injunctive relief in a court
of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
A.
Orders.
The authorized enforcement agency may issue a written order to
enforce the provisions of this Bylaw or any regulations thereunder,
which may include:
(a) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
Elimination of discharges to the MS4 or, directly or indirectly,
into a watercourse or into the waters of the Commonwealth.
(b)
(c) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(d)
That measures shall be taken to minimize the discharge of
pollutants until such time as the illicit connection shall be
eliminated; and
(e)
(f) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
(1)
If the authorized enforcement agency determines that abatement
or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set
forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be
completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator
or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the
specified deadline, the Town may, at its option, undertake such
work, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2)
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate
the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the
property owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town,
including administrative costs. The violator or property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs
with the authorized enforcement agency within 30 days of receipt
of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not
received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest or
within 30 days following a decision of the authorized enforcement
agency affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of
(3)
B.
§ 270-24 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-24
1:180
§ 270-25. Regulations and guidance.
The authorized enforcement agency may promulgate rules and regulations
to effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw after conducting a public hearing
to receive comments. Such hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper
of general local circulation at least 14 days prior to the hearing date.
Failure by the authorized enforcement agency to promulgate such rules
and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this
Bylaw.
a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special
assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a lien
on the owner's property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall
begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided
in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at which the costs first
become due.
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Code of the Town of
Medfield Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-1, of the Town
of Medfield General Bylaws, in which case the authorized enforcement
agency shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation
shall be a warning. The penalty for the second violation shall be $100.
The penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300.
Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
D.
Entry to perform duties under this Bylaw. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the authorized enforcement agency, its agents, officers, and
employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose
of performing their duties under this Bylaw and regulations and may
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as
the authorized enforcement agency deems reasonably necessary.
E.
Appeals. The decisions or orders of the authorized enforcement agency
shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
F.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
G.
§ 270-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-26
1:181
§ 270-26. Transitional provisions.
Residential property owners shall have 60 days from the effective date of
this Bylaw to comply with its provisions, provided good cause is shown for
the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period.
§ 270-27. Severability.
The provisions of this Bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Bylaw or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
Bylaw.
§ 270-26 MEDFIELD CODE § 270-27
1:182
Chapter 280
WELLS AND CESSPOOLS
§ 280-1. Securing facility required.
Owners of land whereon is located an abandoned well, a well in use, or a
cesspool are required to secure same to the satisfaction of the Inspector of
Buildings or the Chief of Police or the Board of Health agent.
§ 280-2. Violations and penalties. [5-4-1981; amended ATM
4-26-1994]
Whoever violates any Section of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 for each offense, which shall inure to the Town. Such fines
shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a district court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws.
Chapter 290
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 310.
§ 290-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the wetlands of the Town of Medfield
by controlling activities deemed to have a significant effect upon wetland
values, including but not limited to the following: public or private water
supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion control, storm damage
prevention, water pollution control, wildlife habitat, recreation, and
aesthetics (collectively, the "interests protected by this Bylaw").
§ 290-2. Restricted activities; application for permit; outside
consultants.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon or alter the following
resource areas: any freshwater wetland, bordering vegetated wetland,
certifiable vernal pools, marsh, wet meadow, bog or swamp; any bank,
beach, lake, river, pond, stream or any land under said waters; any
land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater, surface water
or storm flowage; or any riverfront area; or any 50-foot buffer zone
without receiving a permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw. Any proposed
work which falls within 100 feet of any freshwater wetland, bordering
vegetated wetland, vernal pool, marsh, wet meadow, bog or swamp;
any bank, beach, lake, river, pond, stream or any land under said
A.
§ 270-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2
1:183
waters, within 100 feet of any land subject to flooding or inundation,
or within 100 feet of the 100-year storm line must be permitted by the
Conservation Commission. [ATM 4-26-1999]
The application for a permit shall be a written application and shall
include plans that fully describe such removal, filling, dredging,
altering, and building and its effect on the environment. No such
activity shall commence until after receiving and complying with the
permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
B.
Such application may be identical in form to a notice of intent filed
pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, shall be sent by certified mail to the
Medfield Conservation Commission (the "Commission") and shall be
accompanied by a filing fee payable to the Town of Medfield. The
amount of the filing fee shall be set by the Commission and published
in its rules and regulations. No filing fee is required when the Town of
Medfield files an application for a permit. The application may be filed
before other permits, variances and approvals required by the Zoning
Bylaw,15 the Subdivision Control Law16 or any other Bylaw or regulation
have been obtained. Copies of the application shall be sent at the same
time, by certified mail, to the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board
and the Board of Health.
C.
Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G, and regulations promulgated by the
Commission, the Commission may impose reasonable fees upon
applicants for the purpose of securing outside consultants, including
engineers, wetlands scientists, wildlife biologists or other experts, in
order to aid in the review of proposed projects. Such funds shall be
deposited with the Town Treasurer, who shall create an account
specifically for this purpose. Additional consultant fees may be
requested where the requisite review is more expensive than originally
calculated or where new information requires additional consultant
services.
Only costs relating to consultant work done in connection with
a project for which a consultant fee has been collected shall be
paid from this account, and expenditures may be made at the sole
discretion of the Commission.
(1)
Any consultant hired under this provision shall be selected by,
and report exclusively to, the Commission. The Commission shall
provide applicants with written notice of the selection of a
consultant, identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to
be charged to the applicant and a request for payment of that
fee. Notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date it is
mailed or delivered. The applicant may withdraw the application or
request within five business days of the date notice is given without
incurring any costs or expenses.
(2)
D.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
16.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG; and Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
§ 290-2 MEDFIELD CODE § 290-2
1:184
§ 290-3. Applicability.
§ 290-4. Public hearing.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within 21
days of its receipt. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
given by the Commission at the expense of the applicant, not less than
five days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in Medfield and by mailing a notice to the applicant, the Board
of Health, Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and to such other persons as
the Commission may by regulation determine.
§ 290-5. Permit issuance; conditions.
If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that the area which
is the subject of the application is significant to the interests protected by
this Bylaw, the Commission shall, within 21 days of such hearing, issue or
The entire fee must be received before the initiation of consulting
services. Failure by the applicant to pay the requested consultant
fee within 10 business days of the request for payment shall be
cause for the Commission to declare the application
administratively incomplete and deny the permit without prejudice,
except in the case of an appeal. The Commission shall inform
the applicant and Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection of such a decision in writing.
(3)
The applicant may appeal the selection of an outside consultant
to the Board of Selectmen, who may disqualify the consultant only
on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or is
not properly qualified. The minimum qualifications shall consist of
either an educational degree or three or more years of practice in
the field at issue, or a related field. The applicant shall make such
an appeal in writing, which must be received within 10 business
days of the date that the request for consultant fees was made
by the Commission. Such appeal shall extend the applicable time
limits for action upon the application.
(4)
Upon written request of any person, the Commission shall, within
21 days, make a written determination as to whether this Bylaw is
applicable to any land or work thereon. When the person requesting a
determination is other than the owner, notice of the determination shall
be sent to the owner as well as to the requesting person.
A.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to work performed for
normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural use nor to
work performed in the course of maintaining, repairing or replacing,
but not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully
located structure or facility used in the service of the public and used
to provide electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph and other
telecommunications services.
B.
§ 290-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:185
deny a permit for the work requested. If it issues a permit after making
such determination, the Commission shall impose such conditions as it
determines are necessary or desirable for protection of those interests,
and all work shall be done in accordance with those conditions. If the
Commission determines that the area which is the subject of the application
is not significant to the interests protected by this Bylaw, or that the
proposed activity does not require the imposition of conditions, it shall issue
a permit without conditions within 21 days of the public hearing. Permits
shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless renewed prior to
expiration, and all work shall be completed prior to expiration. Copies of the
permit shall be sent to the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board and the
Board of Health. A copy shall also be sent to the Registry of Deeds to be
recorded with the deed.
§ 290-6. Relationship to state law.
The Commission shall not impose additional or more stringent conditions
pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, than it imposes pursuant to this Bylaw, nor
shall it require a notice of intention pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, to provide
materials or data in addition to those required pursuant to this Bylaw.
§ 290-7. Emergency projects.
This Bylaw shall not apply to any emergency project as defined in MGL
c. 131, § 40.
§ 290-8. Preacquisition violation.
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate upon
which work has been done in violation of the provisions of this Bylaw or
in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw shall forthwith
comply with any such order or restore such land to its condition prior
to any such violation; provided, however, that no action, civil or criminal,
shall be brought against such person unless commenced within three years
following the date of acquisition of the real estate by such person.
§ 290-9. Rules and regulations.
After due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate rules
and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw. Failure by the
Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration
of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the
effect of this Bylaw. Changes in the rules and regulations may be made at
any time, after due notice and a public hearing on the changes.
§ 290-10. Burden of proof.
The applicant shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of
credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not harm
the interests protected by this Bylaw. Failure to provide adequate evidence
to the Commission supporting a determination that the proposed work will
§ 290-5 MEDFIELD CODE § 290-10
1:186
not harm the interests protected by this Bylaw shall be sufficient cause for
the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions, or, in the
Commission's discretion, to continue the hearing to another date to enable
the applicant or others to present additional evidence.
§ 290-11. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this Bylaw:
ALTER — Shall include, without limitation, the following actions when
undertaken in areas subject to this Bylaw:
BANKS — That part of land adjoining any body of water which confines
the water.
IMPROVEMENT OF LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Includes more
extensive practices such as the building of ponds, dams, structures
for water control, water and sediment basins, and related activities,
but only where a plan for such activity approved by the Conservation
District of the Soil Conservation Service is furnished to the Commission
prior to the commencement of work. All such activity shall subsequently
be carried out in accord with said plan. In the event that the work is not
carried out in accordance with the required plan, the Commission may
place a stop order on said work and have recourse to such measures as
if the plan were a permit.
LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Any qualifying wetland within a
farm which is qualified or eligible to be qualified under the Farmland
Assessment Act, MGL c. 61A, §§ 1 through 5.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE OR IMPROVEMENT OF LAND IN
AGRICULTURAL USE — Only:
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
material of any kind;
(1)
Changing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics,
salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns and
flood retention characteristics;
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality;
(4)
(5) Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structures of any kind;
Placing of obstructions, whether or not they interfere with the flow
of water;
(6)
(7) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
Changing of water temperature, or biochemical characteristics of
water which confines the water.
(8)
A.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-11
1:187
§ 290-12. Security.
The Commission may require, as a permit condition, that the performance
and observance of other conditions be secured by one or both of the
following methods:
PERSON — Shall include any individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town Bylaws, administrative agencies, public or quasi-public
corporations or bodies, the Town of Medfield, and any other legal entity,
its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
QUALIFYING WETLAND — Only inland freshwater areas which are
seasonally flooded basins or flats or inland fresh meadows.
VERNAL POOL — Shall include, in addition to scientific definitions
found in the regulations under the Wetlands Protection Act, any
confined basin or depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens,
landscaped areas or driveways which, at least in most years, holds
water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring and/
or summer, contains at least 200 cubic feet of water at some time
during most years, is free of adult predatory fish populations, and which
actually provides essential breeding and rearing habitat functions for
amphibian, reptile or other vernal pool community species, regardless
of whether the site has been certified by the Massachusetts Division
of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of the resource area for vernal
pools shall be 100 feet outward from the mean annual high-water line
defining the depression, but shall not include existing lawns, gardens,
landscaped or developed areas.
(1) Tilling practices customarily employed in the raising of crops;
Pasturing of animals, including such fences and protective
structures as may be required;
(2)
Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and similar materials
subject to state and federal regulations covering their use;
(3)
Constructing, grading, or restoring of field ditches, subsurface
drains, grass waterways, culverts, access roads, and similar
practices to improve drainage, prevent erosion, provide more
effective use of rainfall, and improve equipment operation and
efficiency, in order to improve conditions for the growing of crops.
(4)
The Commission may adopt additional definitions not inconsistent with
this § 290-11 in its regulations promulgated pursuant to § 290-9.
B.
By a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities under
a written third-party escrow arrangement, or other undertaking of
financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission, said
security to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a certificate
of compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit.
A.
§ 290-11 MEDFIELD CODE § 290-12
1:188
§ 290-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 150.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 200.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 210.
Wetlands — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 310.
By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant running with
the land, executed and properly recorded (or registered, in the case of
registered land).
B.
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees may enter upon
privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under
this Bylaw.
A.
Any person who violated any provision of this Bylaw or any condition
of a permit issued pursuant to it shall be punished by the maximum
allowable fine. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This Bylaw may be
enforced by a Medfield police officer or Conservation Agent. Upon
request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall take such
legal action as they deem necessary and proper to enforce this Bylaw
and permits issued pursuant to it.
B.
Fines: up to $300 per offense (Medfield police officer or Conservation
Agent). [ATM 4-26-1994; ATM 4-30-2007]
C.
§ 290-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-13
1:189

ARTICLE 1
Scope
§ 300-1.1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Bylaw for
the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts," which herein is called "this Zoning
Bylaw."
§ 300-1.2. Authority.
This Zoning Bylaw is adopted by virtue of and pursuant to the authority
granted to the Town of Medfield by MGL c. 40A, as now existing or hereafter
amended, herein called the "Zoning Act."
§ 300-1.3. Purpose.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to promote the health, safety, convenience and
welfare of the inhabitants of Medfield by lessening congestion in the streets;
securing safety from fires, panic, or other danger; providing adequate light
and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue congestion
of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; and by other
means in accordance with a comprehensive Master Plan prepared during
the years 1963 and 1964 and since continuously updated.
§ 300-1.4. Planning Board.
There shall be an elected Planning Board consisting of five members
according to MGL c. 41, § 81A, and one associate member to be appointed
by the Planning Board.
§ 300-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-1.4
1:191

ARTICLE 2
Definitions
§ 300-2.1. Word usage; terms defined.17
For the purpose of this Bylaw, certain terms and words shall have the
meanings given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. The
words "used" or "occupied" include the words "designed," "arranged,"
"intended" or "offered" to be used or occupied. The words "building,"
"structure," "lot," "land" or "premises" shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or any portion thereof." The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts State Building Code shall have the meanings given therein
unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined in either
place shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary,
Third Edition. Uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations under the classes
"Commercial/Business" and "Wholesale and Manufacturing" shall be further
defined by the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
ABANDONMENT — The discontinuance of a nonconforming use or the
visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a
nonconforming use of a building or premises, or the removal of the
characteristic equipment or furnishing used in the performance of the
nonconforming use, without its replacement by similar equipment or
furnishings, or the replacement of the nonconforming use or building by a
conforming use or building.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — One additional dwelling unit (see
"dwelling unit" below) contained in a single-family dwelling which complies
with the conditions set out in § 300-14.10.[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 33]
AGRICULTURAL USE — See § 300-5.5B(2).
ALTERATION — Any construction, reconstruction or other action resulting
in a change in the structural parts or height, number of stories, size, use or
location of a building or other structure.
ASSOCIATE MEMBER — A registered voter appointed by the Planning
Board for a one-year term ending in April of each year, who may be
designated by the Chairman of the Planning Board to sit on the Board for
the purposes of acting on a special permit application, on the occasion of the
absence, or inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member
of the Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the Board, all as set
out in MGL c. 40A, § 9.
17.Editor's Note: This section was amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33 to delete the following
definitions: "cluster development"; "permit granting authority"; "sign, applied"; "sign
size"; "sign, special"; "sign, standing"; "sign, surface area of"; "substantially greater
extent"; "Zoning Bylaw"; and "Zoning Enabling Act."
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:193
AUTOMOTIVE GRAVEYARD OR JUNKYARD — A collection of two or more
unregistered vehicles on any lot or parcel under single ownership. In order
to be considered unregistered, vehicles must be of a sort which in their
normal use would be required to be registered by the Registry of Motor
Vehicles of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A private owner-occupied residence with
overnight accommodations for paying guests and a common breakfast area
for their use, but with no cooking facilities in the guest rooms.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Appeals of the Town of Medfield,
Massachusetts.
BUFFERS — A landscaped strip to provide a visual barrier.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, common walls, passageways, areas and serviced by common
utilities and forming a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or
property. For the purposes of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning
or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached subordinate building, the use of
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the
principal building.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — Premises owned and operated by a
governmental or other chartered nonprofit organization, including public
housing for the elderly, but not including fraternal, sports or similar
membership organizations.
DETENTION POND — For purposes of interpreting § 300-6.2, Table of Area
Regulations, "detention pond" shall mean that portion of such a facility
that lies within a line represented by the highest elevation contour that
completely encloses the facility.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — A premises in which persons while in cars
are served, view, purchase, consume as appropriate: food, movies, goods,
materials or equipment.
DRIVEWAY, LEGAL SERVICE — An open space, located on a private lot,
which is built for access to a private garage or off-street parking
space.[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A residential development consisting of three
or more dwelling units on one single contiguous parcel, not necessarily
contained in one building.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 43]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for the
use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or governmental agencies of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal system, including
§ 300-2.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:194
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including
buildings necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or governmental agencies for the public health or safety or general
welfare.
FAMILY — One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying
a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FAMILY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a single structure for use by
a family member.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT — See § 300-10.2.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the walls, including basement
areas. It does not include unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human
occupancy or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building
intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet
the parking requirements of this Bylaw, or any such floor space intended
and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — The ratio of the net floor area of the
principal building to the total lot area.
FRONTAGE — A continuous portion of a side line of one street between
the side lines of a lot which provides primary and actual vehicular and
pedestrian access from said street to the principal use of a lot; said access
must also be both objectively safe and practical.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance, not to exceed the maximum identified
in the Table of Height and Bulk Regulations,18 between the highest point
of the roof and the average elevation of the naturally existing grade (the
measurements to be taken around the structure, or at the four corners)
prior to any excavation, leveling, grading, or filling at the building
foundation. The maximum height is exclusive of chimneys, air shafts,
ventilators, vents, lightning rods or similar items which may be of the height
required for proper operation or use. Building height applies to all buildings
and/or structures. The building shall remain in compliance with the height
requirement after final grading.[Amended 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use which by custom has been carried
on entirely within and only by the occupants of a dwelling unit, which use
is incidental and subordinate to the dwelling use, and which does not in any
manner change the residential character of the building.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space used for loading or unloading and
which is not less than 14 feet in width, 45 feet in length and 14 feet in height
and containing not less than 1,300 square feet, including both access and
maneuvering area.
18.Editor's Note: The Table of Height and Bulk Regulations is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:195
LODGING UNIT — One or more rooms contained in a lodging house for the
use of one or more individuals not living as a single housekeeping unit and
not having cooking facilities. A lodging unit shall include a boarding unit,
tourist house unit, or a rooming unit.
LOT — An area or parcel of land in the same ownership, or any part thereof
designated by its owner or owners as a separate lot, which is bounded by
front, side and rear lot lines as defined in this Bylaw. A parcel shall not
be designated a lot unless it conforms with the Table of Area Regulations,
§ 300-6.2. An owner shall retain the right to alienate any parcel or portion
of any parcel regardless of whether or not it is a legal lot under this Bylaw.
For purposes of this Bylaw, a lot may or may not have boundaries identical
with those recorded in the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets, the angle of intersection of the street lot line, or
in case of a curved street extended lot lines, being not more than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The minimum length of any line drawn from, and
perpendicular to, the front lot line that is all within the area of the lot. In
the case of a curved front lot line, such line must be perpendicular to a line
tangent to the front lot line at the point that will result in the minimum
length of such a line all within the area of the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Same as "frontage"; provided, however, that on a
corner lot only one street line shall be considered the front line, except in
those cases where the latest deed restrictions specify another line as the
front lot line. The front lot line must be located so as to be able to provide
primary access to the lot.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite the front lot line, except in the case
of a corner lot the owner shall have the option of choosing which of the two
lot lines that are not street lines is to be considered the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date of
this Bylaw, or any amendment thereto, which is not in conformity with all
provisions of this Bylaw.
LOT, PERCENTAGE MAXIMUM COVERAGE — The percentage of any lot
that can be covered by man-made impervious surfaces such as buildings,
structures, accessory buildings and structures, nonporous paving, or any
surface with a percolation rate slower than 120 minutes per inch.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot, the front and rear lot lines of which abut
streets; or a corner lot, two opposite lines of which abut streets.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured at the required front yard depth, which may or may not coincide
with the actual front setback line.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A nonprofit social, sports or fraternal association or
organization maintaining a building or facilities which are used exclusively
§ 300-2.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:196
by members and their guests and which may or may not contain bar
facilities.
MUNICIPAL USE — The use of any building, facility, or area owned or
leased and operated by the Town of Medfield for the general use and
welfare of the Town, its inhabitants or businesses located within the Town.
OPEN DRAINAGE STRUCTURE — These shall include swales, ditches, or
other man-made improvements designed to direct the flow of and/or carry
water, which are not covered at ground level. For purposes of interpreting
§ 300-6.2, Table of Area Regulations, "open drainage structure" shall mean
that portion of such a facility that lies within a line represented by the
highest elevation contour that completely encloses the facility, or in the case
where the facility flows into a detention pond, retention pond, or other area
of generally lower elevation, the highest elevation contour that completely
encloses the facility except at its intersection with another component of
the overall drainage system or at the terminus of such drainage structure.
OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential development
in which the buildings and accessory uses are clustered together into one
or more groups separated from adjacent property and other groups within
the development by intervening open land.
OWNER — The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, devisee, trustee
or any person having vested or equitable interest in the use, structure or lot
in question.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space having dimensions of not less than
nine feet six inches by 18 feet plus access and maneuvering space, for
exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle, whether inside or
outside a structure.
PERFECT SQUARE — A square, the dimensions of which are set out in the
Table of Area Regulations for each zoning district,19 which must fit entirely
within a lot and one side of which must coincide with or be tangent to or
touch on two points on the front lot line.
PERSON — The word "person" shall include one or more individuals, a
partnership, an association and a corporation.
RECORDED — Recorded in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or registered in
the Norfolk Registry District of the Land Court.
RECREATIONAL STRUCTURES — Swimming pools, tennis courts,
basketball courts, or similar type residential accessory structures together
with any fencing.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Any area situated within a district zoned primarily
for residential purposes under the Zoning Bylaw. It includes RE, RT, RS and
RU.
RETENTION POND — For purposes of interpreting § 300-6.2, Table of Area
Regulations, "retention pond" shall mean that portion of such a facility
19.Editor's Note: The Table of Area Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:197
that lies within a line represented by the highest elevation contour that
completely encloses the facility.
SIGN — Any letters, pictorial representations, symbol, flag, emblem or
animated device displayed in any manner whatsoever, which directs
attention of persons off the premises on which the sign is displayed to
any object, subject, place, person, activity, product, service, institution,
organization or business. (For the purposes of this code, American flags and
directional or traffic signs and signals erected or adopted by governments
or their agencies are not included in this definition.)
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any billboard, sign or other advertising device that
advertises, calls attention to, or indicates the person occupying the
premises on which the sign is erected or the business transacted thereon,
or advertises the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or to let, and
which contains no other advertising matter.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign used to direct attention to a service, sale or
other activity not performed on the same premises upon which the sign is
located.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable shelter
that is supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
SIGN BAND — A special type of parallel sign. It is a horizontal band,
integral to the building facade, and runs the full length of the building,
exclusive of structural or other interruptions.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign used to direct attention to a service, product
sold or other activity performed on the same premises upon which the sign
is located.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter
that projects from the face of the building and is supported entirely or
partially by the building.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported upon the ground and not
attached to any building.
SIGN FRONTAGE, BUILDING — The length in feet of the building side
fronting on the street. Only one building side may be used as sign frontage.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used simply to identify the name, address
and title of an individual family or firm occupying the premises upon which
the sign is located.
SIGN, NONACCESSORY — Any billboard, sign or other advertising device
that does not come within the foregoing definition of an accessory sign.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign advertising activities, goods, products,
services, etc., available elsewhere than within the building or on the lot
where the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign advertising activities, goods, etc., available
within the building or on the lot where the sign is located.
SIGN, PARALLEL — A wall-mounted sign parallel to the building surface.
§ 300-2.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:198
SIGN, PARKING — A sign at each vehicular entrance to a parking lot or
parking garage.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A wall-mounted sign perpendicular to the building
surface.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which advertises a special event, sale or
service.
SIGN, WINDOW OR INTERIOR — A sign painted or applied to glass doors
or windows, or installed on the interior but visible from the exterior.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A use of a structure or lot or any action upon a
premises which may be permitted under this Bylaw only upon application to
and with the approval of the Board of Appeals or the Planning Board and in
accordance with the provisions of Article 14.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Selectmen
for earth removal permits; the Planning Board for site plan approval for
multifamily, business or industrial buildings constructed or externally
enlarged and not otherwise requiring a special permit; and the Board of
Appeals for all other special permits.
STORY — That part of a building between any floor and the floor or roof
next above. For the purposes of this Bylaw, where a building is not divided
into stories, a story shall be considered 15 feet in height. A story shall be at
least 50% above grade.
STREET — A way which is dedicated or devoted to public use by legal
mapping, by user, or by any other lawful procedure and includes any
avenue, boulevard, parkway, road, land, public square, highway and similar
public way which affords the prescribed means of principal access to an
abutting lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower,
framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing stand,
platform, bin, fence, sign, flag pole, or swimming pool.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure lawfully existing at the
effective date of this Bylaw or any amendment thereto, which is not in
conformity with all provisions of this Bylaw.
SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT USE — Any use which is not permitted either
by right, or by special permit of the Board of Appeals, within the district in
which the lot is located.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Space in a yard or within a setback area on a
lot that is unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed to the sky, not devoted to
service driveways or off-street loading or parking spaces and available to
all occupants of the building on the lot, expressed as a percentage of gross
floor area.
USE — The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed, or
intended to be used, occupied or maintained.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:199
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a structure or lot.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use lawfully existing at the effective date of
this Bylaw or any amendment thereto which is not in conformity with all
provisions of this Bylaw.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it may be used, occupied
or maintained under this Bylaw. Any other use within the main structure
or the use of any other structure or land on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary thereto and permitted under this Bylaw shall be considered
an accessory use.
VARIANCE — Such departure from the terms of this Bylaw as the Board of
Appeals, upon appeal in specific areas, is empowered to authorize under the
terms of Article 14.
WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT — See § 300-11.2A and B.
WETLANDS — Fresh water wetlands, swamps, bogs, wet meadows,
marshes, streams, rivers or ponds as defined in the Wetland Protection Act,
MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended.
YARD — A portion of a lot, other than a court, on the same lot as the
principal building, unobstructed artificially from the ground to the sky,
except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT — A space extending for the full width of the lot between the
front line of the nearest building wall and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — A space, unoccupied, except by an accessory structure or
accessory use as herein permitted, extending for the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the building wall and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An unoccupied space extending for the full length of a
building between the nearest building wall and the side lot line.
ZONING ACT — Section 808 of the Acts of 1975. See MGL c. 40A and
amendments thereto.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The agent appointed by the Board
of Selectmen charged with the enforcement of the Zoning Bylaw.[Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
§ 300-2.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:200
ARTICLE 3
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 300-3.1. Division into districts.
§ 300-3.2. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are established and
shown on a map titled "Zoning Map, Medfield, Massachusetts" dated
January 30, 2003, which is a part of this Bylaw and which herein is called
the "Zoning Map." The authenticity of the Zoning Map shall be identified
by the signature of the Town Clerk and the imprinted seal of the Town
under the words: "This is to certify that this is the Zoning Map of the
Town of Medfield, Massachusetts, referred to in the Zoning Bylaw of the
Town of Medfield, Massachusetts, which was adopted by the Town Meeting
commencing June 2, 2003." Any change in the location of boundaries of a
zoning district by amendment of this Bylaw shall be authenticated in the
same manner. The Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the office of the
Planning Board. Photographic reductions of this Zoning Map may serve as
copies of the Zoning Map.
§ 300-3.3. Boundaries of districts.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of districts shown on
the Zoning Map, these rules apply:
The Town of Medfield, Massachusetts, is divided into eight zoning
districts designated as follows:
Full Name Abbreviation
Agricultural A
Residential Estate RE
Residential Town RT
Residential Suburban RS
Residential Urban RU
Business B
Business-Industrial BI
Industrial-Extensive IE
A.
There are three overlay districts as follows:
Full Name Abbreviation
Watershed Protection WP
Floodplain FP
Aquifer Protection AQ
B.
§ 300-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3.3
1:201
Where a boundary is indicated as a street, railroad, watercourse or
other body of water, it shall be construed to be the center line or middle
thereof. Where such a boundary approximates a Town boundary, then it
runs to the limits of the Town boundary.
A.
Where a boundary is indicated as running approximately parallel to
a street, railroad, watercourse or other body of water, it shall be
construed to be parallel thereto at the distance shown on the Zoning
Map.
B.
Where a boundary is indicated as a specific elevation, it shall be
construed as the distance above mean sea level based on the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
C.
When a district boundary line divides a lot that is in one ownership
of record at the time such line is adopted, a use that is permitted on
one portion of the lot may be extended 30 feet into the other portion,
provided the first portion includes the required lot width and depth.
This allowance does not apply to Floodplain or Watershed Protection
Districts described in Articles 10 and 11.
D.
§ 300-3.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-3.3
1:202
ARTICLE 4
Interpretation and Application
§ 300-4.1. Interpretation.
The provisions of this Bylaw shall be interpreted to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, or the general
welfare of the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts. The provisions of this
Bylaw are not intended to repeal, amend, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with any lawfully adopted law, statute, ordinance, Bylaw,
covenants, regulations or rules. Whenever the regulations made under the
authority hereof differ from those prescribed by any law, statute, ordinance,
Bylaw or other regulations, that provision which imposes the greater
restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
§ 300-4.2. Applicability.
Except as herein provided, or as specifically exempted by a "shall clause" of
the Zoning Act, the provisions of this Bylaw shall apply to the following: the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use of buildings and
structures or use of land.
§ 300-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.2
1:203

ARTICLE 5
Use Regulations
§ 300-5.1. Applicability of use regulations.
No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the
purposes permitted in its district.
§ 300-5.2. Permitted uses.
The permitted uses of buildings, structures or land are set forth in the Table
of Use Regulations included as an attachment to this Bylaw.
§ 300-5.3. Uses subject to other regulations.
Uses permitted by right or by special permit shall be subject to all
provisions of this Bylaw.
A.
There shall be no use of a building, structure, or land in any district
for a purpose that is injurious, dangerous, noxious, or offensive to
the community by reason of the emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke,
vibration, noise or other cause. [See § 300-14.10H(2)(e).]
B.
No parking for an Industrial-Extensive (IE), Business-Industrial (BI), or
Business (B) District and no vehicular access to an Industrial-Extensive,
Business-Industrial or Business District shall be on land that is zoned
Residential. Vehicular access to an Industrial-Extensive, Business-
Industrial or Business District shall be over a public way.
C.
New public ways and ways into Industrial Districts shall be constructed
in accordance with the latest Land Subdivision Rules and Regulations
of the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts.20
D.
Existing public ways, when rebuilt, shall be constructed to conform
with the latest Land Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Town of
Medfield, Massachusetts.21
E.
For multifamily dwellings, all wastewater shall be disposed of by means
of adequate connection to the sewage system of the Town of Medfield.
The connecting system shall be installed in accordance with the
definitive plan and shall conform with the rules of the Water and
Sewerage Board and shall be installed under their direction.
F.
Whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter
of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which
activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or
scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon
the issuance of a special permit, provided the granting authority finds
G.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
§ 300-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5.3
1:205
§ 300-5.4. Table of Use Regulations.
The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this Bylaw.
that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from
the public good.
To erect or externally enlarge any multifamily, business or industrial
building not requiring a special permit from the Board of Appeals, site
plan approval from the Planning Board is required if the ground floor
area of the construction exceeds 500 square feet.
H.
Day-care facilities for the day care of more than six children in
Residential Districts shall conform with the following standards:
That the minimum lot area be 40,000 square feet or such greater
area as is required by the Table of Area Regulations;22
(1)
That the minimum yards be as follows: front yard: 30 feet; side
yard: 20 feet; rear yard: 50 feet or such greater yards as are
required by the Table of Area Regulations;
(2)
That buffers meeting the specifications set out in § 300-6.2J be
provided along side and rear lot lines;
(3)
That there be an on-site drop-off area capable of accommodating at
least a number of vehicles equal to one-fourth the licensed capacity
of the facility;
(4)
(5) That there be a separate entrance and exit for vehicles.
A day-care facility shall not be considered a "community facility"
for the purpose of § 300-6.3A(1) and shall be subject to the height
and bulk regulation of the Table of Height and Bulk Regulations.23
(6)
I.
For use of a construction trailer during the course of a building
construction program, a permit may be issued for one year by the
Building Inspector. No wheels, tires, or other means of keeping the
construction trailer mobile shall be removed; any construction trailer
shall have no skirts, porches, fences, or similar materials or equipment
added which would detract from its mobility. Each construction trailer
and its lot shall be subject to the requirements of the district.
J.
For use of temporary storage containers, such as PODS®, a permit may
be issued for up to six months by the Building Inspector.
K.
22.Editor's Note: The Table of Area Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: The Table of Height and Bulk Regulations is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 300-5.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-5.5
1:206
§ 300-5.5. Agricultural District.
Agricultural land is an important resource to the Town of Medfield, serving
the public interest through its visual, economic, traditional, ecological and
food-producing benefits.
Purpose. The purpose of the Agricultural District is to preserve land
well suited to agriculture and to encourage commitment of such land to
agricultural use.
A.
Definition.
(1) The Agricultural District is shown on the Zoning Map.
Agricultural use. For the purposes of § 300-5.5, land shall be
deemed to be in agricultural use:
When primarily used in raising beef cattle, dairy cattle, poultry,
swine, sheep, horses, ponies, goats or bees, for the purpose
of selling such animals or a product derived from them in
the regular course of business, or when incidentally used in
a related manner which represents a customary or necessary
use in raising such animals and preparing them or the products
derived therefrom for market; and/or
(a)
When primarily used in raising fruits, vegetables, grains,
berries, nuts and other foods for human consumption, feed
for animals, flowers, trees, forest products, and nursery or
greenhouse products for the purpose of selling such products,
in the regular course of business, or when used incidentally in
a related manner which represents a customary and necessary
use in raising such products and preparing them for market.
(b)
(2)
B.
Use.
The primary use of land in the Agricultural District shall be
agricultural.
(1)
The construction or placement of buildings or structures, except
as provided in this § 300-5.5C(3); and the removal, excavation or
dredging of loam, peat, gravel, soil, rock or other mineral
substance in such a manner as to adversely affect the land's overall
future agricultural potential; and other acts or uses detrimental to
such retention of the land for agricultural use shall be prohibited.
(2)
Construction of a single-family or two-family dwelling for the
farmer, his or her family and his or her employees shall be allowed
on a lot exceeding 10 acres in area in the Agricultural District, and
shall not derogate from the purpose of the district. Such dwellings
shall comply with the dimensional regulations of the RS District.
The maximum area devoted to residential use on any lot shall be
30,000 square feet. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(3)
C.
§ 300-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5.5
1:207
§ 300-5.6. Historic properties.
Properties containing historic structures are an important resource to the
Town of Medfield, providing a direct connection with the Town's past and
contributing to the Town's character.
Construction of buildings for year-round retail sales of farm
products raised primarily on the premises shall be allowed in the
Agricultural District. Site plan approval by the Planning Board shall
be required for all such construction exceeding 500 square feet
in area. The area devoted to retail sales and parking on any lot
shall be a maximum of 20,000 square feet, shall meet the yard and
height requirements of the RS District, and shall meet the parking
requirements of Article 8 of this Zoning Bylaw. Signs shall meet
Business District requirements.
(4)
Construction or placement of temporary (not exceeding a period of
three consecutive months) structures for the retail sale of products
raised primarily on the premises and for housing seasonal
agricultural employees shall be permitted in the Agricultural
District, and shall meet the yard and height requirements of the RS
District. Signs shall meet Business District requirements.
(5)
Placement of all other agricultural structures except fences shall
be a minimum of 50 feet from any adjacent zoning district, and
shall meet the front yard requirement of the nearest adjacent
district.
(6)
Purpose. The purpose of this Historic Properties Section is to preserve
historic structures as defined herein by providing a regulatory process
to enable a property owner to increase the productive use of the
property.
A.
Definitions.
HISTORIC PROPERTY — Any property which contains a still-existing
principal or significant structure (constructed or erected upon it prior
to 1900).
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The main or primary structure, in terms of
the present purpose or use of the property.
SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURE — A structure the use or purpose of which
is substantial, in terms of the present purpose or use of the property,
such as a carriage house, caretaker's house, barn, or similar building.
B.
Specially permitted use or uses. The Board of Appeals, upon
application, may issue a special permit to the owner of an historic
property for any use or combination of uses listed in the Table of Use
Regulations;24 the decision whether or not to grant a special permit
under this Section is entirely within the Board's discretion; the Board
C.
24.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-5.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-5.6
1:208
shall not be required to issue a special permit, even if it is able to make
the required findings to support granting a permit.
Procedure.
Generally, the requirements set out in § 300-14.10 for special
permits by the Board of Appeals shall apply to this Section.
(1)
In addition to the application requirements contained in
§ 300-14.10A, applicant shall submit the following:
Historic documentation, including an historic survey prepared
by a qualified professional.
(a)
Plans prepared by a licensed architect or other design
professional showing all proposed exterior improvements and
changes; these shall include both a concept rendering and a
site plan meeting the requirements of § 300-14.12.
(b)
(2)
In addition to the notice requirements contained in § 300-14.10C,
the Board of Appeals shall forthwith transmit copies of the
application and supporting documents to the Medfield Historical
Commission for their review and comment.
(3)
In addition to the required findings contained in § 300-14.10E, the
Board of Appeals shall make the following specific findings of fact:
The proposed use(s) represents a reasonable adaptive reuse of
the historic property.
(a)
The proposed use(s) will preserve or substantially preserve the
historic nature and character of the property and the historic
structures thereon.
(b)
(4)
In addition to the authorized conditions contained in § 300-14.10H,
the Board of Appeals, if it decides to grant a special permit under
this Section, shall impose such conditions, limitations, and
safeguards as it deems necessary to preserve the historic nature
and character of the property and the historic structures thereon,
including a requirement that the property serve as the applicant's
primary residence, and/or a requirement that applicant place a
permanent historic preservation restriction, as defined in MGL
c. 184, § 31, upon the property.
(5)
D.
§ 300-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5.6
1:209

ARTICLE 6
Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
§ 300-6.1. Applicability of area, height and bulk regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to lot area, dimensions, and
residential floor space shall be as specified in this Article and set forth in
the Table of Area Regulations and Table of Height and Bulk Regulations,25
and shall be subject to the further provisions of this Article.
§ 300-6.2. Area regulations.
The Table of Area Regulations included as an attachment to this Bylaw,
together with the notes therein, are part of this Bylaw.
Except for multifamily residential developments, planned business and
industrial developments, public housing for the elderly, agricultural
use, community facilities and public utilities (see Article 14), only one
principal structure shall be permitted on one lot.
A.
For purposes of determining setback requirements, both yards of a
corner lot that front on a street shall be considered front yards on the
street on which they are located.
B.
A legal service driveway shall have a minimum width of 12 feet and a
maximum width of 24 feet.
C.
For purposes of determining setback requirements, both yards of a
through lot that front on a street shall be considered front yards on the
street on which they are located.
D.
Frontage.
Frontage shall be measured at the street line. On corner and
through lots, frontage shall be measured on one street only.
(1)
Frontage for municipal water wells and water storage standpipes
shall not be required.
(2)
E.
Building within the following districts will be subject to the respective
Zoning Bylaw Section: Open Space Residential, Article 7; Floodplain
District, Article 10; Watershed Protection District, Article 11; and
Aquifer Protection District, Article 16.
F.
Only the following projections into required yards or other required
open spaces are permitted:
A balcony or bay window limited in total length to 1/2 the length of
the building shall project not more than two feet.
(1)
G.
25.Editor's Note: The Tables of Area Regulations and Height and Bulk Regulations are
included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6.2
1:211
Open terrace, steps or stoop under four feet in height shall project
not more than 1/2 of the required yard setback.
(2)
Steps or stoop over four feet in height, window sill, belt course,
chimney, roof eave, fire escape, fire tower, storm enclosure or
similar architectural features shall not project more than two feet
into the required yard setback area.
(3)
In B and BI Districts, all uses shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except: dispensing of food, beverages or goods at
a drive-in or stand; dispensing of gas, water or lubricants at a garage
or gasoline service station; vegetation held for sale in a horticulture
or floriculture business; permitted parking or loading; and permitted
exterior signs.
H.
Screening and buffers shall be required in the Industrial-Extensive (IE)
District. There shall be a landscaped buffer strip along each boundary
which adjoins a residential use or district. This strip shall be at least
150 feet in width and shall be portioned as follows:
The portion of such buffer strip within 100 feet of the district
boundary line shall be used only for, and maintained as, a planting
area for lawns, trees, shrubs, or other landscape materials to
provide a visual barrier between districts.
(1)
The remaining 50 feet of space may be used for off-street parking
or other permitted open uses, and shall not contain any permanent
structure.
(2)
I.
In a Business District, a Business-Industrial District or a lot in an RU
District on which a multifamily dwelling is placed, there shall be a
landscaped buffer strip along each boundary which adjoins a residential
lot. The strip shall be at least 25 feet in width and shall contain a screen
of plantings in the strip not less than five feet in width and six feet
in height at the time of the occupancy of any lot. Individual bushes
or trees shall be planted not more than six feet on centers, and shall
thereafter be maintained by the owner or occupants so as to maintain
a dense screen year round. All of the plantings shall be evergreen. No
building, structure, driveway, or other artificial improvements, except
such fencing as the Planning Board may require, shall be placed within
this buffer strip. A waiver of the required plant spacing may be granted
if, in the opinion of the Planning Board based on evidence submitted
by applicant, the wider spacing allows the proposed plantings to thrive
and fully mature while providing a long-term healthier vegetative
screen. The relief of plant spacing will allow for plantings to be
concentrated in areas where a fuller vegetative screen is required or
desired. A waiver on the plant spacing does not allow for a reduction in
the overall plant quantity. [Amended 4-30-2018 ATM by Art. 40]
J.
In any R District, permitted accessory buildings shall conform to the
following provisions: They shall be not less than 60 feet from any street
K.
§ 300-6.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-6.2
1:212
lot line, except for a garage on a corner lot, which shall be set back
at least the same distance as the front yard setback for the adjacent
lot; and they shall be set back from side and rear lot lines at least the
distance specified in the Table of Area Regulations, provided that one
accessory structure that will not exceed 15 feet by 10 feet, and not
exceeding 12 feet in height, shall be allowed to be located in the rear
yard with a setback to the rear lot line of no less than 20 feet and side
lot line of no less than 12 feet.
L. All IE uses shall conform to IE District regulations.
M. All BI uses shall conform to BI District regulations.
N. All B uses shall conform to B District regulations.
O. All R and A uses shall conform to R and A District regulations.
Setbacks in the Table of Area Regulations shall not apply to fences up
to six feet in height.
P.
Side yards for other permitted business and residential uses in the B
District shall be a minimum of 12 feet on one side and six feet on
the opposite side, either or both of which may be reduced to zero
side yard, provided that it is adequately demonstrated in site plan
review that unobstructed emergency access to the rear of the lot can
be gained, that appropriate fire-stop construction is provided for the
sidewalls of the structure, and that light, air, and access is not unduly
obstructed from openings in the side wall of any structure on the
adjacent lot. These minimums may be waived for conversion of existing
structures that have nonconforming setbacks, provided that the above
conditions are adequately demonstrated in site plan review. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
Q.
Lot frontage and width for other permitted business and residential
uses in the B District shall be the width of the building plus 24 feet
unless it is noted that access can be otherwise gained by means of a
public way. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
R.
Any permitted structure within a Business District shall have a
minimum seven-foot front yard setback. The area between the building
and the sidewalk shall be landscaped. The landscaped setback may be
interrupted only by access walks and driveways.
S.
Recreational structures are subject to the requirements of the Table
of Area Regulations, except that the Board of Appeals may, by special
permit, allow a lesser setback. Fencing for recreational structures is
not subject to the height limit of the "wall, fence, hedge or similar
enclosure" entry in the Table of Use Regulations included as an
attachment to this Bylaw.
T.
Only land or that portion of land located within the Town of Medfield
shall be included for purposes of determining compliance with
U.
§ 300-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6.2
1:213
§ 300-6.3. Height and bulk regulations.
minimum lot area and frontage requirements set out in the Table of
Area Regulations; land located outside of the Town's borders shall not
be included.
Any maximum height permitted in this Bylaw shall be further subject to
the restrictions of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building
Code and shall not apply to:
Community facility and public utility structures, provided that the
side yards, rear yards and setbacks required in the district for the
highest permitted principal structure shall be increased two feet in
width for each foot by which the height of such structure exceeds
the height permitted in the district.
(1)
Necessary appurtenant structures such as a church spire, belfry,
cupola, dome, smokestack, monument, derrick, conveyer, flag pole,
communications tower, mast, antenna, aerial, airplane hangar, roof
tank, building service equipment, roof structure other than a
penthouse, chimney or parapet wall, or any similar appurtenance,
provided that the side yards, rear yard and front setback be
increased one foot horizontally for each two feet that the height of
such structure exceeds the height permitted in the district.
(2)
Special industrial structures such as a cooling tower, grain
elevator, sugar refinery, gas holder or other similar structure where
the industrial process requires a greater height, provided that any
such structure shall not occupy more than 15% of the lot area and
shall be not less than 50 feet from any lot line.
(3)
A.
A fence, hedge, wall or other enclosure may be maintained on a corner
lot, provided that it shall not, at intersecting streets, obstruct visual
clearance between 3 1/2 feet and 10 feet above the grade within the
triangular area formed by the intersection of the curblines and a
straight line joining said curblines at points which are 25 feet measured
from the intersection of the curblines. Where curbs do not exist, the
lines shall be where such curb would be required if built.
B.
A basement or cellar, to be inhabited, must have the ceiling not less
than five feet above the average elevation of the land immediately
surrounding the building foundation wall.
C.
In order to minimize drainage and erosion problems as well as to
discourage disturbance of natural areas, the maximum amount of
impervious surface allowed shall be as indicated in the Table of Height
and Bulk Regulations.26
D.
26.Editor's Note: The Table of Height and Bulk Regulations is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 300-6.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-6.3
1:214
Recreational structures are subject to the requirements of the Table
of Height and Bulk Regulations adopted in accordance with § 300-6.2
of the Medfield Zoning Bylaw, except that the Board of Appeals may,
in Districts RE, RT, RS and RU, by special permit as specified in
§ 300-14.10E, allow a greater maximum lot coverage not to exceed 5%
beyond the maximum lot coverage for the zoning district.
E.
§ 300-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6.3
1:215

ARTICLE 7
Open Space Residential Zoning
§ 300-7.1. Purpose; application process.
For the purpose of encouraging the preservation of open space and
promoting the more efficient use of land in harmony with its natural
features and within the general intent of the Zoning Bylaw, an owner or
owners, or their agent, of a tract of land may, in connection with the
submission of a subdivision plan for Planning Board approval under the
Subdivision Control Law also make application to the Board of Appeals
for a special permit excepting his or her plan from the lot size and yard
dimension regulations as required in the Zoning Bylaw. In no event,
however, shall such permit operate as an exception from any other provision
of this Bylaw. The owner or such agent shall at the same time file a
copy of the application with all accompanying plans and environmental
impact statement with the Board of Health, the Water and Sewerage Board,
Superintendent of Public Works, the Conservation Commission and the
Planning Board, which boards shall, within 30 days from the date of receipt
of such documents by them, file their written recommendations concerning
said applications with the Board of Appeals. If no such recommendations
are filed within 30 days, said Board of Appeals shall have been deemed to
have no recommendations on the application.
§ 300-7.2. Conditions for granting special permit.
After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration of
recommendations required to be filed, the Board of Appeals may grant such
a permit for residential use, provided that:
It finds that the proposed plan will promote the purposes of this Article;
and
A.
Not less than 25% of the area of the tract, exclusive of land set aside
for road area and parking area, shall be open land; and
B.
The maximum number of lots permitted on a given piece of land shall be
determined by reducing the total acreage of the proposed subdivision
by the area of ponds as shown on the Zoning Map, but not deducting for
street right-of-way, and by dividing the remaining area by the minimum
lot area requirements of the zoning district in which the subdivision is
to be located; and
C.
The size of the tract of land shall be not less than 10 times the minimum
lot size permitted in the zoning district in which the tract is located
and land area of not more than 25% of open land in the tract may be
wetlands, Floodplain District, Watershed Protection District, or have a
greater than 20% slope; and
D.
The entire development shall be serviced with a public water supply
and a public sewer or an on-site sewage disposal system capable of
E.
§ 300-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.2
1:217
§ 300-7.3. Ownership of and restrictions on open land.
Open land shall be:
processing in excess of 2,000 gallons of sewage effluent per day and
to which all units in the development shall be connected and which
shall be approved by the Board of Health and the Water and Sewerage
Board; and
To insure the protection of existing residences, proposed lots abutting
lots with existing single-family dwellings shall conform to the area
requirements of the adjacent zone. The Board of Appeals may substitute
a requirement for a buffer zone which shall be at least 50 feet in width
for the protection of the abutting lots; and
F.
All lots adjoining existing ways shall meet all existing regulations for
zoning districts in which the lots are located. Land adjoining existing
ways may be used for open land, provided that its minimum dimension
is 50 feet; and
G.
Minimum lot size shall be 12,000 square feet in area, 80-foot frontage
and a perfect square 80 feet by 80 feet, 100-foot width, 100-foot depth,
20-foot front yard, 12-foot side yards and 30-foot rear yard.
H.
Only land located within the Town of Medfield shall be included in
determining whether a proposed development meets the open land and
minimum lot dimensional requirements of Article 7; land or that portion
of land located outside of the Town's borders shall not be included.
I.
Owned by a membership corporation, trust or association whose
members are all the owners or occupants of the dwelling units in the
tract, by the Town or otherwise as the Board of Appeals may approve;
and
A.
Restricted by a conservation restriction as defined in MGL c. 184, §§ 31,
32, and 33, running to the Town appropriate to retaining the open land
predominantly in its natural scenic and open condition in such form as
shall be approved by the Conservation Commission, the Planning Board
and the Board of Selectmen. The applicant shall provide satisfactory
assurance that such conservation restriction, following approvals, has
been properly recorded in the appropriate Registry of Deeds or
Registry District of the Land Court and the interest in land thereby
created is not subject to any mortgage, security interest, lien or other
monetary encumbrance of any kind other than the aforesaid
conservation restriction; and
B.
Further restricted by covenants in deeds to all grantees in the tract
for recreational, agricultural, conservation, or park uses on which no
building may be erected more than 15 feet in height and only incidental
to the foregoing uses; and
C.
§ 300-7.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-7.3
1:218
§ 300-7.4. Compliance with subdivision regulations.
A special permit for an open space development issued hereunder by the
Board of Appeals is primarily an authorization for the use of lots which
have less than the normal lot size and yard dimension. Subsequent approval
by the Planning Board of such portions of the development as constitute a
subdivision will be required as set forth in the Subdivision Control Law,27
including approval of the street and utility systems. A favorable
recommendation by the Board of Appeals that the special permit be issued
shall not, therefore, be deemed to either constitute subdivision approval
under the Subdivision Control Law or the Subdivision Rules and Regulations
or imply that such approval will be given.
§ 300-7.5. Conditions on approval.
Consistent with the general purposes of this Bylaw and the specific
purposes of this Article, the Board of Appeals may recommend and may
impose, as conditions to the approval of a permit hereunder, such provisions
as to parking, loading, road construction and sidewalks, community service
and recreational facilities, screening, and care and maintenance of open
land as may be deemed advisable for the protection and well being of the
occupants of dwelling units in the tract and of the inhabitants of the Town.
§ 300-7.6. Further subdivision prohibited.
No lot shown on a plan for which a permit is granted under this Article may
be further subdivided, and a notation to this effect shall be shown upon the
subdivision plan recorded with the Registry of Deeds or Registry District of
the Land Court.
Open to such uses by at least the owners and occupants of the dwelling
units in the tract; and
D.
E. Open to Town officials for purposes of maintaining public facilities; and
Subject to such further restrictions and conditions as the Board of
Appeals may impose.
F.
27.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG; and Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
§ 300-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.6
1:219

ARTICLE 8
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 300-8.1. Table of Off-Street Parking Standards.
In any district, if a structure is constructed or enlarged, or an existing
use is enlarged or changed, or the dimensions of a lot are changed, offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
following Table of Off-Street Parking Standards:
Table of Off-Street Parking Standards
Use Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit
Dwelling 2 per unit
Accessory dwelling unit in an
R District
1 per bedroom
Dwelling in a B District 1.5 per unit
Lodging house, motel or hotel 1.5 per rental unit, plus 1 for each 20
square feet of floor area available for
meetings or functions, plus 1 for each 2
employees
Retail, service, finance,
insurance, or real estate
establishment
1 per each 120 square feet of floor space
open to the public, plus 1 for each 2
employees
Medical offices and clinics 5 for each doctor having office space
therein
Other professional offices 2 for each person working in the office
Minimum 3 spaces per office
Wholesale establishment 1 per each 500 square feet of floor space
Manufacturing or industrial
establishment
1 per each 1,000 square feet of floor space
Auditorium, gymnasium,
stadium, theater, church or
other place of assemblage
1 for each 4 seats or each 8 feet of bench
therein, to be based on the maximum
seating capacity
Public housing for elderly 1/4 per unit
School or college 2 per classroom in an elementary and
junior high school and 4 per classroom in
a senior high school, plus spaces as
required above for auditorium or
gymnasium, whichever has the larger
capacity
Community facility (Town
building, recreation, etc.) or
public utility establishment
1 per 300 square feet or fraction thereof
of space, plus space for spectators as
required in auditorium, gymnasium, etc.,
above
§ 300-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.1
1:221
Table of Off-Street Parking Standards
Use Number of Parking Spaces Per Unit
Restaurants, night clubs or
eating places
1 for each 3 seats or stools, plus 1 for each
2 employees, plus 4 for each two linear
feet of "takeout service" counter
Bowling alley 7 for each bowling lane
Barber shop, beauty parlor 2 for each chair installed, and 1 for each 2
operators
Self-service dry cleaners and
self-service laundries
1 for each 2 machines installed, including
dryers
Gasoline and service stations 3 for each service bay
Hospitals, extended-care
facilities or homes
2 per bed at design capacity
Day-care facility for children 1 for each full-time employee and each
full-time position shared by part-time
employees, plus 1 for each 300 square feet
of classroom space
Bed-and-breakfast 1 for each guest bedroom, plus 2 for
owner-occupant
§ 300-8.2. General parking and loading regulations.
Accessory parking or loading spaces that are maintained in any district
in connection with an existing use on the effective date of this Bylaw
shall hereafter be maintained so long as the use continues, unless
an equivalent number of parking or loading spaces is constructed
elsewhere conforming to the requirements of these regulations.
A.
When units or measurements that determine the number of required
parking or loading spaces result in a requirement of a fractional space,
a fraction over 1/2 shall require one parking or loading space.
B.
The required parking spaces shall be provided either on the same
premises with the parking generator, or on any premises associated
therewith. The walking distance between the farthest point of the
parking area and the main pedestrian entrance to the building or use
in question shall not exceed 500 feet, except that in the case of parking
space for employees only, the distance may be increased to 800 feet.
Such walking distance shall be only over land owned or controlled
by the parking generator or over a public way. When the required
parking spaces are not immediately adjacent to the parking generator,
directional signs to the parking spaces must be posted. Such signs shall
conform with Article 13. Accessory uses must be in the same district
by special permit or in a district in which the principal use would be
permitted by right.
C.
§ 300-8.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-8.2
1:222
§ 300-8.3. Parking and loading space standards.
Where required parking spaces are provided away from the lot on
which the use or structure they are intended to serve is located, such
spaces shall be in the same possession, either by deed or lease, as the
property occupied by the use or structure to which the parking spaces
are accessory. If both the structure and the parking area are leased,
the period of time of the parking area lease shall be the same as the
structure lease.
D.
The loading spaces required for the uses listed in the above table shall
in all cases be on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve.
In no case shall the required loading spaces be part of the area used to
satisfy the parking requirements of this Bylaw.
E.
No accessory off-street parking shall be permitted within the required
front yard or side yard in any R District; however, access driveways may
be located within the required front yard area. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
F.
For any use not enumerated in this Section, off-street parking spaces
shall be one space for each employee plus one space for each 50 square
feet of floor area. The Board of Appeals may make exceptions to this
Section by means of a special permit which will be granted only after
an affirmative finding that the proposed parking will be adequate, and
such a special permit must be applied for in conformance with Article
14.
G.
Where differing uses occur on a single parcel of land, the number
of off-street parking spaces to be provided shall be the sum of the
requirements for each use.
H.
All parking and loading spaces required under this Bylaw and drainage
for same shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board and
inspected by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No certificate of
occupancy shall be granted until said parking and loading facilities
have been approved by the Planning Board. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
I.
All parking or loading areas (see definition in § 300-2.1) are subject to
the following: [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
There shall be no vehicle parking or loading spaces within five feet
of any front, side or rear lot line.
(1)
(2) There shall be no vehicle repair facilities within parking areas.
There shall be no storage of material or equipment within parking
areas.
(3)
Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged as not to permit
backing of automobiles onto any street.
(4)
A.
§ 300-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.3
1:223
§ 300-8.4. Downtown Parking District.
The area and access driveways in any B, BI and IE Zoning Districts
and RU lots containing three or more units shall be surfaced with
bituminous asphalt, concrete, brick, cobblestones or pavers and
shall be constructed so that there shall be no puddling of surface
water.
(5)
All parking or loading areas containing over five spaces, including
automobile service and drive-in establishments, shall be subject to the
following additional requirements:
The area shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins
or faces the side or rear lot line of a lot situated in any R District.
The screening shall consist of that required for buffers as specified
in Article 6, § 300-6.2I and J. The screening shall be set back from
each street no more than the main building wall minimum setback.
(1)
A substantial bumper of masonry, steel, heavy timber or concrete
curb stop shall be placed at the edge of surfaced areas except
driveways in order to protect abutting structures, properties and
sidewalks.
(2)
Any fixture used to illuminate a parking or loading area shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from the street and away from
adjoining premises used for residential purposes.
(3)
Any repair or service facility for use by vehicles such as gas, oil or
water shall be at least 25 feet from any lot line.
(4)
No portion of any entrance or exit driveway shall be within 150
feet of the point of intersection of the center lines of two or more
intersecting streets. (No more than two driveways shall serve any
one area.)
(5)
For any site having one means of access or egress, the width of
the driveway shall not be less than 24 feet. For any site having a
separate entrance or exit, the driveway shall not exceed 20 feet in
width, except for a suitable curvature at the entrance.
(6)
Each parking space shall be marked with a three-inch-wide
(minimum) solid painted line on each side and along the full depth.
Paint shall be white or yellow traffic paint as specified for pavement
markings in Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Transportation. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(7)
B.
There is hereby created a Downtown Parking District consisting of
Main Street from South Street to Route 27 (Spring Street and North
Meadow Road), North Street from Main Street to Green Street and
Janes Avenue.
A.
§ 300-8.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-8.4
1:224
Uses established and existing within said district on January 1, 1998,
shall maintain whatever off-street parking they had as of that date, but
shall otherwise be exempt from the parking requirements of Article 8.
B.
Changes of use, as long as they are permitted in the underlying district,
shall be permitted without regard to said parking requirements upon
issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals. In determining
whether to issue the special permit, the Board of Appeals shall consider
the impact of the proposed use, as contrasted with prior uses, and if
it determines that the proposed use will not significantly increase the
demand for parking from that of prior uses, the Board of Appeals may
issue the special permit.
C.
Expansion of existing uses or changes which increase parking demand
and which cannot meet said parking requirements may be permitted
by the Board of Appeals if the Board of Appeals issues a special permit
therefor. In determining whether to issue a special permit, the Board
of Appeals shall consider the impact of the proposed new use and the
increased parking on the area. If it determines that, despite the impact
of the increased parking on the area, the new use is in the public
interest, it may issue the special permit. The Board of Appeals may
impose such conditions as it deems necessary to protect public safety
and convenience.
D.
§ 300-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.4
1:225

ARTICLE 9
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 300-9.1. Application of nonconformity.
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all districts as established in
this Bylaw and as amended.
A.
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall
conform to any subsequent amendment of the Bylaw unless the use or
construction is commenced within a period of not more than six months
after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving construction,
unless such construction is continued through to completion as
continuously and expeditiously as reasonable.
B.
Change, extension or alteration of nonconforming structures. [Added
4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 32]
The Building Commissioner may permit a proposed extension,
alteration, or change to a preexisting nonconforming single- or
two-family dwelling, if he or she determines that there will be no
increase to the nonconforming nature of said structure. A proposed
extension, alteration, or change shall be deemed not to increase the
nonconforming nature of said structure if:
The structure is located on a lot with insufficient area,
frontage, width, depth, or perfect square but the proposed
extension, alteration, or change complies with all other current
requirements of the Table of Area Regulations and the Table of
Height and Bulk Regulations.28
(a)
The structure already encroaches upon one or more required
yard or setback areas, but the proposed extension, alteration,
or change will comply with the appropriate setbacks for the
proposal and all other current setback, yard and building
height requirements that the original lot complied with.
(b)
(1)
Any proposed extension, alteration, or change to a preexisting
nonconforming single-, or two-family dwelling that the Building
Commissioner determines will increase the nonconforming nature
of such structure shall require the granting of a special permit from
the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may grant a special
permit if it determines that such extension, alteration, or change
will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than
the existing nonconforming structure.
(2)
Other preexisting nonconforming structures may be extended,
altered or changed upon the granting of a special permit from the
Board of Appeals if the Board of Appeals finds that such extension,
(3)
C.
28.Editor's Note: The Tables of Area Regulations and Height and Bulk Regulations are
included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.1
1:227
§ 300-9.2. Extension and alteration.
§ 300-9.3. Reduction or increase.
§ 300-9.4. Change.
alteration or change will not be substantially more detrimental
to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming building or
structure.
A nonconforming use shall not be extended except for agriculture,
horticulture or floriculture.
A.
A nonconforming lot that has no structure shall not be extended except
for agriculture, horticulture or floriculture.
B.
C. A nonconforming principal use of a structure shall not be extended.
A conforming principal use of a nonconforming structure may be
extended throughout the existing structure.
D.
A nonconforming accessory use of a portion of a conforming structure
or conforming accessory use of a portion of a nonconforming structure
may be extended up to a maximum of 40% of the floor area of the
existing structure.
E.
A nonconforming structure located in any R District may be altered and
the use, if conforming, may be extended throughout the altered portion,
provided: any conforming use shall not be made nonconforming, and
the alteration shall not cause the structure to violate the maximum
floor area ratio and yard regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
F.
A nonconforming lot or open space on a lot (yards, setbacks, courts,
usable open space, or floor area ratio) shall not be changed so as to be
in greater nonconformity.
A.
Any nonconforming off-street parking or loading area already
containing fewer than the required number of spaces to serve their
intended use shall not be made more nonconforming.
B.
A nonconforming use of a structure may not be changed to another
nonconforming use.
A.
A nonconforming lot, use or structure which has come into conformity
shall not again be changed to a nonconforming lot, use or structure.
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
B.
A conforming lot, structure, or use shall not be enlarged, reduced or
changed in any manner so as to become nonconforming. A conforming
lot shall not be divided so as to leave preexisting structures on a
nonconforming lot or to render their use nonconforming.
C.
§ 300-9.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-9.5
1:228
§ 300-9.5. Restoration.
§ 300-9.6. Abandonment.
If the nonconforming use, except for agriculture, horticulture or
floriculture, of a structure or lot has been abandoned for a continuous
period of two years or more, the lot or structure shall not be used again
except for a conforming use.
§ 300-9.7. Moving.
A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other location on
its lot or any other lot unless every portion of such structure and the use
thereof shall become conforming and the change will be in accordance with
the area and yard regulations of this Bylaw.
§ 300-9.8. Unsafe structures. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
Any nonconforming structure determined by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition, provided that the
restoration shall not place it in greater nonconformity. If the cost to restore
any nonconformity exceeds 50% of its physical replacement value, it shall
be reconstructed only as a conforming structure unless a new variance is
secured.
Any reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall require a
variance except when that reconstruction is in the same configuration
as the preexisting structure.
A.
Any conforming structure damaged more than 50% by fire or other
casualty located on a nonconforming lot may be restored or rebuilt. No
such restoration or rebuilding shall be permitted which changes the
use or structure to a nonconforming use or structure. The rebuilding
or restoration of such conforming structure will not require a new
variance.
B.
§ 300-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.8
1:229

ARTICLE 10
Floodplain District
§ 300-10.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to promote:
§ 300-10.2. Definition.
§ 300-10.3. Permitted uses.
The health and safety of the occupants of lands subject to seasonal or
periodic flooding in the Charles and Stop Rivers Floodplain District.
A.
The preservation of the natural flood control characteristics and the
water storage capacity of the Floodplain District.
B.
The safety and purity of water; control and containment of sewage;
safety of gas, electric, fuel and other utilities from breaking, leaking,
short circuiting, grounding, igniting, electrocuting or any other dangers
due to flooding.
C.
The Floodplain District is superimposed over all districts established
by this Bylaw. The Floodplain District is defined as all lands along or
sloping to the Stop River and Charles River whose elevation is below
125 feet mean sea level based on the Massachusetts Geodetic Datum of
1929 (Elevation 124 based on NAVD 1988) and as shown on the Zoning
Map and all the A Zone flood areas (Zone A and Zone AE) as shown
on the Department of Homeland Security Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for Norfolk County, dated July 17, 2012, Community #250242,
panel numbers: 25021C0153E, 25021C0154E, 25021C0158E,
25021C0159E, 25021C0162E, 25021C0164E, 25021C0166E,
25021C0167E, 25021C0168E, and 25021C0169, as amended.
A.
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other
floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B.
Land in the Floodplain District may be used for any purpose otherwise
permitted in the underlying district except that:
No building permit shall be issued nor any building, wall, dam or
other structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged or
otherwise created or moved for any purpose unless a special permit
is issued by the Board of Appeals.
(1)
Dumping, filling, excavating or transferring of any earth or fill
material within the district is prohibited unless a special permit is
issued by the Board of Appeals.
(2)
A.
§ 300-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.3
1:231
§ 300-10.4. Application for special permit.
§ 300-10.5. Issuance of special permits.
No ponds or pools shall be created or other changes in
watercourses allowed, whether for swimming, fishing or other
recreational uses, agricultural uses, scenic features or drainage
improvements or any other uses, unless a special permit is issued
by the Board of Appeals.
(3)
Dams and water control devices.
Proper operation and maintenance of existing dams and other
water control devices are permitted uses under this Article. This
includes the temporary alteration of the water level for emergency
or maintenance purposes and the removal of any and all
flashboards of a privately owned dam in order to lower the water
level.
(1)
No new dams or other water control devices shall be created unless
a special permit is issued by the Board of Appeals.
(2)
B.
Maintenance of municipal facilities, such as waterworks, pumping
stations, existing public ways and parks, shall not be subject to a special
permit under this Article.
C.
Any person desiring a special permit for any use set out in § 300-10.3A
above within the Floodplain District shall submit an application to the
Board of Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40A,
as amended. The application shall be accompanied by plans of any
construction and of the premises on which it is to be situated. All plans
shall show existing and proposed finished ground contour at two-foot
intervals. Contours shall be delineated within 200 feet of the proposed
construction. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
A.
Copies of the application for special permit to the Board of Appeals
with accompanying plans shall also be sent to the Building Inspector,
Board of Health, Conservation Commission and Planning Board for
their recommendations to the Board of Appeals, as to their approval,
disapproval or appropriate recommendations.
B.
All such plans shall be certified by a registered land surveyor or a
registered professional civil engineer.
C.
Prior to submitting an application for special permit, the applicant
shall have obtained an order of conditions or determination of
nonapplicability, as appropriate, from the Medfield Conservation
Commission; a copy of the Commission's decision shall be included with
the application.
D.
The Board of Appeals, after holding a public hearing, shall issue a
permit under this Article if it finds that the use of the premises will not
A.
§ 300-10.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-10.5
1:232
endanger the health or safety of the occupants thereof or of other land
in the Floodplain District. In deciding applications for a special permit
under this Article, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
the Board of Appeals shall find affirmatively:
That the basement floor elevation for any structure having
sustained living occupancy shall be at least 125 feet above the
mean sea level (NGVD 1929), and the top of the foundation wall
shall be at least 132 feet above mean sea level (NGVD).
(1)
That structures be so designed and secured that during flooding:
(a) The foundation would not be undermined.
(b) The structure will not be floated, battered off nor swept away.
(2)
That safe vehicular and pedestrian access to, over and from the
premises is provided on ways having all elevations no less than 125
feet above mean sea level (NGVD 1929), unless data indicated a
higher ground.
(3)
That because of the location, elevation or for other reasons, there
will be no danger of pollution to public or on-site water facilities.
(4)
That sewage, gas, electricity, fuel, and other utilities will be
adequately protected from all hazards which may arise as a result
of a severe flood.
(5)
(6) That the methods of drainage are adequate.
That other land in the Floodplain District is nevertheless protected
against diminution of value as a result of the proposed use of the
premises.
(7)
No new construction, improvement of existing structures, filling
or other land development shall be permitted unless it is
demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point in the
Town.
(8)
The proposed project, and its construction, will be consistent with
the Conservation Commission's decision.
(9)
If any land included in the Floodplain District is found by the Board of
Appeals not to be in fact subject to seasonal or periodic flooding, the
Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the use of such land for
any purpose permitted in the underlying district.
B.
No building permit shall be issued until the Board of Health has issued
a permit under this Article approving the proposed sanitary and storm
C.
§ 300-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.5
1:233
§ 300-10.6. Limits of authority.
Nothing contained in this Article 10 shall limit the authority of the Board
of Health with respect to premises in the Floodplain District or limit the
applicability of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building Code to
any structure in the Floodplain District.
§ 300-10.7. Obligation of applicant.
The furnishing of all plans and specifications necessary to all boards and
authorities as required by this Article shall be the obligation of the
applicant. Each board or authority shall immediately return to such
applicant a dated receipt in duplicate, describing the documents received.
Such receipt shall be prima facie evidence of delivery and date of delivery.
A copy of each receipt shall be presented to the Board of Appeals at least
two weeks before the date set for the hearing of the application.
drainage system or has allowed 45 days to elapse after receipt of the
application.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the Board of Appeals,
the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission and the Planning Board have received a certified plan
showing the foundation and floor elevations, grading of the premises,
elevations of the complete structure and all elevations of the various
elements that make up the sewage disposal system, and it is
determined by each board and the Building Inspector that all
requirements of all permits are satisfied or 45 days have elapsed after
the receipt of such plan by the Building Inspector and each board and
notification of the Building Inspector and each board by the applicant
for the completion of the work.
D.
In consideration of any of the items under this § 300-10.5, Issuance of
special permits, the Board of Health and the Board of Appeals shall
consider the minimum groundwater level in the Floodplain District
to be 123 feet above mean sea level, unless data indicate a higher
groundwater level.
E.
§ 300-10.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-10.7
1:234
ARTICLE 11
Watershed Protection District
§ 300-11.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is:
§ 300-11.2. Location.
§ 300-11.3. Permitted uses.
To preserve and protect the streams and other watercourses in the
Town of Medfield and their adjoining lands.
A.
To protect the health and safety of persons and property against the
hazards of flooding and contamination.
B.
To preserve and maintain the groundwater table for water supply
purposes.
C.
To protect the community against the detrimental use and development
of lands adjoining such watercourses.
D.
To conserve the watershed areas of the Town of Medfield for the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
E.
The Watershed Protection District is superimposed over any other
district established by this Bylaw. The Watershed Protection District is
defined as all land area along the streams and brooks for a horizontal
distance of at least 25 feet from the normal high water line and from
adjacent low, marshy areas. The names of the brooks included within
the district are as follows: Great Pond Brook, Mill Brook, North Brook,
Saw Mill Brook, Sewall Brook, Nantasket Brook, Turtle Brook, Vine
Brook, Winter Brook, Brooks "A" through "J," inclusive, and all other
brooks in the Town of Medfield.
A.
The Watershed Protection District shall include all land that lies within
a horizontal distance of 25 feet from the normal high water line of the
following major water bodies: Baker's Pond, Cemetery Pond, Chickering
Lake, Danielson Pond, Echo Lake, Flynn's Pond, Hinkley Pond, Holt's
Pond, Jewell's Pond, June Pond, Kingsbury Pond, Little Chickering Lake,
Notch Pond, Parker's Pond, and all other ponds that are in the Town of
Medfield.
B.
Land in the Watershed Protection District may be used for any purpose
otherwise permitted in the underlying district except that:
No building permit shall be issued nor any building wall, dam or
other structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, or
otherwise created or moved for any purpose unless a special permit
is issued by the Board of Appeals.
(1)
A.
§ 300-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.3
1:235
§ 300-11.4. Application for special permit.
Dumping, filling, excavating or transferring of any earth material
within the district is prohibited unless a special permit is issued by
the Board of Appeals.
(2)
No ponds or pools shall be created or other changes in
watercourses allowed, whether for swimming, fishing, or other
recreational uses, agricultural uses, scenic features or drainage
improvements or any other uses, unless a special permit is issued
by the Board of Appeals.
(3)
Dams and water control devices.
Proper operation and maintenance of existing dams and other
water control devices are permitted uses under this Article. This
includes the temporary alteration of the water level for emergency
or maintenance purposes and the removal of any and all
flashboards of a privately owned dam in order to lower the water
level.
(1)
No new dams or other water control devices shall be created unless
a special permit is issued by the Board of Appeals.
(2)
B.
Maintenance of municipal facilities, such as waterworks, pumping
stations, existing public ways and parks, shall not be subject to a special
permit under this Article.
C.
Any person desiring a special permit for any use set out in § 300-11.3A
above within the Watershed Protection District shall submit an
application to the Board of Appeals, in accordance with the provisions
of MGL c. 40A, as amended. The application shall be accompanied by
plans of any construction and of the premises on which it is to be
situated. All plans shall show existing and proposed finished ground
contours at two-foot intervals. Contours shall be delineated within 200
feet of the proposed construction. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art.
33]
A.
Copies of the application for special permit to the Board of Appeals
with accompanying plans shall also be sent to the Building Inspector,
Board of Health, Conservation Commission and Planning Board for
their recommendations to the Board of Appeals, as to their approval,
disapproval or appropriate recommendations.
B.
All such plans shall be certified by a registered land surveyor or a
registered professional civil engineer.
C.
Prior to submitting an application for special permit, the applicant
shall have obtained an order of conditions or determination of
nonapplicability, as appropriate, from the Medfield Conservation
Commission; a copy of the Commission's decision shall be included with
the application.
D.
§ 300-11.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-11.5
1:236
§ 300-11.5. Issuance of special permits.
The Board of Appeals, after holding a public hearing, shall issue a
special permit under this Article only if it finds that the use of the
premises will not endanger the health or safety of the occupants thereof
or of other land in the Watershed Protection District. In deciding upon
applications for a special permit under this Article, but without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, the Board of Appeals shall find
affirmatively:
That the basement floor elevation for any proposed structure in
a Watershed Protection District having sustained living occupancy
shall be at least two feet above the elevation of the surrounding
Watershed Protection District and that the top of the foundation
wall shall be at least nine feet above the elevation of the
surrounding Watershed Protection District.
(1)
That structures be so designed and secured that during flooding:
(a) The foundation would not be undermined.
(b) The structure will not be floated, battered off nor swept away.
(2)
That safe vehicular and pedestrian access to, over and from the
premises is provided on ways having all elevations no less than two
feet above the elevation of the surrounding Watershed Protection
District.
(3)
That because of the location, elevation or for other reasons, there
will be no danger of pollution to public or on-site water facilities.
(4)
That sewage, gas, electricity, fuel, and other utilities will be
adequately protected from all hazards which may arise as a result
of a severe flood.
(5)
(6) That the methods of drainage are adequate.
That other land in the Watershed Protection District is nevertheless
protected against diminution of value as a result of the proposed
use of the premises.
(7)
The proposed project, and its construction, will be consistent with
the Conservation Commission's decision.
(8)
A.
No building permit shall be issued until the Board of Health has issued
a permit under this Article approving the proposed sanitary and storm
drainage system or has allowed 45 days to elapse after receipt of the
application.
B.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the Board of Appeals,
the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission and the Planning Board have received a certified plan
showing the foundation and floor elevations, grading of the premises,
C.
§ 300-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.5
1:237
§ 300-11.6. Water bodies.
All water bodies encircled by the Watershed Protection District are hereby
included within said district.
§ 300-11.7. Limits of authority.
Nothing contained in this Article 11 shall limit the authority of the Board of
Health with respect to premises in the Watershed Protection District or limit
the applicability of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building
Code to any structure in the Watershed Protection District.
§ 300-11.8. Obligation of applicant.
The furnishing of all plans and specifications necessary to all boards and
authorities as required by this Article shall be the obligation of the
applicant. Each board or authority shall immediately return to such
applicant a dated receipt in duplicate describing the documents received.
Such receipt shall be prima facie evidence of delivery and date of delivery.
A copy of each receipt shall be presented to the Board of Appeals at least
two weeks before the date set for the hearing of the application.
elevations of the completed structure and all elevations, of the various
elements that make up the sewage disposal system, and it is
determined by each board and the Building Inspector that all
requirements of all permits are satisfied or 45 days have elapsed after
the receipt of such plan by the Building Inspector and each board and
notification of the Building Inspector and each board by the applicant
for the completion of the work.
In consideration of any of the items under this § 300-11.5, Issuance of
special permits, the Board of Health and the Board of Appeals shall
consider the minimum groundwater level in the Watershed Protection
District to be two feet below the natural elevations of the ground at
the location of the proposed construction, unless data indicate a higher
ground water level.
D.
§ 300-11.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-11.8
1:238
ARTICLE 12
Rules and Regulations Governing Earth Removal Uses
§ 300-12.1. Permit required.
§ 300-12.2. Application.
The removal of earth from all zoning districts of the Town of Medfield
shall be permitted only after special permission of the Board of
Selectmen and under these rules and regulations. The Board of
Selectmen shall grant no such permit except in conjunction with the
construction of subdivision streets approved by the Planning Board;
public works or other municipal projects approved by a public
authority; or private land development where the Selectmen find that
no reasonable alternative contour plan is practicable, and, in that
event, that minimal disruption of the natural contours of the site may
be permitted. Furthermore, the Board of Selectmen shall grant no such
permit as would, in their opinion, adversely affect the scheme of growth
laid down in the Zoning Bylaw or elsewhere, or the economic status of
the Town, or tend to impair the beauty of the Town, or of the district
most immediately affected, or result in health or other hazards.
A.
If any earth shall be removed without obtaining a special permit or
otherwise in violation of this Article, the Selectmen may order the
restoration of the property involved in accordance with the provisions
of this Article. Such an order of restoration will not constitute a waiver
of any other fines or penalties for such violations.
B.
All applications for approval or endorsement for the removal of earth in
the Town of Medfield shall be made in accordance with the rules and
regulations hereinafter set forth.
A.
Before an applicant can obtain a permit for the purpose of removing
earth in the Town of Medfield, he shall present to the Board of
Selectmen an original and five copies of a plan made by a registered
engineer or registered land surveyor, which shall show in detail the
following information:
All property where earth is to be removed, with the boundaries
shown in detail.
(1)
All buildings on said property and buildings within 100 feet of said
property lines.
(2)
(3) All adjacent roads, their elevations, and established grades.
(4) All adjacent waterways, brooks, swamps and their elevations.
Contour lines for the entire property at two-foot intervals and
showing existing and proposed elevations.
(5)
(6) Any and all easements existing and proposed, public or private.
B.
§ 300-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12.2
1:239
§ 300-12.3. Site plan.
The plan shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 40 feet. All profiles
shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals eight feet. The Board of
Selectmen, after study, may make such corrections and revisions as it
deems advisable in the public interest.
§ 300-12.4. General requirements.
In approving the plan, the Board of Selectmen will require that the land
shall be suitable for the removal of earth without danger to health and life
and that proper steps are taken so as not to hinder or endanger traffic
on public ways. The Board of Selectmen may require, at its discretion,
that police control of the traffic be provided by the applicant at his or her
expense. Only when the Selectmen find affirmatively that no public hazard
or nuisance will result will they approve a plan for the removal of earth
where intentions are shown for excavation below the level of an adjacent
already-existing public way.
§ 300-12.5. Procedure.
§ 300-12.6. Publication and notices.
(7) Any and all benchmarks.
(8) All land shall be divided into five-acre grids.
The Board of Selectmen will act upon application for approval of earth
removal only when proper plans have been submitted with all
information that is required clearly shown.
A.
Before approval is granted, a public hearing shall be held by the Board
of Selectmen, notices of which shall be sent by certified or registered
mail with return receipt to mortgagees, if any, of the applicant's
property and to all owners of property as appearing on the most recent
tax list, any part of which lies within 100 feet of the property of the
applicant.
B.
The applicant shall arrange and pay for such publications and notices
and shall deliver a list of said mortgagees, property owners, return
receipts, and a copy of the paper containing the notice of the hearing
to the Clerk of the Board of Selectmen at least 24 hours prior to the
hearing.
A.
The notice shall appear in a paper of general circulation within the
Town, once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication at
least 14 days before the day of the hearing.
B.
The word "applicant" as used in these rules and regulations shall mean
the owner of the property or his or her legal representative or persons
authorized by the owner.
C.
§ 300-12.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-12.6
1:240
§ 300-12.7. Bond.
§ 300-12.8. Specifications.
All work shall be done in accordance with the following specifications:
Corporations shall file with the Board of Selectmen a list of their
officers and designate their authority to sign legal documents.
D.
Before approval of any plan, and in order to insure the fulfillment of the
following requirements, the Board of Selectmen will require a proper
bond, or deposits of money, or negotiable securities on a scale of not
less than $10,000 per acre, for which restoration could be required, the
exact amount to be set by the Board of Selectmen.
A.
Said bond or security shall be held by the Town of Medfield until
all requirements of the specifications have been complied with. The
Board of Selectmen shall be the agent to enforce compliance with these
rules and regulations, and upon satisfactory completion will release the
security.
B.
No applicant will be allowed to work more than one five-acre grid at
any one time.
C.
A. Trees are to be cut (not bulldozed).
All trees and brush are to be chipped on the site, unless removed for
commercial purposes. Stumps are to be either chipped on the site or
removed in accordance with DEP regulations.
B.
All loam and subsoil must be bulldozed into piles for future respreading,
except that loam and subsoil lying below proposed impervious surfaces
on a site may be removed in accordance with the provisions of this
Article 12.
C.
Earth may be removed only to contours as specified by the Board of
Selectmen. In earth removal areas, ledge shall not be left exposed
above the approved grade, and boulders, when encountered, shall be
buried at least such that their tops are four feet below the approved
grade, and in the event that ledge is encountered prior to reaching
the approved grade, a revision of the approved grade plan must be
immediately obtained.
D.
After the earth has been removed from the first five-acre grid, and
before proceeding to the next five-acre grid, excavation shall be graded
to the approved grade and all loam and subsoil shall then be respread
over the excavation, except in such areas as are required in subsequent
operations.
E.
Rye grass shall be seeded on this reloamed area at the rate of 200
pounds per acre.
F.
§ 300-12.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12.8
1:241
§ 300-12.9. Removal of earth not intended for business.
§ 300-12.10. Definition of earth.
"Earth," as used in this Article, shall include all material, fragmental or
otherwise, normally composing part of the surface of the globe, excluding
water.
§ 300-12.11. Violations and enforcement.
Fingerling fir, white pine or other approved trees shall be planted over
the entire area, five to six feet on centers.
G.
Upon completion and approval by the Board of Selectmen of the fiveacre
grid, the security may be released in part or in whole or it may be
advanced to the next grid.
H.
Noncommercial removal of earth for the improvement of a person's
property in an area not exceeding one acre will be allowed on a weekly
permit upon such conditions and terms as specified by the Board of
Selectmen. This type of permit must be renewed every seven days at a
time and place set by the Board of Selectmen.
A.
If a violation of the terms of an earth removal permit occurs, the
Selectmen shall forthwith revoke the permit and not renew it until
the violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the Board of
Selectmen.
B.
These rules and regulations governing earth removal uses in the Town
of Medfield shall not apply to operations that were in progress and
operated on land owned by the applicant prior to April 9, 1938, except
that the final grade of the land shall be approved by the Board of
Selectmen immediately upon the approval of this Bylaw.
C.
The Board of Selectmen may delegate authority to inspect the earth
removal operations under these rules and regulations.
D.
The Board of Selectmen shall reserve the right to limit the days and
hours of operation and may require antidust treatment in those areas
that, in the Board of Selectmen's opinion, require such treatment.
E.
The Board of Selectmen may also require additional surety to cover
the cost of damage to existing Town roadways or cleanup requirements
caused by the earth removal operation.
F.
Removal of earth without a valid earth removal permit or in excess of
the amount specified in a permit or otherwise in violation of any stated
condition of a permit shall be punishable by fine as follows: $100 per
cubic yard, each cubic yard constituting a separate violation.
A.
The enforcement officer for this Earth Removal Bylaw shall be the Chief
of Police and any police officer, and the Building Inspector. An applicant
B.
§ 300-12.8 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-12.11
1:242
may appeal an enforcement officer's determination as to the existence
of a violation or the amount of a fine by requesting a hearing before the
Board of Selectmen. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
The Board of Selectmen, in addition to any other remedies available to
the Town, shall have the right to withhold consideration or approval of
an applicant's request for additional earth removal while any fine levied
under Subsection A remains unpaid.
C.
§ 300-12.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12.11
1:243

ARTICLE 13
Sign Bylaw
§ 300-13.1. Administration.
(See § 300-14.2 also.)
§ 300-13.2. Signing districts.
The Town of Medfield is divided into three sign districts, following zoning
classifications.
No sign, except noncommercial signs less than one square foot or
specifically enumerated in § 300-13.4, Required signs, and § 300-13.5
Temporary signs, shall be erected without a permit issued by the
Building Inspector, application for which shall be accompanied by such
scale drawings, photographs, and other information as the Building
Inspector may require. The applicant must be the owner of the property
or have the written permission of the owner.
A.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and/or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this
Sign Bylaw. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
B.
A Sign Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Planning Board and
shall be composed of three residents at large and two business persons.
The Sign Advisory Board shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To review and recommend action on all sign permit applications.
To review periodically the existing Sign Bylaw and advise the
Planning Board as to desirable modifications.
(2)
To provide assistance and advice to applicants requesting sign
permits.
(3)
To bring violations of the Sign Bylaw to the attention of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(4)
C.
Fees for sign permits shall be fixed every three years by the Board of
Selectmen.
D.
Owners of signs found to be in violation shall be subject to a fine of $25
per day until such sign is in conformity with this Bylaw.
E.
Business districts: those areas of Town zoned Business (B) and
Business-Industrial (BI) and those areas used for retail sales in the
Agricultural District.
A.
Industrial-Extensive (IE): those areas of the Town zoned (IE) Industrial-
Extensive. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
B.
C. Residential: all other areas of the Town not included above.
§ 300-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.3
1:245
§ 300-13.3. Prohibited signs and signing limitations.
Off-premises signs are prohibited, except temporary signs used to
advertise special events whose proceeds are used for charity, schools or
nonprofit organizations, provided an approved sign permit is obtained
at least three days before the posting of the sign. There shall be no
fee for the permit and the Building Inspector is authorized to issue the
permit without the Sign Advisory Board's approval.
A.
No sign or light shall move, flash, or make noise. (Indicators of time and
temperature may move.)
B.
Any imitation of official traffic signs or signals and the use of such
words as STOP, LOOK, DANGER, GO SLOW, CAUTION, or WARNING is
prohibited.
C.
Signs near traffic signals or intersections shall not obscure visibility or
create confusion when viewed from a vehicle stopped at or approaching
a signal or intersection.
D.
Colored lights for sign or building illumination are prohibited in
residential areas. This requirement does not apply to holiday signs or
lights. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
E.
A permanent window sign may not exceed one-third of the total glass
area of the window in which it is mounted. Permanent window signs
must be included in calculating the total area of signage for that
building side.
F.
A freestanding or projecting sign may only include lettering and
symbols to indicate the name of the business, trademark or logo,
telephone number, and hours of operation. Freestanding directory signs
for multiple-occupancy buildings may only display the name and kind
of business for each occupancy. No freestanding or projecting sign may
have more than two sides, excluding frames and supports.
G.
There shall be no more than two different types of permanent signs
employed per building, regardless of the number of occupancies. Each
occupant shall be restricted to no more than two signs. There shall be
no more than one freestanding sign per building.
H.
The registered trademark of a specific product may occupy no more
than one-quarter of the area of the sign face upon which it appears
unless the specific product is at least 50% of the business by dollar
volume.
I.
Off-street parking facilities for 10 or more cars may be identified by
a sign displaying the letter "P" and a directional arrow indicating an
entrance or exit. Such a sign may not exceed two square feet in sign
area. Such signs are not counted in computing total sign area.
J.
One entrance or exit sign of no more than three square feet per side
shall be allowed for each entrance or exit from a parking area. These
K.
§ 300-13.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-13.3
1:246
§ 300-13.4. Required signs. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
A sign permit is not required for the following types of required signs:
§ 300-13.5. Temporary signs.
signs shall not be counted in computing the total sign area or in
calculating the number of freestanding signs. Such sign(s) shall
conform to the U.S. Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
Backlighted (internally illuminated) informational signs or structures
with translucent faces are not allowed. Signs may be illuminated by
an external light fixture (white in color) or halo-lighted (no "day-glo"
colors). Lamps or tubes shall not be visible to the motoring public from
a public way. Sign graphics may not be translucent.
L.
One "OPEN" flag shall be permitted per retail business. The flag shall
not exceed three feet by five feet. The flag is to fly from a pole mounted
to the building. The flag must be removed when the business is not
open.
M.
Building identification numbers conforming to the requirements of
Chapter 110, Building Construction, Article II, of the Bylaws.
A.
In a nonresidential zone, a construction sign is required identifying
the parties involved and the nature of the construction project, on the
premises where the construction is located. In a residential zone it
is optional. Sign area may not be greater than 16 square feet. The
sign must not be installed more than 14 days before construction
commences and must be removed 14 days after any portion of any
structure is occupied or after any portion of the last structure in a
multiple-building construction project is occupied.
B.
Temporary window signs are allowed without a permit in Business
Districts for no more than 30 days for advertising special sales or
events. They may cover no more than one-third of the total area of
exterior street side windows. Their area is not included in calculating
allowable permanent sign area.
A.
Temporary outdoor signs may be allowed by permit in Business
Districts for no more than 30 days to advertise special sales or events.
Their area is not included in calculating allowable permanent sign area,
but the area of such a sign shall not exceed six square feet per side.
B.
Temporary signs are allowed without permit in Residential and
Business Districts, including but not limited to real estate signs,
contractor and subcontractor and temporary services, limited to one
unlighted sign of up to eight square feet pertaining to the sale, rental
or lease of the premises, or to the services being performed on the
premises on which the sign is placed. Such signs shall be removed
C.
§ 300-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.5
1:247
§ 300-13.6. Nonconforming signs.
When the replacement of an existing nonconforming sign or the placement
of a new sign on a multi-tenant building would violate the allowable sign
area, a permit may be issued allowing such sign. However, the sign surface
area allowed for the replacement or new sign shall be based on the
proportion of floor area occupied by each tenant.
§ 300-13.7. Location of signs.
§ 300-13.8. Sign surface area.
within 14 days after final sale, lease or rental, or cessation of services
on the premises.
Real estate signs are allowed without permit in Industrial-Extensive
Districts, limited to one unlighted sign of up to 25 square feet
pertaining to the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign
is placed. Such signs and their supports shall be removed by the realtor
within 14 days after final sale, rental or lease.
D.
A parallel sign shall project no more than 12 inches from the building
surface. No awning, canopy or projecting sign shall project more than
five feet from the building face or come within three feet of the public
way reserved for vehicular traffic.
A.
The bottom of a projecting sign shall be at least 10 feet above ground
level. The bottom of any awning or canopy sign shall not be lower than
the awning or canopy to which it is attached.
B.
The top of a freestanding sign shall extend no higher than 15 feet
above ground level, and the bottom shall not interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
C.
No parallel sign or any portion thereof shall be allowed above the
bottom of the sills of second story windows of the building on which it
is mounted.
D.
No sign or support for a sign may extend above the cornice line of the
building to which it is attached.
E.
In a Business (B), Business-Industrial (BI), or Industrial-Extensive (IE)
District, no freestanding sign shall be located nearer any property line
than the permitted setback distance for a building on the same lot.
F.
The area of a sign is defined as the entire area within a single rectangle
enclosing the extreme limits of lettering, decorative structures, logos,
representations, emblems or other figures, together with any material
or color forming an integral part of the sign or used to differentiate
the sign from the building on which it is mounted. Structural members
bearing no sign copy and outside of the area defined above are not
included in calculating sign area. In applying the maximum height and
A.
§ 300-13.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-13.8
1:248
width limitations prescribed in this Bylaw for signs, any intermediary
removable surface to which a sign is affixed shall be deemed to be a
part of the sign. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
For a sign, either freestanding or attached, the area shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording, and the accompanying
designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open
or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the
display itself.
(1)
For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area shall
be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs of symbols together with any backing of a different color
from the finish material of the building face.
(2)
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached
to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the area
shall be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(3)
For two-sided freestanding or projecting signs, both sides are included
in calculating sign area, whether used for copy or not.
B.
In a Residential District, there shall be no signs except the following:
On a lot occupied by a dwelling, there shall not be more than
one sign pertaining to the use thereof or bearing the name and
occupation of any occupant or occupants, and no such sign shall
exceed one square foot in area.
(1)
For premises used for permitted home occupations, there shall be
no exterior signs other than a sign not to exceed one square foot
in area per side, carrying only the name and occupation of the
occupant as allowed in the Table of Use Regulations included as an
attachment to this Bylaw and/or § 300-14.10H(2)(c).
(2)
In a Residential-Urban District, a multifamily dwelling complex
containing 10 or more units shall be allowed one sign not to exceed
eight square feet in area per side. This sign shall contain only the
name and address of the complex.
(3)
C.
In the case of single-story, multi-tenant structures within the Business,
Business-Industrial and Industrial-Extensive Districts, the allowable
sign area shall be allotted based on the proportion of floor area
occupied by each tenant.
D.
In a Business Districts, maximum sign area allowed is calculated
according to a formula based on the building sign frontage or as
otherwise indicated.
E.
§ 300-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.8
1:249
§ 300-13.9. Obsolete signs.
A sign (and its supports) which ceases to advertise a bona fide business
conducted or product sold on any premises shall be removed within 30 days
after written notification from the Building Inspector.
§ 300-13.10. Alteration, repair, and replacement of signs.
For one-story buildings, or multi-story, single-tenant buildings, with
building sign frontage not more than 25 feet: maximum sign area
equals five times the square root of the building sign frontage.
(1)
For one-story buildings, or multi-story, single-tenant buildings with
sign frontage more than 25 feet: maximum sign area equals 10
times the square root of the building sign frontage.
(2)
For all multi-story, multi-tenant buildings: maximum sign area shall
equal 10 times the square root of the building sign frontage, plus
an additional area equal to a maximum of five times the square root
of the upper story sign frontage.
(3)
In an Industrial-Extensive District, maximum sign area allowed is
calculated according to a formula based on the building sign frontage
or as otherwise indicated.
Maximum sign area equals five times the square root of the
building sign frontage.
(1)
In the case where no building sign frontage exists, the maximum
sign area allowed is 32 square feet, advertising only those activities
conducted on the premises.
(2)
F.
In all zoning districts, the following sign area exceptions are allowed, in
addition to the maximum sign area:
Historic markers and commemorative tablets up to five square feet
in area when made a permanent and integral part of the building.
(1)
Signs up to two square feet in area, used for identifying nonprofit
organizations, rest rooms, telephones, and other public facilities,
are allowed for the purposes of identification.
(2)
(3) A bed-and-breakfast use shall be allowed a two-square-foot sign.
G.
No sign shall be reconstructed, extended, changed structurally,
repaired or replaced except in accordance with this Bylaw and then
only if a new permit is issued following the requirements of this Article
13. A sign which is deemed unsafe by the Building Inspector shall be
removed by its owner.
A.
A sign which does not conform with this Article 13 may be repaired,
provided that the cost of repair does not exceed 50% of the replacement
cost of the entire sign, provided that such sign as repaired is not more
B.
§ 300-13.8 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-13.10
1:250
nonconforming than the existing sign. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
an electric time and temperature sign which is an integral part of a
nonconforming sign may be repaired or replaced with no restrictions
on the cost of the repair or replacement, provided that such sign as
repaired or replaced is not more nonconforming than the existing sign.
A nonconforming sign may not be maintained if the use of the property
is changed.
§ 300-13.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.10
1:251

ARTICLE 14
Administration and Enforcement
§ 300-14.1. Building Inspector and/or Zoning Enforcement Officer.
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
It shall be the duty of the Board of Selectmen, which may appoint agents,
the Building Inspector and Zoning Enforcement Officer, to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Bylaw.
§ 300-14.2. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to erect, construct, reconstruct,
or alter a structure or change the use, increase the intensity of use, or
extend or displace the use of any building, other structure or lot without
applying for and receiving from the Building Inspector or Board of
Selectmen the required permit. For purposes of administration, the
application procedure involving a permit for a structure or use may be
made at the same time and combined with the permit required under the
State Building Code. In addition to the plot plans and drawings required
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building Code (prepared and
certified to by a professional engineer and/or land surveyor), plans and
information for signs and off-street parking and loading shall also be filed
with the Building Inspector. An application for a permit in the Floodplain
or Watershed Protection Districts shown on the Zoning Map shall meet all
requirements of Articles 10 and 11.
§ 300-14.3. Previously approved permits.
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform
to any subsequent amendment of the Bylaw unless the use or construction is
commenced within a period of not more than six months after the issuance
of the permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such construction
is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is
reasonable.
§ 300-14.4. Certificate of use and occupancy required.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure or lot for which a permit
is required herein until the owner applies for and receives from the Building
Inspector a certificate of use and occupancy. Nothing herein shall negate
the necessity of a use and occupancy permit required under the State
Building Code.
§ 300-14.5. Permit and certificate fees.
Fees shall be established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 300-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.6
1:253
§ 300-14.6. Special permit time limits.
The recipient of a special permit shall apply for a building permit within two
years of the date of authorization by the special permit granting authority or
the special permit will become null and void. Any work for which any permit
has been issued by the Building Inspector shall be actively prosecuted
within 90 days and completed within one year of the date of the issuance of
the special permit. Any special permit issued for a project which is actively
prosecuted for one year may be extended up to an additional year at the
discretion of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 300-14.7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 33]
§ 300-14.8. Prosecution of violations.
If the notice of "violation and order" is not complied with promptly, the
Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall request the Board
of Selectmen to institute the appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain and correct the violation.
§ 300-14.9. Board of Appeals.
There shall be a Board of Appeals of three members and three associate
members appointed as provided in MGL c. 40A, as amended, which shall
act on all matters within its jurisdiction under this Bylaw in the manner
prescribed in said Section, subject always to the rule that it shall give
due consideration to promoting the public health, safety, convenience, and
welfare, and conserving property values; that it shall permit no building or
use injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental to a neighborhood; special
permits may be issued only for uses which are in harmony with the general
purpose and interest of this Bylaw and shall be subject to general or
The Building Inspectors or Zoning Enforcement Officers shall serve
a notice of "violation and order" to any owner or person responsible
for any violation of the provisions of the Bylaw or violation of any
approved plan, information or certificate issued under the provisions of
this Bylaw. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the unlawful
action, use or condition and the abatement of violation within a time to
be specified by the Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Any owner who has been served with a notice and who ceases any work
or other activity shall not leave any structure or lot in a condition that
is a hazard or menace to the public safety, health or general welfare.
The Building Inspector shall have the power to require that premises
be put in safe condition or such condition that he directs to bring them
into conformity with this Bylaw.
A.
Except as set forth in § 300-13.1E for violations of the Sign Bylaw,
violation of any of the provisions of this Bylaw shall be fined not more
than $300 for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 300-14.6 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.9
1:254
specific provisions set forth herein; and that it shall prescribe appropriate
conditions, safeguards and limitations on time or use.
§ 300-14.10. Special permits by Board of Appeals.
Certain uses, structures or conditions are designated as "SP" in the Table
of Use Regulations included as an attachment to this Bylaw. These uses
require a special permit from the Board of Appeals, which may be obtained
only by use of the following procedure. Special permits required by Article
7, Open Space Residential Zoning, Article 10, Floodplain District, and
Article 11, Watershed Protection District, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Section and shall be governed by the provisions of Articles
7, 10 and 11.
Form of application. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
Any person desiring to apply for a special permit hereunder shall
submit an application in writing to the Board of Appeals with a
copy to the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, the Planning
Board and Town Clerk. Each application shall contain the following
information:
(a) The full name and address of the applicant.
The full name and address of the record owner of the real
estate concerning which the special permit is sought if
different from the applicant.
(b)
If the applicant is other than the record owner of the real
estate, the nature of the applicant's interest in the real estate
(i.e., lease, option to purchase, etc.).
(c)
The street address and zone for the property concerning which
a special permit is sought.
(d)
A summary of any construction or change which the applicant
intends to make to the property if the special permit is granted.
(e)
A plot plan showing the boundary lines of the premises and the
locations of structures thereon.
(f)
Plans showing any proposed construction, alterations or
renovations of the premises for which the special permit is
sought.
(g)
If the proposed use contemplates removal or disturbance of
any earth, topographical plans of the property shall be
furnished which show existing and finished ground contours at
two-foot intervals.
(h)
A summary of applicant's reasons for seeking the special
permit.
(i)
(1)
A.
§ 300-14.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.10
1:255
The Board of Appeals may require from any applicant for a special
permit such additional information as it may determine to be
necessary to determine the effect of the proposed use upon
neighboring persons and property, and upon the welfare of the
Town.
(2)
If no recommendations are received within 35 days after the date on
which a copy of the application is submitted to the Building Inspector,
the Board of Health and the Planning Board, as required by Subsection
A, it shall be deemed lack of their opposition thereto.
B.
Hearing. The Board of Appeals shall, at the expense of the applicant,
give notice of a public hearing as required by the Zoning Act and shall,
after publication of said notice, hold a public hearing on the application.
The public hearing shall not be held until at least 21 days have elapsed
and within 65 days from the date of the filing of the application. The
public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and
procedures prescribed by the Board of Appeals as required by the
Zoning Act.
C.
The Board of Appeals shall adopt and from time to time amend rules
relative to the issuance of special permits and shall file a copy of said
rules in the office of the Town Clerk.
D.
After the public hearing required by Subsection C has been concluded,
the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit if it concludes that
a special permit is warranted by the application and the evidence
produced at the public hearing and if it makes the following specific
findings of fact:
The proposed use will not result in a public hazard due to
substantially increased vehicular traffic or parking in the
neighborhood. In deciding this, the Board shall find affirmatively
that the road's structure, surroundings and configuration are such
as will support the added traffic safely.
(1)
The proposed use will not have any adverse effect upon property
values in the neighborhood.
(2)
The proposed use is architecturally and aesthetically consistent
with the other structures in the neighborhood.
(3)
The proposed use will not create any hazard to public safety or
health in the neighborhood.
(4)
The proposed use will not create any danger of pollution to public
or private water facilities.
(5)
(6) The methods of drainage at the proposed site are adequate.
If public sewerage is not provided, plans for on-site sewage
disposal systems are adequate and have been approved by the
Board of Health.
(7)
E.
§ 300-14.10 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.10
1:256
(8) That no excessive noise, light or odor shall be emitted.
(9) That no nuisance shall be created.
There is an adequate supply of potable water approved by the
Board of Health or the Water and Sewerage Board.
(10)
Single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling as a secondary use in
conjunction with a principal use in the B District not otherwise
requiring a special permit, shall be permitted subject to the following
special conditions: [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(1) A special permit will be required.
The principal use to which the residential use is "secondary" must
occupy all of the street and ground floor (with the exception of the
area for stairs or elevator necessary to gain access to the upper
floor residential use). This will not preclude that the business use
may occupy all or part of any floor above the street or ground floor.
(2)
(3) Residential off-street parking must be provided (See § 300-8.1).
The residential use will be protected from offensive noise,
vibration, electromagnetic interference, dust and other particulate
matter, odorous matter, heat, glare, and other objectionable
influences.
(4)
(5) The area of the lot will not be less than 10,000 square feet.
F.
Signs.
Upon proper application pursuant to Article 13, and after a public
hearing following the procedure required by Subsection C, the
Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to allow a sign to
be erected that would otherwise not be permitted, if the Board
concludes that a special permit is warranted by the application and
the evidence produced at the public hearing and if the Board makes
the following specific findings of fact:
The proposed sign will not have an adverse effect upon
property values in the neighborhood.
(a)
The proposed sign is architecturally and aesthetically
consistent with the other signs and structures in the area.
(b)
The proposed sign will not create any hazard to public safety
or health in the neighborhood.
(c)
(d) The proposed sign does not create a nuisance.
(1)
In no case shall a special permit be granted for a sign specifically
prohibited in any subsection of § 300-13.3.
(2)
G.
H. Conditions.
§ 300-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.10
1:257
If the Board of Appeals elects to grant a special permit pursuant
to this § 300-14.10, it may impose conditions upon the granting
thereof at its discretion. No building permit shall be granted for
construction authorized by a special permit granted hereunder
until plans have been submitted to the Building Inspector which
specify in detail the manner of compliance with any conditions set
by the Board of Appeals.
(1)
The Board shall also impose the conditions specified below on the
following uses:
For the use of a travel trailer or mobile home located in any
district, provided: any travel trailer or mobile home shall not
be used for more than six months; no wheels, tires or other
means of keeping the travel trailer or mobile home mobile
shall be removed; any travel trailer or mobile home shall have
a current state motor vehicle license; and no skirts, porches,
fences or similar materials or equipment shall be added to
any travel trailer or mobile home which would detract from its
mobility. Each travel trailer or mobile home and its lot shall be
subject to the requirements of the district.
(a)
For the conversion to or location of a lodging house in the
RU District, provided: it shall be limited to not more than five
persons; it shall be located in the principal building; official
residence shall be maintained therein by the owner of the
premises; it shall be used for non-transients only.
(b)
For bed-and-breakfast use, there shall be no more than four
rooms used as guest rooms for no more than six short-term
paying guests; parking shall be provided as required by
§ 300-8.1; and signs shall conform to § 300-13.8G(3).
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(c)
For the use of a single-family dwelling in any R District for
a home occupation, provided: not more than one nonresident
shall be employed therein; the use is carried on strictly within
the principal building; not more than 40% of the existing floor
area, not to exceed 500 square feet, is devoted to such use;
that there shall be no display of goods or wares visible from the
street; there shall be no advertising on the premises other than
a small nonelectrical sign not to exceed one square foot in area
and carrying only the name and occupation of any occupant
of the premises such as physician, artisan, teacher, day nurse,
lawyer, architect, engineer, clergyman, accountant, osteopath,
dentist, and similar occupations or professions; the buildings
or premises occupied shall not be rendered objectionable or
detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood
due to the exterior appearance, emission of odor, gas, smoke,
dust, noise, electrical disturbance or in any other way; the
building shall include no features of design not customary
(d)
(2)
§ 300-14.10 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.10
1:258
in buildings for residential use. Such uses as clinics, barber
shops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, real estate offices, tourist
homes, animal hospitals, kennels and others of a similar nature
shall not be considered home occupations. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
For the planned business or industrial development of land for
any permitted use in a B or BI District subject to the floor
area ratio more than the maximum permitted in the Table of
Area Regulations29 and less than the parking requirements
contained in Article 8, provided: the tract in single or
consolidated ownership at the time of application shall be at
least three acres in size; a development plan shall be presented
for the entire tract; the development shall be served by one
common parking area, exit and entrance; the maximum floor
area ratio shall not exceed 0.50; the parking space
requirements shall not be reduced by 10% or more of the
normal application requirements of the B or BI District.
(e)
For the manufacturing or other industrial use of any lot in any
I District, provided: the proposed use shall not emit any smoke
of a shade darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart
as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines; no air pollution
particle concentrations shall exceed 0.3 grain per cubic foot;
all inflammable or radioactive liquids shall be stored
underground; the discharge of wastes shall be into a public
sewer or the system subject to written approval of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health; vibration shall
not exceed the safe range of Table 7, U.S. Bureau of Mines,
Bulletin No. 442; there shall be no unusual or objectionable
odor; no direct or sky-reflected glare shall be permitted; and
all materials shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
(f)
For the use of land or the erection and use of any building
or other structure in any district for a principal or accessory
use where the provisions for a Bylaw cannot reasonably be
interpreted to provide anywhere in this Bylaw for such use,
provided: the Board determines in each instance such use shall
be essential to the general welfare of the Town; they shall
be permitted only in a district where uses similar to the use
shall be permitted; the use shall be subject to all provisions
prescribed in this Bylaw for the district in which the similar use
is provided for as a permitted use.
(g)
For the enlargement of any nonconforming structure (not
including a sign) beyond the maximum floor area ratio and
yard regulations in any district, and the extension of the use
thereof, refer to Article 9.
(h)
29.Editor's Note: The Table of Area Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.10
1:259
For alteration of single-, two- or multifamily dwelling to adapt
them to additional limited two- or multiple-family use upon the
following conditions:
That there will be no change in the existing district use
and the approval shall automatically cease when the
structure is removed.
(i)
That a minimum floor space of 500 square feet per family
unit be provided.
(ii)
(iii) That satisfactory off-street parking be provided.
(iv) That each family unit be a complete housekeeping unit.
That additions or appurtenances may not be added without
the prior approval of the Board of Appeals, except for
openings for ingress and egress, for necessary stairs and
steps, including shelters therefor, and for the housing of
one motor vehicle per family unit.
(v)
Other conditions that may lawfully be required by the
Board of Health, the Building, Plumbing and Wiring
Inspectors, the Planning Board and the Board of Appeals,
consistent with the foregoing.
(vi)
(i)
Accessory dwelling unit in single-family dwelling; provisions applicable
to a special permit for an accessory dwelling unit in a single-family
dwelling only. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
The purpose of permitting an accessory dwelling unit in a singlefamily
dwelling, in accordance with the conditions set forth below,
is to encourage preservation and maintenance of the larger older
houses in Medfield and to increase the supply of affordable housing
without significantly changing the character of existing residential
areas.
(1)
If it makes the findings set out in Subsection E(1) through (10) and
subject to such conditions as the Board of Appeals shall elect to
impose pursuant to Subsection F, the Board of Appeals shall issue
a permit for an accessory dwelling unit in a single-family dwelling
unit if it makes the following findings and subjects the permit to the
conditions required by this Section:
(a) The house was in existence prior to 1938.
The house has a minimum of 2,000 square feet of existing floor
area.
(b)
The house meets the lot area requirement for a single-family
dwelling in its district.
(c)
(2)
I.
§ 300-14.10 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.10
1:260
An addition to the house of up to 10% of the existing floor area
shall be allowed in the rear or side yard, provided the addition
is architecturally consistent with the existing house.
(d)
Except as regards item (d) above, the exterior of the house
shall not be altered except for restoration consistent with the
existing architecture and exits required by law, which exits
shall be in the rear or at the side of the house.
(e)
The accessory unit shall have a minimum floor area of 500
square feet, plus 100 square feet for each bedroom over one.
(f)
The accessory unit shall have a bathroom and a kitchen or
kitchenette.
(g)
Off-street parking shall be provided as required in § 300-8.1, in
addition to spaces required for the existing dwelling.
(h)
The owner of the house must occupy the house or the
accessory unit, except for bona fide temporary absences of up
to one year.
(i)
The special permit shall be a personal permit restricted to
the individual owner-applicant and shall terminate when said
owner-applicant ceases to own the dwelling.
(j)
In the event of a change of ownership of a house for which a
special permit has been issued for an accessory unit, the new
owner or holder of a purchase-and-sale agreement with the
owner may apply for a renewal of the special permit.
(k)
This Section has been included in the Bylaw in order to permit
family apartments in residential districts, and, in the Business
District, to provide housing for family members within the home
of another member of their family when situations such as the
age, physical condition or financial circumstances of a member
of the family of a person occupying what would otherwise be a
single-family dwelling make it necessary or desirable for the
establishment of separate living quarters within that dwelling for
said family member. The Board of Appeals may grant a special
permit for a family apartment as defined in § 300-2.1 if it finds
that the use is aesthetically consistent with other structures in the
neighborhood and that said use is consistent with the purpose of
this Section as set forth above.
(3)
Said special permit may be issued subject to such conditions as the
Board of Appeals may deem appropriate and shall terminate upon
the happening of any of the following events:
(a) Sale of the property.
(b) Death of those persons occupying the family apartment;
(4)
§ 300-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.10
1:261
§ 300-14.11. Variances.
The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant variances in accordance
with provisions of MGL c. 40A. Applications for a variance shall conform
with the requirements of § 300-14.10A.
§ 300-14.12. Site plan approval by Planning Board.
The purpose of site plan approval is to ensure that plans for the design and
layout of certain permitted developments conform to all the Town's Bylaws
and regulations, by requiring that the plans be approved and signed by
the Planning Board before a building permit may be issued by the Building
Inspector.
Permanent change of domicile of all of the persons occupying
the family apartment from said family apartment to some other
location either within or without the Town of Medfield.
(c)
No building, except a single-family dwelling, shall be constructed or
expanded in ground area, no residential use shall be changed to a
nonresidential use, and no nonresidential use shall be changed to
another, substantially different, nonresidential use except in
conformance with this § 300-14.12. For the purposes of the preceding
sentence, it shall be the Planning Board which makes the determination
whether a proposed nonresidential use is substantially different from
the existing nonresidential use. A one-time only construction contained
within a total ground floor area not exceeding 500 square feet is exempt
from the provisions of this subsection. The Planning Board shall adopt
and from time to time shall amend rules and fee schedules relative to
the issuance of site plan approval and shall file a copy of said rules and
fee schedules in the office of the Town Clerk. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
A.
Hearing. The Planning Board shall, at the expense of the applicant,
give notice of a public hearing as required by the Zoning Act of
Massachusetts General Laws and shall, after publication of said notice,
hold a public hearing on the application. The public hearing shall not
be held until at least 21 days have elapsed and within 65 days from
the date of the filing of the application. The public hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures prescribed by
the Planning Board as required by the Zoning Act of Massachusetts
General Laws.
B.
Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning
Board that the plan conforms to the following standards. The Planning
Board may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the
applicant, including performance guarantees, to ensure such
conformance. To the extent feasible, new building construction or other
site alteration shall be designed, after considering the qualities of the
specific location, the proposed land use and buildings, grading, egress
C.
§ 300-14.10 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.12
1:262
§ 300-14.13. Appeal periods.
points, and other aspects of the development, so as to meet these
objectives:
For multifamily site plans for which more than one structure is
proposed, placement of structures on the site is appropriate to the
site and compatible with its surroundings.
(1)
The proposed use will not result in a public hazard due to
substantially increased vehicular traffic or due to inadequacy of the
structure or configuration of the road(s) directly serving the site.
(2)
The proposed use will not create any danger of pollution to public
or private water facilities.
(3)
The methods of drainage at the site are adequate and meet the
standards of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Town of
Medfield.30
(4)
(5) No excessive noise, light or odor shall be emitted.
The site plan and proposed use(s) conform to all requirements of
the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Medfield.
(6)
No building permit shall be granted for construction authorized by
approval granted hereunder until plans have been submitted to the
Building Inspector which specify in detail the manner of compliance
with any conditions set by the Planning Board.
D.
Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the grant
thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except
for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in
writing by the Planning Board upon the written request of the
applicant.
E.
Appeal periods. Appeals shall be conducted in accordance with
applicable law.
F.
Any appeal to the Board of Appeals to any order or decision relative to
this Bylaw shall be made in conformance with the conditions set out by
the Zoning Act. All such appeals shall be conducted in accordance with
the Zoning Act.
A.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals or the
Planning Board or the Board of Selectmen may petition the court within
the period of time set forth in the Zoning Act. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
B.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Subdivision of Land.
§ 300-14.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.14
1:263
§ 300-14.14. Duty to supply plans and specifications.
The furnishing of all plans and specifications necessary to all boards and
authorities as required by this Article shall be the obligation of the
applicant. Each board or authority shall immediately return to such
applicant a dated receipt in duplicate describing the documents received.
Such receipt shall be prima facie evidence of delivery and date of delivery.
A copy of each receipt shall be presented to the Board of Appeals or the
Planning Board at least two weeks before the date set for the hearing of the
application.
§ 300-14.15. Special permits by Planning Board. [Added 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 42]
Certain uses, structures, or conditions are designated as "SPPB" in the
Table of Use Regulations, included as an attachment to this Bylaw. These
uses require a special permit from the Planning Board, which may be
obtained only by use of the following procedure.
Form of application.
Any person desiring to apply for a special permit hereunder shall
submit an application, in writing, to the Planning Board with a copy
to the Building Commissioner, the Board of Health, and Town Clerk.
Each application shall contain the following information:
(a) The full name and address of the applicant.
The full name and address of the record owner of the real
estate concerning which the special permit is sought if
different from the applicant.
(b)
If the applicant is other than the record owner of the real
estate, the nature of the applicant's interest in the real estate
(i.e., lease, option to purchase, etc.).
(c)
The street address and zone for the property concerning which
a special permit is sought.
(d)
A summary of any construction or change which the applicant
intends to make to the property if the special permit is granted.
(e)
Zoning Table to show existing and proposed dimensional
requirements using methodologies found in the Medfield
Zoning Bylaw.
(f)
A site plan showing the boundary lines of the premises and
the locations of structures thereon, including parking areas,
walkways, patios, decks, accessory structures, utilities,
easements, stone walls or other significant features.
(g)
(1)
A.
§ 300-14.14 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.15
1:264
Current stamped plans showing any proposed construction,
alterations or renovations of the premises for which the special
permit is sought.
(h)
Current stamped engineered plans showing proposed drainage
system.
(i)
If the proposed use contemplates removal or disturbance of
any earth, topographical plans of the property shall be
furnished which show existing and finished ground contours at
two-foot intervals.
(j)
A summary of applicant's reasons for seeking the special
permit.
(k)
The Planning Board may require from any applicant for a special
permit such additional information as it may determine to be
necessary to determine the effect of the proposed use upon
neighboring persons and property, and upon the welfare of the
Town.
(2)
If no recommendations are received within 35 days after the date
on which a copy of the application is submitted to the Building
Commissioner and the Board of Health, as required by Subsection A, it
shall be deemed lack of their opposition thereto.
B.
Hearing. The Planning Board shall, at the expense of the applicant, give
notice of a public hearing as required by the Zoning Act and shall, after
publication of said notice, hold a public hearing on the application. The
public hearing shall not be held until at least 21 days have elapsed
and within 65 days from the date of the filing of the application. The
public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and
procedures prescribed by the Planning Board as required by the Zoning
Act.
C.
The Planning Board shall adopt and from time to time amend rules
relative to the issuance of special permits and shall file a copy of said
rules in the office of the Town Clerk.
D.
After the public hearing required by Subsection C has been concluded,
the Planning Board may grant a special permit if it concludes that
a special permit is warranted by the application and the evidence
produced at the public hearing and if it makes the following specific
findings of fact:
Overall design is consistent and compatible with the neighborhood,
including as to factors of building orientation, scale, and massing.
(1)
Vehicular traffic flow, access and parking and pedestrian safety are
properly addressed such that the proposed use will not result in
a public hazard due to substantially increased vehicular traffic or
parking in the neighborhood.
(2)
E.
§ 300-14.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.15
1:265
Drainage, utilities and other infrastructure are adequate or will be
upgraded to accommodate development.
(3)
The proposed use will not have any significant adverse effect upon
properties in the neighborhood, including property values.
(4)
Project will not adversely affect or cause substantial damage to any
environmentally significant natural resource, habitat, or feature
or, if it will, proposed mitigation, remediation, replication, or
compensatory measures are adequate.
(5)
Number, height, bulk, location and siting of building(s) and
structure(s) will not result in abutting properties being deprived
of light or fresh air circulation or being exposed to flooding or
subjected to excessive noise, odor, light, vibrations, or airborne
particulates.
(6)
Water consumption and sewer use, taking into consideration
current and projected future local water supply and demand and
wastewater treatment capacity, will not be excessive.
(7)
The proposed use will not create any hazard to public safety or
health in the neighborhood.
(8)
If public sewerage is not provided, plans for on-site sewage
disposal systems are adequate and have been approved by the
Board of Health.
(9)
New two-family dwellings with a proposed lot coverage equal to or
greater than 15% (in the RU Zoning District) or the conversion of
an existing single-family dwelling to a new two-family dwelling with a
proposed lot coverage equal to or greater than 15% (in the RU Zoning
District) shall be permitted subject to the following special criteria:
The common party wall shall connect habitable space (an area
within a building, typically a residential building, used for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking purposes - also called "occupiable
space." Those areas not considered to meet this definition include
storage rooms, garages and utility spaces).
(1)
There shall be no more than two garage bays (or two interior
parking spaces as defined by the Zoning Bylaw) per unit and they
should be oriented so that they are in character with the
surrounding properties.
(2)
Each dwelling unit has access to private yard, patio, or other
private outdoor space.
(3)
The Planning Board, in its discretion, may require additional
screened buffer zone for the privacy of adjacent properties.
Screening can include use of existing trees and plants, new
vegetation, fencing, or a combination of these options.
(4)
F.
§ 300-14.15 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.15
1:266
Each parking space or driveway serving a two-family dwelling shall
be set back at least 10 feet from any side lot line and rear lot line
and shall be designated on the site plan.
(5)
Adequate provisions for snow removal or on-site storage should
also be demonstrated.
(6)
Multifamily dwelling developments shall be permitted subject to the
following special criteria: [Added 4-30-2018 ATM by Art. 4131]
The development of multiple dwellings does not detract from the
livability, scale, character or economic value of existing residential
neighborhoods.
(1)
There shall be no more than two garage bays (or two interior
parking spaces as defined by the Zoning Bylaw) per unit and they
should be oriented so that they are in character with the
streetscape and surrounding properties.
(2)
Each dwelling unit should have access to private yard, patio, or
other private outdoor space.
(3)
Negative visual impacts of the development, if any, are screened
from adjacent properties and nearby streets by landscaping or
other site planning techniques. The Planning Board, in its
discretion, may require additional screened buffer zone for the
privacy of directly abutting properties. Screening can include use
of existing trees and plants, new vegetation, fencing, or a
combination of these options.
(4)
Each parking space or driveway serving a multifamily dwelling
shall be set back at least 10 feet from any side lot line and rear lot
line and shall be designated on the site plan.
(5)
Adequate provisions for snow removal or on-site storage should
also be demonstrated.
(6)
The access, egress, and internal circulation are designed to provide
a network of pedestrian-friendly streetscapes.
(7)
The dwellings are sited and oriented in a complementary
relationship to: each other, the common open space, and the
adjacent properties with respect to scale, mass, setback,
proportions and materials.
(8)
G.
Historic preservation incentive for two-family dwellings in the RU
Zoning District.
A special permit pursuant to § 300-14.15A through F for a proposed
project that preserves a structure that has received a
(1)
H.
31.Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections G and H as Subsections H
and I, respectively.
§ 300-14.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.15
1:267
determination from the Medfield Historical Commission that the
structure is a "historically significant structure" (as defined by
Town Code § 150-13, as the same may be amended from time to
time) may allow a lot coverage of up to 30% upon finding the
property complies with the following criteria:
As to the existing historic structure, the project:
Preserves the primary part of the existing historic
structure, particularly that portion which is visible from
the street, integral to the historic character of the property
and important for its relationship to neighboring
structures.
(i)
Preserves the historic structure's existing scale, massing,
height, setback, orientation, roofline, materials, and
architectural details.
(ii)
Maintains the size, type and spacing of existing windows
and doors.
(iii)
Maintains any historic outbuildings on the property
whenever possible.
(iv)
(a)
It shall be a prerequisite to requesting such increased lot
coverage that the applicant shall have submitted to Medfield
Historical Commission information relating to the historical
features of the structure to enable the Commission to make a
determination as to whether such structure is a "historically
significant structure." Where such increased lot coverage is
sought, a copy of the Commission's determination must be
included in the applicant's application for a special permit
pursuant to § 300-14.15A through F.
(b)
As to new construction directly related to an existing historic
structure, the new construction respects and reflects the scale,
massing, roof forms, materials, windows, doors, and other
architectural details of the related historic structure.
(2)
Waivers to special permit criteria for a two-family dwelling. One or
more of the special permit criteria specific to two-family dwellings
required by Subsection F(1) through (6) may be waived if, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, based on compelling reasons of safety,
aesthetics, or site design and evidence submitted by the applicant
at the public hearing, the proposed project can be built without
substantial detriment to the neighborhood, the proposed building is
compatible with the neighborhood and surrounding properties, and
the proposed project is otherwise consistent with the requirements of
Subsections E, F, and G of this Section. [Amended 4-30-2018 ATM by
Art. 41]
I.
§ 300-14.15 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.15
1:268
§ 300-14.16. Inclusionary Zoning Bylaw. [Added 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 46]
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Bylaw is to encourage development
of new housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
At minimum, affordable housing produced through this regulation should be
in compliance with the requirements set forth in MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 through
24 (as the same may be amended from time to time), and other affordable
housing programs developed by state, county and local governments. It
is intended that the affordable housing units that result from this Bylaw/
ordinance be considered as local action units, in compliance with the
requirements for the same as specified by the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) or successor state agency or regulations.
Note: Waivers granted to one project do not mean future projects may
automatically receive the same waivers.
Applicability.
In all zoning districts, the inclusionary zoning provisions of this
section shall apply to the following uses:
Any project requiring a special permit under Chapter 300,
Zoning, Attachment 1, Table of Use Regulations, Section 1.4,
that results in a net increase of six or more dwelling units,
as measured over a 10-year time period, whether by new
construction or by the alteration, expansion, reconstruction, or
change of existing residential or non-residential space.
(a)
(1)
A.
Special permit. The development of any project set forth in Subsection
A (above) shall require the grant of a special permit from the Planning
Board. A special permit shall be granted if the proposal meets the
requirements of this Bylaw. The application procedure for the special
permit shall be as defined in § 300-14.15 of the Town's Zoning Bylaw.
B.
Mandatory provision of affordable units.
As a condition of approval for a special permit, the applicant shall
contribute to the local stock of affordable unit by providing at
least the number of affordable housing units specified below, which
affordable housing units must be eligible for inclusion on the
Subsidized Housing Inventory. A fractional unit of 0.5 or more shall
be rounded up to the next whole unit.
Table of Affordable Units Requirements*
Total Units in Project Affordable Units
6 to 20 15%
21 to 49 20%
50+ 25%
(1)
C.
§ 300-14.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.16
1:269
NOTES:
* The construction of affordable units shall be commensurate
with the construction of market rate units. Should projects
be constructed in phases, each phase shall contain the same
proportion of affordable units to market rate units as the overall
development.
As a condition of approval for a special permit, at least 20% of the
total number of bedrooms within a development shall be located
within affordable units. A fractional bedroom count of 0.5 or more
shall be rounded up to the next whole unit.
(2)
As a condition for the granting of a special permit, all affordable
housing units shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction
and a regulatory agreement in a form acceptable to the Planning
Board. The regulatory agreement shall be consistent with any
applicable guidelines issued by the Department of Housing and
Community Development, including but not limited to Provisions
Applicable to Affordable Housing Units; Maximum Incomes and
Selling Prices: Initial Sale; Preservation of Affordability;
Restrictions on Resale; and shall ensure that affordable units can
be counted toward the Town's subsidized housing inventory. The
special permit shall not take effect until the restriction, the
regulatory agreement and the special permit are recorded at the
Registry of Deeds and a copy provided to the Planning Board and
the Inspector of Buildings.
(3)
Deed restrictions. All developments with affordable units shall provide
deed restrictions on the units in perpetuity. The deed restriction shall
be consistent with riders prepared by DHCD, and shall grant the Town
the right of first refusal to purchase any ownership units in the event
that a qualified purchaser cannot be located. In addition, no certificate
of occupancy permit shall be granted for any development containing
affordable units prior to the recording of the deed restriction at the
Registry of Deeds.
D.
Local preference. To the maximum extent permitted by law, including
the regulations of DHCD, any special permit granted hereunder shall
include a condition that a preference for Medfield residents, Town of
Medfield employees, employees of Medfield businesses, and families of
students attending Medfield schools shall be included as part of the
lottery and marketing plan for the affordable units.
E.
Fees. The applicant shall be responsible for all consultant fees,
including engineering, architectural, legal, housing consultant and
planning fees, incurred by the Planning Board in connection with the
application, review of relevant plans and documents, and ensuring that
the affordable units are included on the Town's SHI.
F.
Conflict with other Bylaws. The provisions of this Bylaw shall be
considered supplemental of existing zoning Bylaws. To the extent that
G.
§ 300-14.16 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-14.16
1:270
a conflict exists between this Bylaw and others, the more restrictive
Bylaw/ordinance, or provisions therein, shall apply.
§ 300-14.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.16
1:271

ARTICLE 15
Amendment, Validity and Effective Date
§ 300-15.1. Amendment.
This Bylaw may be amended from time to time in accordance with the
Zoning Act. During the amendment procedure, subdivision plans in process
of review by the Planning Board under the Subdivision Control Law32 shall
be subject to the provisions of the Zoning Act.
§ 300-15.2. Validity.
The invalidity, unconstitutionality or illegality of any provision of this Bylaw
or boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall not have any effect upon the
validity, constitutionality or legality of any other provisions or boundary.
§ 300-15.3. Effective date.
This Bylaw shall take effect upon the date resulting from the procedure
provided for in MGL c. 40A.
32.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG.
§ 300-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-15.3
1:273

ARTICLE 16
Aquifer Protection District
§ 300-16.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Aquifer Protection District is to preserve and maintain
the quality and quantity of the existing and potential groundwater supply
within the known aquifers of the Town by protecting the groundwater and
groundwater recharge areas from adverse land use practices.
§ 300-16.2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to specialized words and terms associated
with this district:
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of rock, sand, and/or gravel
that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water.
AQUIFER PROTECTION DISTRICT — A district shown on the Zoning Map
superimposed on all other zoning districts in the Town, consisting of
groundwater protection areas, including Well Protection Districts, Primary
Aquifer Zone and Secondary Aquifer Zone.
AREA OF INFLUENCE — The ground surface area which experiences
drawdown by a pumping well.
The Primary Aquifer Zone's delineation is shown on the Primary Aquifer
Overlay Map dated July 10, 1987, by Amory Engineers, P.C. The Primary
Aquifer Zone's delineation is derived from the following sources:
United States Geologic Survey Atlas HA-554, Hydrology and Water
Resources of the Charles River Basin;
(1)
USGS Atlas HA-484 Hydrology and Water Resources of the
Neponset Weymouth River Basins; and
(2)
(3) Water Supply Protection Atlas, prepared by the Massachusetts DEP.
A.
The Secondary Aquifer Zone area is shown on the Secondary Aquifer
Overlay Map dated January 30, 2003, by Environmental Partners Group
Inc. and has been derived from the DEP approved Zone 2 of the
following well recharge areas:
Wells WPS-1 and WPS-2 (Geosphere Environmental Management
Inc.) approved 8/01;
(1)
Wells WPS-3, WPS-4, WPS-6 (S.E.A. Consultants Inc.) approved 02/
90;
(2)
(3) Well WPS-5 (Amory Engineers) approved 12/90; and
Hospital WPS Well (Talkington Edson Environmental Management,
LLC) approved 9/01.
(4)
B.
§ 300-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.2
1:275
DISPOSAL — The deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration
or placing of any substance into or on any land or water so that such
substance or any constituent thereof presents a hazard to the groundwater.
GROUNDWATER — The subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge
areas.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A substance or combination of substances,
including any liquid petroleum product, that, because of quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a
significant present or potential hazard to water supplies or to human health
if disposed of into or on any land or water in the Town of Medfield. Any
substance deemed a "hazardous waste" in MGL c. 21C, as amended, shall
also be deemed a hazardous material for purposes of this Bylaw.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material that does not allow significant amounts
of surface water to penetrate into the sod.
INJECTION — The placement of fluids into the ground by gravity or greater
through a well or wells, including all of those described in the following
regulations as amended: 310 CMR 27.03, Classes I through V, and further
described in 310 CMR 27.08.
LEACHABLE WASTE — Waste material, including solid waste, sewage,
sludge and agricultural waste, that is capable of releasing waterborne
contaminants to the surrounding environment.
PRIMARY AQUIFER ZONE — An area of generally stratified glacial
deposits, predominantly sand and gravel, exhibiting moderate to high
permeability favorable for location of wells capable of yielding 300 gallons
per minute or more, as shown on the Zoning Map.
PROCESS WASTE — Nondomestic, nontoxic, nonhazardous, liquid or solid
waste by-products associated with the manufacture or preparation of a
product, including but not limited to hardware, dry goods, foodstuffs and
printed material.
RECHARGE AREA — An area of porous, permeable geologic deposits,
especially, but not exclusively, deposits of stratified sand and gravel
("stratified drift") through which water from any source drains into an
aquifer, including any wetland or body of surface water surrounded by or
adjacent to such area, together with the watershed of any such wetland or
body of surface water.
SANITARY WASTE — Wastewater arising from ordinary water use from
toilets, sinks and bathing facilities, and containing such concentrations and
types of pollutants as are considered normal domestic wastes.
SECONDARY AQUIFER ZONE — An area that was derived from the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Zone 2, in
accordance with the Massachusetts Drinking Water Regulations (310 CMR
22.00). The area is defined under 310 CMR 22.02, as that area of an
aquifer which contributes water to a well under the most severe pumping
and recharge conditions that can be realistically anticipated (180 days
of pumping at approved yield, with no recharge from precipitation). It
§ 300-16.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-16.2
1:276
is bounded by the groundwater divides, which result from pumping the
well and by the contact of the aquifer with less permeable materials such
as till or bedrock. In some cases, streams or lakes may act as recharge
boundaries. In all cases, the area shall extend upgradient to its point of
intersection with prevailing hydrogeologic boundaries (a groundwater flow
divide, a contact with till or bedrock, or a recharge boundary).
SOLID WASTE — Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. This includes but is not limited
to rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material and
landscape refuse.
WELL PROTECTION DISTRICT — Land within 2,000 feet of a public well or
wellpoint, as shown on the Zoning Map, unless otherwise determined by the
Board of Appeals. (See § 300-16.3A.)
§ 300-16.3. Establishment of Aquifer Protection District.
For the purposes of this Bylaw, there is hereby established within the Town
of Medfield an Aquifer Protection District consisting of Well Protection
Districts (Zone 1), Primary Aquifer Zone and Secondary Aquifer Zone (Zone
2) as delineated on the Zoning Map.
§ 300-16.4. Establishment of use regulations.
The Aquifer Protection District is superimposed over all other districts
established by this Bylaw. Only those uses specifically allowed by these use
regulations and also allowed in the underlying district by other provisions
of this Bylaw are permitted in the Aquifer Protection District.
Determination of location in Well Protection District. Any owner of, or
other party interested in, land within 2,000 feet of a public well may
apply to the Board of Appeals for a determination that the land is not
located within the area of influence of the well. If such a determination
is made, the land is deemed not to be in the Well Protection District. At
the request of the owner, the Town may engage a qualified professional
geologist, hydrogeologist or engineer trained and experienced in
hydrogeology to assist in determination of the location of the
applicant's property in relation to the area of influence. The Town may
charge the applicant for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
A.
Determination of location in Primary and/or Secondary Aquifer Zones.
Where the boundaries of the Primary and/or Secondary Aquifer Zones
as delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be
upon the owner of, or other party interested in, the land in question
to show where they should properly be located. At the request of
the owner, the Town may engage a qualified professional geologist,
hydrogeologist or engineer trained and experienced in hydrogeology
to assist in determination of the location of the applicant's property in
relation to the Primary and/or Secondary Aquifer Zones. The Town may
charge the applicant for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
B.
§ 300-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.5
1:277
§ 300-16.5. Uses in Well Protection District (Zone 1).
Permitted uses in Zone 1. The following uses are permitted in the Well
Protection District, provided that all necessary permits, orders and
approvals required by local, state and federal law also are obtained:
(1) Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife;
Outdoor recreation, including boating, fishing, nature study and
hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
(2)
(3) Foot, bicycle and horse paths and bridges;
Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies, dams,
splashboards and other water control, supply and conservation
devices;
(4)
Any residential construction connected to the Town sewer system,
provided that no construction shall be permitted within 400 feet of
a public well or wellpoint;
(5)
Construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot of more than
80,000 square feet by special permit from the Board of Appeals
(see § 300-16.8), provided that no construction shall be permitted
within 400 feet of a public well or wellpoint; [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
(6)
Nonintensive farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry,
harvesting and grazing uses, provided that hazardous materials are
not used except in quantities normally associated with household
use;
(7)
Necessary public utilities or facilities if designed so as to prevent
contamination of groundwater.
(8)
A.
Prohibited uses in Zone 1. The following uses are prohibited in the Well
Protection District:
(1) Any use prohibited in the Primary or Secondary Aquifer Zones;
Underground storage tanks, septic tanks except as permitted by
Subsection A(6), and pipelines and injection wells;
(2)
Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind except those
normally associated with operating a residence, and except for
storage of fuel in a freestanding container within a building for the
heating of that building;
(3)
(4) Storage of hazardous materials;
(5) Disposal of leachable wastes;
Disposal of solid waste other than brush, leaves and grass
clippings, or stumps;
(6)
B.
§ 300-16.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-16.5
1:278
§ 300-16.6. Uses in Primary Aquifer Zone.
(7) Storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals;
(8) Industrial and commercial uses;
Outdoor storage of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides, and
outdoor uncovered storage of manure;
(9)
(10)Animal feedlots;
(11)Use of hazardous material in cleaning septic systems;
(12)Disposal of septage waste;
Any other use which involves as a principal or accessory activity
the manufacture, storage, use, handling, transportation or disposal
of hazardous materials except in quantities normally associated
with operating a single-family dwelling. [Amended 4-28-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
(13)
Permitted uses in Primary Aquifer Zone. All uses permitted in a Well
Protection District, and the following uses, are permitted in a Primary
Aquifer Zone, provided that all necessary permits, orders and approvals
required by local, state and federal law also are obtained:
Commercial uses, limited to retail, shopping and business or
professional offices on lots of less than 40,000 square feet;
(1)
Industrial and commercial uses other than as set out in Subsection
A(1), by special permit from the Board of Appeals (see § 300-16.8);
(2)
Residential development of single-family dwellings on lots of at
least 40,000 square feet in area;
(3)
Any residential development permitted in the underlying district
which is connected to the Town sewer system.
(4)
A.
Prohibited uses in Primary Aquifer Zone. The following uses are
prohibited in a Primary Aquifer Zone:
(1) Underground storage of hazardous materials;
Injection wells of any kind, as defined by 310 CMR 27.03, except by
special permit from the Board of Appeals;
(2)
(3) On-site disposal of hazardous materials;
Disposal of leachable wastes other than from a residential septic
system or the Medfield sewer system;
(4)
Storage of hazardous materials as defined in MGL c. 21E, unless
in a freestanding container within a building or above ground with
adequate secondary containment adequate to contain a spill the
size of the container's total storage capacity;
(5)
B.
§ 300-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.6
1:279
Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage is within a
structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated runoff or leachate;
(6)
Disposal of snow that contains deicing chemicals and that has been
brought in from outside the district;
(7)
Industrial uses that discharge water containing process waste on
site;
(8)
(9) Automotive and boat service, washing and repair shops;
(10) Junk and salvage yards;
(11)Dry-cleaning establishments;
(12)Metal plating or etching;
(13)Chemical and bacteriological laboratories;
Landfilling of sludge and septage and storage of sludge and
septage, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30
and 310 CMR 32.31;
(14)
(15)Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
Treatment or disposal works for non-sanitary wastewaters which
discharge to the ground and that are subject to 314 CMR 5.00,
except the following:
The replacement or repair of an existing treatment works that
will not result in a design capacity greater than the design
capacity of the existing treatment works;
(a)
Treatment works approved by the DEP designed for the
treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters;
(b)
(16)
Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste
subject to MGL c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.000 as amended, except
for:
Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR
30.000.
(a)
Household hazardous waste centers and events under 310
CMR 30.390.
(b)
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A.
(17)
Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL c. 128, § 64,
unless such storage is within a structure designated to prevent the
generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
(18)
Storage of animal manure unless covered or contained in
accordance with the specifications of the United States Natural
(19)
§ 300-16.6 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-16.6
1:280
§ 300-16.7. Uses in Secondary Aquifer Zone (Zone 2).
Resources Conservation Service; [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by
Art. 33]
Storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in MGL c. 21E,
unless in a freestanding container within a building or above
ground with adequate secondary containment adequate to contain
a spill the size of the container's total storage capacity;
(20)
Storage of liquid petroleum products, except the following:
(i) Normal household use, outdoor maintenance, and heating
of a structure; (ii) waste oil retention facilities required by
statute, rule, or regulation; (iii) emergency generators
required by statute, rule, or regulation; (iv) treatment works
approved under 314 CMR 5.00 for treatment of ground or
surface waters, provided that such storage, listed in items
(i) through (iv) above, is in freestanding containers within
buildings or above ground with secondary containment
adequate to contain a spill the size of the container's total
storage capacity.
(a)
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or any other mineral
substances within four feet of the historical high groundwater
table elevation (as determined from monitoring wells and
historical water table fluctuation data compiled by the United
States Geological Survey), unless the substances removed are
redeposited within 45 days of removal on site to achieve a
final grading greater than four feet above the historical high
water mark, and except for excavations for the construction of
building foundations or the installation of utility works.
(b)
(21)
Permitted uses over the Zone 2 area. All proposed uses permitted in
a Well Protection District and the Primary Aquifer Zone are permitted
in the Zone 2 area, provided that all necessary permits, orders and
approvals required by local, state and federal law also are obtained.
A.
Prohibited uses in the Zone 2 area are governed by the Massachusetts
drinking water regulations [310 CMR 22.21(2)]. Therefore, prohibited
proposed uses include the following:
(1) Landfills and open dumps, as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
Landfills receiving only wastewater residuals and/or septage
(wastewater residuals "monofills");
(2)
Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in MGL c. 140B,
§ 1;
(3)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice removed from highways
and streets located outside of Zone 2 that contains sodium chloride,
(4)
B.
§ 300-16.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.7
1:281
chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for snow and
ice removal;
Petroleum, fuel oil, and heating oil bulk stations and terminals,
including but not limited to those listed under the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
Codes 5171 (not including liquefied petroleum gas) and 5983;
(5)
Treatment and disposal works subject to 314 CMR 5.00 for
wastewater other than sanitary sewage. This prohibition includes,
but is not limited to, treatment or disposal works related to
activities under the SIC Codes set forth in 310 CMR 15.004(6)
(Title V), except the following:
The replacement and repair of an existing system(s) that will
not result in a design capacity greater than the capacity of the
existing system(s); and
(a)
Treatment works approved by the DEP, designed for the
treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters and
operated in compliance with 314 CMR 5.50(3) or 5.50(13); and
(b)
(c) Publicly owned treatment works (POTWs).
(6)
Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste
that are subject to MGL c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.000, except for the
following:
(a) Very small quantity generators, as defined by 310 CMR 30.000;
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events
pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390;
(b)
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; and
Treatment works approved by DEP designed in accordance
with 314 CMR 5.00.
(d)
(7)
The siting of the following land uses, unless designed in accordance
with the performance standards specified below and in 310 CMR
22.21(2)(b):
Storage of sludge and septage, as defined in 310 CMR 32.05,
unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and
310 CMR 32.31;
(a)
Storage of sodium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or
other chemicals used for the removal of ice and snow on roads,
unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent
the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
(b)
Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL c. 128,
§ 64, unless such storage is within a structure designed to
(c)
(8)
§ 300-16.7 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-16.7
1:282
§ 300-16.8. Uses by special permit from Board of Appeals.
prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or
leachate;
Storage of animal manures, unless such storage is within a
structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated runoff or leachate;
(d)
Storage of liquid hazardous waste materials as defined in MGL
c. 21E, and/or liquid petroleum products unless such storage
is:
(i) Above ground level;
(ii) On an impervious surface; and
Either:
In a container(s) or aboveground tank(s) within a
building; or
[a]
Outdoors in covered containers or an aboveground
tank(s) in an area that has a containment system
designed and operated to hold either 10% of the total
possible storage capacity, or 110% of the largest
container's storage capacity, whichever is greater.
However, these storage requirements shall not apply
to the replacement of existing tanks or systems for
the keeping, dispensing or storage of gasoline,
provided that the replacement is performed in a
manner consistent with state and local requirements.
[b]
(iii)
(e)
Removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or any other mineral
substances within four feet of an historical high groundwater
table elevation (as determined by the U.S.G.S.), unless the
substances removed are either redeposited within 45 days of
removal on site to achieve a final grading greater than four feet
above the historical high water mark (except for excavations
for the construction of building foundations or the installation
of utility works, or wetlands restoration work conducted in
accordance with a valid order of conditions issued pursuant
to MGL c. 131, § 40) or conducted in accordance with other
applicable local rules and regulations; and
(f)
The land use that results in the rendering impervious of more
than 15% or 2,500 square feet of any lot or parcel, whichever is
greater, unless a system for artificial recharge of precipitation
is approved that will not result in the degradation of
groundwater quality.
(g)
§ 300-16.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.8
1:283
In addition to those uses otherwise permitted by this Article, and not
otherwise prohibited by this Bylaw, the following uses may be permitted
in the Aquifer Protection District by special permit from the Board of
Appeals in accordance with Article 14 and any additional conditions
specified hereunder:
Construction of a single-family dwelling in Zone 1 with on-site
septic system on a lot of more than 80,000 square feet. [Amended
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
(1)
Commercial and industrial uses, provided that:
No more than 40% of the lot is rendered impervious and
provided that if the use will render impervious more than 15%
or 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater, then a
system for groundwater recharge must be provided which does
not degrade groundwater quality;
(a)
Roof, parking and drive runoff is recharged on site to the
maximum extent practicable as determined by the Board of
Appeals;
(b)
The runoff from the parking and drive areas shall be
discharged to petroleum trap catch basins with appropriate
sumps prior to recharge;
(c)
There shall be no manufacturing, storage, handling, use or
transportation of hazardous wastes as defined in MGL c. 21C,
as amended; and
(d)
Hazardous material other than hazardous waste may be
stored, handled, used or transported only upon conditions
imposed by the Board of Appeals to safeguard the underground
water supply.
(e)
(2)
The application of fertilizers for uses that are nondomestic and
noncommercial, provided that:
Such application shall be made in such a manner as to
minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater
due to nutrient transport and deposition or sedimentation.
(a)
(3)
(4) Injection wells.
A.
Additional requirements.
In addition to the requirements of Article 14, each application
under this Article shall include the following information:
A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and other
hazardous materials to be used, handled or stored on the
premises in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, accompanied by a description of
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 300-16.8 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-16.8
1:284
measures proposed to protect all storage containers/facilities
from vandalism, corrosion and leakage, and to provide for
control of spills.
A description of hazardous wastes to be generated, indicating
storage and disposal methods.
(b)
Evidence of approval by the Massachusetts DEP of any
industrial waste treatment or disposal system or any
wastewater treatment system where such approval is required.
(c)
In addition to the requirements of Article 14, the Board of Appeals
shall refer copies of the application to the Conservation
Commission, the Water and Sewerage Board, the Building
Inspector and the Hazardous Waste Committee, if any, which shall
review, either jointly or separately, the application and shall submit
their recommendations to the Board of Appeals. Failure to make
recommendations within 35 days of the referral of the application
shall be deemed lack of opposition.
(2)
In addition to the findings required under Article 14, prior to
issuing a special permit under this Article 16, the Board of Appeals
shall also find that the proposed use:
Is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw and
will promote the purposes of the Aquifer Protection District;
(a)
Is appropriate to the natural topography, soils and other
characteristics of the site to be developed; and
(b)
Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse
environmental impact on a primary aquifer or recharge area.
(c)
(3)
§ 300-16.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.8
1:285

ARTICLE 17
Personal Wireless Communications Facilities
§ 300-17.1. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety,
convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of Medfield, more specifically to
minimize negative visual impacts and preserve natural vistas by providing
for controlled placement and operation of certain radio communications
facilities and towers within the Town. Placement is controlled by
establishing a limited number of permitted locations, minimizing the
number and overall height of towers, encouraging shared use of structures,
and limiting new construction to that necessary to provide personal wireless
services.
§ 300-17.2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — An entity authorized by the FCC to provide personal wireless
services that files an application, or is the holder of a special permit
pursuant to this Article; if the applicant is not the landowner, the
landowner(s) shall file as co-applicant(s).
APPLICATION — A petition for a special permit for a personal wireless
facility submitted by an applicant to the Board of Appeals under the
auspices of this Article, and which fulfills all of the Board of Appeals filing
requirements defined in this Bylaw.
PERSONAL WIRELESS ANTENNA — A surface used to transmit and/or
receive signals between a personal wireless facility and subscribers.
PERSONAL WIRELESS EQUIPMENT — Apparatus employed by a provider
of personal wireless services strictly to operate a personal wireless facility.
Such apparatus typically includes transmission/reception electronics,
network interconnection equipment, power supply equipment, and control
and processing equipment.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — An arrangement of transmitting/
receiving equipment, network interconnection equipment, and transmit/
receive antenna(s) operated by a personal wireless service at one location
that provides service to a geographic area.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY ACCESSORY BUILDING — A structure
designed to house personal wireless equipment that is placed at a personal
wireless tower or other personal wireless facility.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE — Radio communications services
specifically identified by the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) as
personal wireless services. Such services include cellular services, personal
communications services, and enhanced specialized mobile radio services,
among others.
§ 300-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17.2
1:287
PERSONAL WIRELESS TOWER — A self-supporting lattice structure, a
monopole, or other structure erected for the primary purpose of supporting
personal wireless antennas at a personal wireless facility.
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS — All forms of communication which transmit
radio frequency or microwave signals.
SECONDARY ANTENNA; SECONDARY COMMUNICATIONS — Antennas
and communications services which do not qualify as personal wireless and
which may be supported on a secondary, subservient basis by a personal
wireless tower.
§ 300-17.3. Location.
Personal wireless facilities shall be permitted in the IE Zoning District
east of Route 27 to West Mill Street and west of Route 27, north of the
railroad tracks on Town-owned land; the BI District at Medfield State
Hospital; and on the Town of Medfield water tower property at Mt.
Nebo, only after compliance with all the provisions of this Article.
A.
A personal wireless tower shall be permitted in the IE District east of
Route 27 to West Mill Street and west of Route 27, north of the railroad
tracks on Town-owned land; and at Medfield State Hospital in an area
extending 150 feet north from the rear of the present "R" building,
only after compliance with all the provisions of this Article. Secondary
antennas may be installed on a personal wireless tower under the
provisions of this Article.
B.
Personal wireless equipment in the areas identified in Subsections A
and B may be housed in or on preexisting structures, personal wireless
facility accessory buildings, or weather-resistant outdoor equipment
enclosures. Personal wireless antennas may be installed on preexisting
structures at these locations or on personal wireless towers built for the
purpose. Secondary antennas may be installed on a personal wireless
tower under the provisions of this Article.
C.
No personal wireless tower in the IE District may be constructed within
2,500 feet of another Personal wireless tower. In the event of conflicting
applications, the Board of Appeals shall make a judgment as to which
proposed personal wireless tower, if any, is most suitable.
D.
Personal wireless towers may not be built for any purpose other than to
provide for personal wireless services.
E.
Personal wireless antennas may be installed on preexisting electric
transmission towers presently located on a Boston Edison utility
easement in the southeast quadrant of Town, provided that they do not
exceed the present height of the utility tower by more than 30 feet,
and only after compliance with all provisions of this Article. Personal
wireless equipment may be sited on the utility easement to support the
operation of such antennas.
F.
§ 300-17.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-17.3
1:288
§ 300-17.4. General requirements.
Personal wireless facilities shall be permitted outside of the areas
identified in Subsections A, B and F only if an applicant demonstrates
that such facilities are necessary to prevent an effective prohibition
of the provision of personal wireless services. Applicants for facilities
outside of the areas identified in Subsections A, B and F must
demonstrate that they have made maximum practicable utilization of
the areas identified in Subsections A, B and F to serve all or portions of
the area that the proposed facility is intended to serve.
G.
Applicants for personal wireless facilities outside the areas identified in
Subsections A, B and F shall demonstrate that their proposal is the most
favored way that is practicable to facilitate the provision of personal
wireless service, according to the following order of priority, from most
favored to least:
Regarding facilities.
(a) Fully concealed personal wireless facilities.
(b) Camouflaged personal wireless facilities.
(1)
Regarding location.
(a) Collocations in or on preexisting personal wireless facilities.
Collocations in or on preexisting structures with no preexisting
personal wireless facility.
(b)
New location for personal wireless facility and associated
personal wireless tower.
(c)
(2)
H.
No personal wireless facility or personal wireless tower shall be erected
or installed except in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
In all cases, a special permit is required from the Board of Appeals.
Section 300-6.2A shall not apply to these applications. Any proposed
addition of a personal wireless service provider to a preexisting
personal wireless facility or personal wireless tower, proposed increase
in the height of a tower, or in the number of antennas, or any
construction or replacement of a personal wireless tower or personal
wireless facility accessory building shall be subject to a new application
for a special permit.
A.
Applicants for a new or modified personal wireless tower must make a
showing satisfactory to the Board of Appeals that preexisting structures
and preexisting personal wireless towers are not capable of providing
adequate service to those personal wireless service carriers planning to
use the tower.
B.
Unless otherwise restricted in this Section, personal wireless towers
may be self-supporting monopoles, lattice towers, or other styles of
support structure and shall meet with the approval of the Board of
C.
§ 300-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17.4
1:289
Appeals, subject to this Section and to the requirement that no guy
wires shall be used.
Personal wireless towers and personal wireless facilities shall be
suitably screened from view to the maximum extent possible and/or be
designed and placed in a manner that is compatible with surrounding
land uses. All towers shall be of a design that minimizes the negative
visual and environmental impacts on the Town, as determined by the
Board of Appeals.
D.
Personal wireless towers shall be designed and constructed to support
the antennas of multiple personal wireless facilities. An applicant for
a special permit to construct a personal wireless tower shall certify
to the Town that it will reasonably and in good faith make the tower
available to other personal wireless services. Each installation of a
personal wireless facility shall require a special permit.
E.
Secondary communications and secondary antennas may be installed
at a personal wireless tower such that they may be moved or removed
to accommodate the maximum number of additional personal wireless
antennas possible. The personal wireless tower special permit holder
shall apply to the Board of Appeals for a special permit for such
secondary installations, as if they were personal wireless facilities.
F.
Personal wireless towers shall be removed within one year after
cessation of use by all personal wireless services, whether or not there
are one or more secondary antennas on the tower. Personal wireless
antennas shall be removed within one year after cessation of use. As
a condition of the special permit, the Board of Appeals may require a
surety bond or other security satisfactory to the Board to fund removal
of any and all components of a personal wireless facility that is unused
for more than one year, or is no longer under a valid permit. If an
applicant fails to comply with this requirement, the Town may enforce
by entering the property and removing the ceased facility, which
expenses shall be paid to the Town by the applicant or landowner within
30 days of notice by the Town. If such expenses are not paid in full, the
Town may impose a lien on the property. In addition, the applicant or
landowner shall be liable for all expenses the Town incurs in obtaining
judicial enforcement of this subsection.
G.
Continuation of the special permit for a personal wireless tower or
personal wireless facility is subject to inspection and reporting
requirements established by the Inspector of Buildings.
H.
It shall be a requirement of any special permit issued under this Section
that at any reasonable time or interval the Board of Appeals may
require the applicant to demonstrate that the emissions of its personal
wireless facility are in compliance with applicable federal and/or state
safety requirements. Such demonstration shall be performed at
applicant's expense by a qualified engineer appointed or approved by
the Town.
I.
§ 300-17.4 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-17.4
1:290
§ 300-17.5. Application process.
All applications for personal wireless towers or personal wireless facilities
shall be made and filed in accordance with the requirements of the Board of
Appeals. In addition to filing requirements detailed in § 300-14.10A of this
Bylaw, the following are required to be filed with an application:
In the event that the applicant's personal wireless facility is not in
compliance with applicable state and federal emissions exposure
requirements, the personal wireless facility operator shall immediately
inform the Town about the noncompliance, and remedies being
implemented to correct it. The Town reserves the right to require the
personal wireless facility to cease operations until the noncompliance
is resolved.
J.
Applicants shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals' satisfaction that
a proposed personal wireless facility will be compliant with any
applicable noise regulations of the Federal EPA (Environmental
Protection Agency) and Massachusetts DEP (Department of
Environmental Protection). Applicants shall maintain compliance for
the duration of the facility's operation. Compliance shall be determined
by evaluating all noise sources from the site of the personal wireless
facility(ies). In the event of noncompliance, the Town reserves the right
to require the personal wireless facility to cease operations until the
noncompliance is resolved.
K.
A locus plan, which in printed form is of an appropriate scale, showing
elevation contours, all property lines, structures, and landscape
features within 500 feet of the property line, the proposed tower and/or
accessory building, access way, and fencing.
A.
Design drawings showing the elevation and plan views of the proposed
personal wireless facility and a photograph or rendition of outdoor
views of the proposed personal wireless tower, personal wireless
antennas or the enclosure(s) within which the antennas are concealed,
personal wireless equipment or fenced area, and/or personal wireless
facility accessory building; photographs of the proposed location from
the property lines. The Board of Appeals may request an applicant to
demonstrate the visual impact of proposed installations by providing, at
applicant's expense, one or more of the following:
Sight-line drawings to specific locations identified by the Board of
Appeals;
(1)
A visual demonstration of visibility in which a balloon, crane or
other representative object shall be placed at the height of the
proposed tower and at an alternative location on or off the
proposed site as determined by the Board of Appeals; the date, time
and location of such test shall be advertised, at the expense of the
applicant;
(2)
B.
§ 300-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17.5
1:291
§ 300-17.6. Design guidelines.
The following guidelines shall be used when preparing plans to site and
construct any personal wireless tower or personal wireless facility.
Photographic simulations based on the results of a visual
demonstration and prepared by a qualified individual; and
(3)
(4) Other measures requested by the Board.
The following information prepared by one or more qualified
individuals:
(1) A description of the facility and/or tower proposed.
A description of the reasons the facility is proposed, the reason the
location is proposed, and a rationale for the height proposed.
(2)
Verification that the facility will be in compliance with federal and
state regulations.
(3)
A description of tower capacity for additional personal wireless
antennas.
(4)
A description of site capacity for additional personal wireless
facilities.
(5)
C.
A description of how the proposed personal wireless facility integrates
with preexisting personal wireless facilities in and around Medfield;
what current or future planned personal wireless facilities the applicant
is pursuing in and around Medfield; and a description of how the
applicant's network in and around Medfield will evolve based on market
trends, emerging technologies and the like.
D.
Submission of an application for a special permit obligates the
applicant to pay review expenses determined by the Board of Appeals.
Applications must include a deposit of $5,000 for each proposed
personal wireless facility, which funds will be used to pay reasonable
costs associated with the Board's review of the application, including
fees for outside consultants with expertise in structural engineering,
wireless communications technology, wireless communications law and
other relevant fields of experience, as determined necessary by the
Board. If fees for such reviews exceed the amount of the required
deposit, the Board of Appeals may request additional funds from the
applicant. Any unused funds will be returned to applicant after
approval, rejection or withdrawal of the application.
E.
All personal wireless towers shall be designed to stand at the minimum
height necessary to accommodate planned use and anticipated shared
use, as certified at applicant's expense by a qualified engineer
appointed or approved by the Town. The Board of Appeals may require
a personal wireless tower to be constructed at one height, but with the
structural capacity to be extended to another height in the future.
A.
§ 300-17.5 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-17.6
1:292
In the IE District, a personal wireless tower with attached antenna(s)
shall not exceed 150 feet in height above the lowest finished grade
contacting the base. A maximum height with antenna(s) of 190 feet
shall be allowed in the IE District if the applicant can make a significant
showing that the low ground elevation prevents satisfactory
performance of a proposed personal wireless facility at 150 feet and
lower. A personal wireless tower shall not be constructed on a building.
B.
Personal wireless antennas may be mounted on preexisting structures
in the allowed locations and districts. They shall be mounted no more
than 10 feet above the roofline or top surface of the preexisting
structure. Mounting hardware extending vertically 10 feet or less above
a structure shall not be considered a tower in this Article.
Consideration will be given to disguising or concealing roof- or topmounted
antennas and hardware.
C.
In the IE District, a tower shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
any property line. The Board of Appeals may require greater setback if
a benefit is achieved and it is practicable, as determined by the Board.
D.
In districts other than the IE District, a personal wireless tower shall be
no more than 100 feet above the undisturbed natural grade at the base
of the tower.
E.
In districts other than the IE District, the minimum distance from the
base of any ground-mounted personal wireless tower to any property
line shall be two times the height of the facility/mount, including any
antennas or other appurtenances. In addition, a minimum distance of
300 feet from any habitable dwelling is required. The aforementioned
setback is measured from the nearest abutting non-applicant property,
while the 300-foot distance is measured from the nearest non-applicant
habitable dwelling.
F.
In the event that a preexisting structure is proposed as a mount for a
personal wireless facility, the setback provisions of the zoning district
shall apply. In the case of preexisting nonconforming structures,
personal wireless facilities, including equipment shelters, shall not
increase any nonconformities.
G.
All personal wireless towers and personal wireless facility accessory
buildings shall be sited and landscaped in such a manner that the view
of them from neighboring residences shall be as limited as possible.
They shall be colored in a manner that best blends in with the
surroundings, subject to approval of the Board of Appeals.
H.
Personal wireless towers shall be designed to accommodate the
maximum number of personal wireless services practical. The intent
of this requirement is to maximize shared use of towers and limit
the number required to provide satisfactory and competitive personal
wireless service in the Town. In evaluating the maximum number
practicable, the Board of Appeals shall determine whether or not an
increase or decrease in height of a proposed personal wireless tower
I.
§ 300-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17.6
1:293
§ 300-17.7. Special permit review.
is justified to balance the objectives of maximizing collocation and
minimizing the visual impact on the community.
Fencing and/or other access control measures shall be employed to
limit access to personal wireless facilities, including personal wireless
towers, personal wireless equipment, and personal wireless antennas.
Outdoor access control measures (such as fencing) shall be compatible
with the character of the area in which they are installed and shall be
approved by the Board of Appeals. In the application, the applicant shall
provide a description of all indoor and outdoor access control measures
planned for the proposed personal wireless facility.
J.
Signs shall be limited to those required by federal or state regulation,
and those necessary to provide safety information or warnings. Signs
shall conform with Article 13.
K.
The special permit holder shall maintain with the Medfield Police
Department up-to-date 24-hour emergency contact information for each
personal wireless facility and personal wireless tower permitted.
L.
Lighting of personal wireless towers is not allowed unless the applicant
demonstrates to the Board of Appeals that it is essential for safety and/
or is required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
M.
A minimum of one on-site parking space shall be available for
maintenance personnel to park their vehicles off-street.
N.
Applications to the Board of Appeals for special permits shall be
approved or approved with conditions, only if the applicant can fulfill
the requirements of this Bylaw to the satisfaction of the Board. If
the Board is not satisfied that the applicant has fulfilled or addressed
these requirements, the application shall be denied. In addition to the
required findings contained in § 300-14.10E, the Board of Appeals shall
make the following specific findings of fact:
Prohibition of service. The Board shall approve an application for
personal wireless facilities outside of the areas identified in
§ 300-17.3A, B and F only if an applicant fulfills criteria detailed in
§ 300-17.3G.
(1)
Preference hierarchy. The Board shall approve an application for a
personal wireless facility only after an applicant has demonstrated
their proposal is the most favored choice, as detailed in
§ 300-17.3H.
(2)
Preexisting structures. The Board shall approve an application for
a new or modified personal wireless tower only after satisfactory
showing by the applicant that preexisting structures and
preexisting personal wireless towers cannot be used, as described
in § 300-17.4B.
(3)
A.
§ 300-17.6 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-17.7
1:294
Tower structure. The Board shall approve an application after
exercising discretion about the Personal wireless tower structure
type, as described in § 300-17.4C.
(4)
Minimal visual and environmental impact. The Board shall approve
an application only after determining the proposed design
minimizes negative visual and environmental impact, as described
in §§ 300-17.4D and 300-17.6H.
(5)
Tower capacity. The Board shall approve an application only after
receiving certification from applicant to make the personal wireless
tower available to other personal wireless services, as described
in § 300-17.4E, and after determining said personal wireless tower
is designed to accommodate the maximum number of personal
wireless services practical, as described in § 300-17.6I.
(6)
Noise compliance. The Board shall approve an application only
after determining applicant has demonstrated the proposed
personal wireless facility will be compliant with noise regulations
as described in § 300-17.4K.
(7)
Minimum necessary height. The Board shall approve an application
only after determining the proposed personal wireless facility is
designed for the minimum height necessary, subject to the
considerations described in § 300-17.6A.
(8)
Area regulation. The Board shall approve an application only after
confirming the proposed personal wireless facility complies with
height requirements detailed in § 300-17.6B and C, and setback
requirements detailed in § 300-17.6D, E and F. The Board may
exercise discretion to modify setbacks under § 300-17.6F if the
Board determines it would achieve a more desirable result.
(9)
Access control. The Board shall approve an application only after
approving proposed unauthorized access control methods and
associated visual impacts, as described in § 300-17.6J.
(10)
Signs. The Board shall approve an application only after confirming
proposed signs conform with Article 13, as described in
§ 300-17.6K.
(11)
Lighting. The Board shall approve an application with designs that
include lighting only after an applicant demonstrates it is essential
for safety, as described in § 300-17.6M.
(12)
Parking. The Board shall approve an application only after
confirming provisions for off-street parking, as described in
§ 300-17.6N.
(13)
The Board may impose as a condition of the special permit a
requirement for periodic review of the minimum necessary height of the
B.
§ 300-17.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17.7
1:295
§ 300-17.8. Invalidity.
In the event that any provision of this Article 17 shall be determined to
be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise, the remaining
provisions of this Article 17 not manifestly inseparable from the invalid
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
tower and may require a reduction in the tower's height based upon the
review.
§ 300-17.7 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-17.8
1:296
ARTICLE 18
Adult Uses
§ 300-18.1. Purpose and intent.
§ 300-18.2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT USES — An establishment, a building or portion thereof, or a use
of land having a substantial or significant portion of its business activity,
stock-in-trade, or other matter or materials for sale, rental, distribution, or
exhibition, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, including but not limited to the following:
It is the purpose and intent of this Article 18 to address and mitigate
the secondary effects of the adult uses and sexually oriented businesses
referenced herein, since such secondary effects have been found by
the Planning Board, as a result of the studies relied upon by it and
after other public input, to include increased crime, adverse impacts
on public health, adverse impacts on the business climate of the Town,
adverse impacts on the property values of residential and commercial
properties, and adverse impacts on the quality of life in the Town, all of
which secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the Town of Medfield and its inhabitants. The provisions of
this Article have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative matter or materials,
including sexually oriented matter or materials.
A.
Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this Article to restrict or
deny access by adults to adult uses and to sexually oriented matter
or materials protected by the Constitutions of the United States of
America and of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or
deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials
may have to sell, rent, distribute, or exhibit such matter or materials;
neither is it the purpose nor intent of this Article to legalize the sale,
rental, distribution, or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or
materials.
B.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, and other
matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement
as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31;
A.
ADULT CLUB — An establishment having as any of its activities or
entertainment a person or persons in a state of nudity or distinguished
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual
conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31;
B.
§ 300-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18.2
1:297
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION — The term "substantial or
significant portion" as used in this Article 18 shall mean any of the
following:
§ 300-18.3. Special permit.
No adult use shall be allowed except by a special permit granted by the
Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for an
adult use, with such conditions as it deems appropriate for the protection of
public health, safety, and welfare, only in the Adult Use District, hereinafter
defined, and only if the use is found by the Board of Appeals to comply with
the following standards and procedures:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
offering activities or goods or providing services where employees,
entertainers or patrons are engaging in nudity, sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31;
C.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment used for
presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in MGL c. 272, § 31;
D.
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade devices, objects,
tools or toys which are distinguished or characterized by their
association with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31;
E.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade videos, movies or other film
materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
F.
Twenty percent or more of the business inventory or stock of
merchandise for sale, rental, distribution, or exhibition during any
period of time;
A.
Twenty percent or more of the annual number of gross sales, rentals, or
other business transactions; or
B.
C. Twenty percent or more of the annual gross business revenue.
Location. An adult use may only be located in the Adult Use District
namely: a parcel of land located on the easterly side of North Meadows
Road and shown as Lot #8 on Map 48 of the Town of Medfield Official
Assessors Map containing, according to said map, four acres, together
with a portion of Lot 35 on said Map 48 bounded as follows:
A.
§ 300-18.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-18.3
1:298
Northerly by Penn Central R.R. right-of-way, westerly by North
Meadows Road for a distance of 200 feet, southerly by the remainder
of said Lot 35, and easterly by said Lot 8.
Site development standards.
Site plan review. No special permit for any adult use shall be issued
without site plan approval having been obtained from the Planning
Board under § 300-14.12.
(1)
Dimensional requirements. Any building or structure containing
an adult use shall meet the setback requirements and other
dimensional controls which apply to the district of which the Adult
Use District is a part as specified in these Bylaws. For any property
proposed to contain an adult use, the applicant for a special permit
for such use shall comply with these requirements and controls
following the establishment of such use thereon.
(2)
Parking and loading. On-site parking and loading shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article 8 as
pertains to retail stores, offices, and consumer service
establishments. For any property proposed to contain an adult use,
the applicant for a special permit for such use shall demonstrate
that the entire property shall comply with these requirements and
controls following the establishment of such use thereon.
(3)
Landscaping. At a minimum, the property on which an adult use is
proposed to be located shall contain a landscaped buffer strip along
its entire perimeter, except that portion directly abutting a public
street in accordance with the requirements of § 300-6.2I.
(4)
Signs. All signs for any adult use must meet the requirements
of Article 13. In addition, no advertisement, display or other
promotional material which contains sexually explicit graphics or
sexually explicit text shall be visible to the public from any public
way, including but not limited to sidewalks, pedestrian walkways,
highways or railways.
(5)
B.
Other special permit requirements.
If the adult use allows for the showing of films or videos within the
premises, the booths in which the films or videos are viewed shall
not be closed off by curtains.
(1)
The application for a special permit for an adult use must include
the following information:
(a) Name and address of the owner of record of the property;
Name and address of the legal owner of the proposed adult use
establishment;
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 300-18.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18.3
1:299
§ 300-18.4. Nonconformity.
Name and address of all persons having a lawful equity or
security interest in the adult use establishment,
(c)
A sworn statement must be provided stating that neither the
applicant, nor the manager, nor any person having a lawful
equity or security interest in the adult use establishment has
been convicted of violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63,
or MGL c. 272, § 28;
(d)
Name and address of the manager of the adult use
establishment;
(e)
Proposed provisions for securing the safety of the public within
and without the adult use establishment;
(f)
(g) The number of employees; and
The present and proposed physical layout of the interior of the
adult use establishment.
(h)
No special permit for an adult use shall be issued to any person
convicted of violating MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28.
(3)
An adult use special permit shall only be issued following a public
hearing held within 65 days after the filing of an application with
the Board of Appeals, a copy of which shall forthwith be given to
the Town Clerk by the applicant.
(4)
Any adult use special permit issued under this Bylaw shall lapse
within one year if substantial use thereof has not sooner
commenced except for good cause or, in the case of a permit for
construction, if construction has not begun by such date except for
good cause; excepting only any time required to pursue or await
the determination of an appeal from the grant thereof.
(5)
Any adult use special permit issued under this Bylaw shall require
that the owner of such adult use shall supply on a continuing
basis to the Building Inspector any change in the name of the
record owner or address or any change in the name of the current
manager, and that failure to comply with this provision shall result
in the immediate revocation of such special permit. If anyone so
identified is or is found to be convicted of violating MGL c. 119,
§ 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28, such special permit shall immediately be
null and void.
(6)
No adult use special permit issued under this Bylaw shall become
valid or in full force and effect until and unless the owner of the
property containing such adult use shall supply to the Building
Inspector a notarized statement agreeing to all terms and
conditions of said adult use special permit.
(7)
§ 300-18.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-18.4
1:300
§ 300-18.5. Invalidity.
In the event that any provision of this Article 18 shall be determined to
be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise, the remaining
provisions of this Article 18 not manifestly inseparable from the invalid
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
Any adult use in existence prior to the adoption of this Article 18 shall
apply for a special permit as specified in this Article within 90 days
following the adoption of this Article and shall be required to comply in
all respects with all requirements of this Article.
A.
Any adult use in existence prior to the adoption of this Article 18 which
has applied for such special permit but which has not been granted
such special permit may be permitted by a unanimous vote of the Board
of Appeals following a public hearing to continue in operation at its
present location for a period of time not exceeding six months following
the date of the application for such special permit, provided that a
written request therefor is made to the Board of Appeals. The Board
of Appeals, upon written application made prior to the expiration of
any such period of time and following a public hearing, may grant one
additional extension period of time not to exceed six months. The adult
use owner must demonstrate to the Board of Appeals undue financial
hardship if forced to close immediately upon failure to obtain a special
permit in order to obtain any such extension.
B.
The provisions of this § 300-18.4 shall only apply to adult uses as
defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
C.
§ 300-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18.5
1:301

ARTICLE 19
Large-Scale Solar Photovoltaic Facilities Overlay District (PVOD)
[Added 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 34]
§ 300-19.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article 19 is to promote and regulate the use of
commercial and municipal solar photovoltaic facilities within the Town of
Medfield and encourage their location and use in a manner which minimizes
negative visual and environmental impacts on scenic, natural and historic
resources and to the residents of Medfield. The purpose is also to provide
adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such
installations.
§ 300-19.2. Applicability.
This Article applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this
Article. This Article also pertains to physical modifications that materially
alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related
equipment. Large-scale solar photovoltaic facilities include photovoltaic
panels, mounting structures, transmission lines and any other equipment,
or structure, including access ways or landscaping, used to support solar
photovoltaic activities with a rated nameplate capacity of at least 250 kW
(DC).
§ 300-19.3. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING — As-of-right siting shall mean that development
may proceed without the need for a special permit, variance, amendment,
waiver, or other discretionary approval; as-of-right development shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board pursuant to § 300-14.12.
DESIGNATED LOCATION — The locations permitted shall be within the
large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic overlay district, hereinafter
referred to as "PVOD."
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted
on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum nameplate
capacity of 250 kW DC.
ON-SITE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic
installation that is constructed at a location where other uses of the
underlying property occur.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current (DC).
§ 300-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.3
1:303
RELATED EQUIPMENT OR FACILITIES — Any equipment, building,
structure, access way, landscaping or other means used to support the
operation, or disguise the appearance, of a solar photovoltaic tower,
antenna, or transmitting or receiving equipment of any kind.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY — An arrangement of solar photovoltaic
panels.
UTILITY — A system of wires or conductors and supporting structures
that functions in the transmission of electrical energy or communication
services (both audio and video) between generating stations, substations,
and transmission lines.
§ 300-19.4. Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District.
In order to allow new large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations to be located efficiently and in areas that will have the least
visual and environmental impact, there is hereby created the following
Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District (PVOD):
Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District - This district shall consist of the
following land and parcels: All land and parcels within the boundaries of the
Industrial Extensive (IE) Zoning District shown on the Zoning Map and as
described in Article 3 elsewhere in this Bylaw.
§ 300-19.5. Scope of authority.
The Solar Photovoltaic Facilities Overlay District (PVOD) shall be
considered as overlying other use districts established by this Bylaw. Within
the Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay District, the requirements of
the underlying district continue to apply except as may be specifically
superseded herein.
§ 300-19.6. Siting solar photovoltaic facilities.
The establishment of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be allowed by right and subject to site plan approval
in accordance with § 300-14.12 and a building permit, provided that the
following minimum requirements are met:
Allowed uses in the underlying zoning district(s). The following uses are
allowed by right:
All uses permissible and as regulated within the underlying district,
including uses requiring site plan approval.
(1)
(2) A large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation.
A.
Special permit allowed uses in the underlying zoning district. All uses
permitted by special permit in the underlying district at that location
may be allowed upon the issuance of a special permit by the designated
special permit granting authority under such conditions as the Board
may require.
B.
§ 300-19.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-19.6
1:304
§ 300-19.7. Dimension, density, and parking requirements.
Site control. The project proponent shall submit documentation of
actual access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for
construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic
installation.
A.
Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent shall submit
a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures
for maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater controls,
as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the
installation.
B.
Utility notification. No large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation shall be constructed until written confirmation has been
given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the
electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed
of the solar photovoltaic installation owner's or operator's intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator and its acceptance
of the owner's or operator's request to connect to the grid. Off-grid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
C.
For large-scale solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear
setbacks shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum front setback: 50 feet.*
(3) Minimum side setback: 100 feet.*
(4) Minimum rear setback: 50 feet.*
(5) Maximum lot coverage: 90%.
(6) Lot width, lot depth, perfect square: none required.
Height. Height shall be determined by each individual panel
measured to the grade level beneath that panel and shall not
exceed 18 feet from the preexisting natural grade.
(7)
Parking requirement. No additional parking is required for this use
as long as there is no full-time on-site system operator required
following installation of the large-scale solar photovoltaic
installation.
(8)
A.
*Setbacks may be increased or reduced if, in the opinion of the Planning
Board based on evidence submitted by applicant, existing and/or
proposed screening will not or will be adequate to minimize visual
impact (as described in § 300-19.10D). Under no circumstance will
setbacks be reduced to less than the dimensional requirements for the
zoning district.
B.
§ 300-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.8
1:305
§ 300-19.8. Appurtenant structures.
All appurtenant structures to large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, including, but not limited to, equipment shelters,
storage facilities, batteries or other electric storage, transformers and
substations, should be screened from view from abutting properties and
public ways by vegetation and/or joined or clustered, as determined by the
Planning Board, to avoid adverse visual impacts on abutting properties or
public ways.
§ 300-19.9. Design standards.
§ 300-19.10. Safety and environmental standards.
Lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent
with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the
installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that
required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be shielded
from abutting properties. Lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation
shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
A.
Signage. Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall comply with the sign bylaw (Article 13), except that
one additional sign no more than one square foot in area shall be
required to identify the owner and provide a twenty-four-hour
emergency contact telephone number. Solar photovoltaic installations
shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for identification
of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.
B.
Utility connections. All utility connections from the solar photovoltaic
installation shall be underground; provided, however, that the Planning
Board may waive this requirement as part of its site plan approval
based on soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and/or
any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for
utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility
provider.
C.
Emergency services. The large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire Chief.
The owner or operator shall coordinate and train local emergency
services and develop an emergency response plan that includes a
twenty-four-hour per day, seven days a week contact. The means to
shut down the solar photovoltaic installation will be clearly marked.
The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public
inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
A.
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
B.
§ 300-19.8 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-19.10
1:306
§ 300-19.11. Monitoring and maintenance.
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and bylaws. Herbicides shall only be applied by properly
licensed personnel. Mowing, grazing, or using geotextile materials
underneath the solar arrays may be permissible alternatives and
require Planning Board approval as part of the site plan review.
Impact on agricultural and environmentally sensitive land. The facility
shall be designed to minimize stormwater, temperature and other
environmental impacts to agricultural and environmentally sensitive
land, including abutting parcels, and to be compatible with continued
agricultural use of the land whenever possible.
C.
Visual impact. Structures shall be shielded from view by vegetation
and/or joined and clustered to minimize adverse visual impacts.
Landscaping, natural features, opaque fencing and other suitable
methods shall be utilized. Large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations permitted under this Bylaw are bound by
the buffer requirements found in Article 6 of this Bylaw for parcels
that adjoin residential districts. Additionally, a screening plan shall
be submitted ensuring that the solar arrays and any appurtenant
structures do not create a glare concern for adjacent residences and
are screened from roads and from adjacent lots by a minimum twentyfive-
foot-wide buffer strip and shall contain a screen of plantings not
less than five feet in width and six feet in height at the time of operation
of the facility or such greater height as required by the Planning Board
depending on the location of the site. The Planning Board may alter
or waive this requirement if such screening would have a detrimental
impact on the operation and performance of the array, or would prove
to be ineffective for the site. A diversity of plant species shall be used,
with a preference for species native to New England. Use of invasive
plants, as identified by the most recent copy of the "Massachusetts
Prohibited Plant List" maintained by the Massachusetts Department of
Agricultural Resources, is prohibited.
D.
Noise. Noise generated by large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations and associated equipment and machinery
shall conform to applicable state noise regulations, including the DEP's
Division of Air Quality noise regulations, 310 CMR 7.10.
E.
Security. Installation of fencing and or other access control measures
shall be employed to limit access to the solar photovoltaic installation
to facility personnel and emergency responders. Outdoor access control
measures shall be compatible with the character of the area in which
they are installed and shall be approved by the Planning Board as part
of the site plan review. In the application, the applicant shall provide
a description of all access control measures planned for the proposed
installation.
F.
§ 300-19.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.11
1:307
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in very good condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, trash removal, pest
control, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be
maintained to a level acceptable to the Town Public Safety Officials. The
owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the
solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted
as a public way.
A.
Modifications. Any modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation
made after issuance of the required building permit shall require
approval by the Planning Board in accordance with § 300-14.12.
B.
Removal requirements.
Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned
consistent with Subsection D of this Section shall be removed. The
owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more
than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner
or operator shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
(1)
Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization and revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner
or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation. Otherwise, the site shall be brought back to its
original condition or better with new trees planted.
(c)
(2)
C.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning
or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the solar photovoltaic
installation shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate
for more than six months without the written consent of the Planning
Board. If the owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance
with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment
or the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may take
appropriate enforcement action, including pursuing all available civil or
criminal penalties.
D.
§ 300-19.11 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-19.11
1:308
§ 300-19.12. Contents of application.
Financial surety. Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of
decommissioning and remediation of the landscape as defined in
Subsection C in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by
the Planning Board. The project proponent shall provide an estimate of
the cost of decommissioning as defined by Subsection C. The Planning
Board may consult with an expert at the applicant's cost to determine
the size of the surety, taking into account prevailing wages. Such surety
shall remain in force for so long as the project is in existence, and the
owner shall annually provide the Planning Board with proof that the
surety continues in effect. Lapse of surety shall be a violation of this
Bylaw and the Town may take appropriate enforcement action. Such
surety will not be required for municipally or state-owned facilities. The
project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs
associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount
shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due
to inflation.
E.
Failure to comply with regulation. If an applicant fails to comply with
the requirements of this regulation the Town may elect to enforce the
regulation by revoking the license granted to the applicant, by entering
the property and removing the installation, which expenses shall be
paid by the applicant or landowner within 30 days of notice by the
Town. If such expenses are not paid in full, the Town may impose
a lien. In addition, the applicant or landowner shall be liable jointly
and severably for all expenses the Town incurs in obtaining judicial
enforcement of this Article.
F.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, plans for the proposed
facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Board for site plan review.
In addition to the requirements of § 300-14.12 for site plan approval,
applications for a large-scale solar photovoltaic facility shall also
include:
A site plan showing:
Property lines and physical features, including access roads for
the project site.
(a)
A locus map showing the site in relationship to the properties,
easements, and roadways in reasonable proximity thereto,
including buildings, structures driveway openings, off-street
parking and all public or private ways.
(b)
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading,
vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening
vegetation and structures.
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 300-19.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.12
1:309
Elevations and/or photo simulations of the proposed facility
from the nearest public way and possibly other locations at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
(d)
Drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout
of the system and any potential shading from nearby
structures.
(e)
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices.
(f)
A stormwater runoff evaluation that includes water and
temperature impacts to receptors and a stormwater
management plan to mitigate impacts.
(g)
(h) An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter.
(i)
Name, address, and contact information for proposed system
installer.
(j)
Name, address, telephone number and signature of the project
proponent, as well as all co-proponents and/or property
owners, if any.
(k)
The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the project proponent.
(l)
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the
project site.
(2)
(3) An operation and maintenance plan.
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the electric generating photovoltaic panels, mounting
system, inverter, etc. shall be provided [including applicable
material safety data sheets (MSDS)].
(4)
A list of any hazardous materials proposed to be located on the
site in excess of household quantities and a plan to prevent their
release to the environment, as appropriate, [including applicable
material safety data sheets (MSDS)].
(5)
(6) A decommissioning plan in compliance with § 300-19.11C.
Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising
the project site [submission of a copy of a Zoning Map with the
parcel(s) identified is suitable for this purpose].
(7)
§ 300-19.12 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-19.12
1:310
§ 300-19.13. Review of application.
§ 300-19.14. As-built plans.
Engineer-stamped as-built plans shall be submitted to the Building
Commissioner before a certificate of completion or occupancy may be
issued.
§ 300-19.15. Changes in ownership.
The Building Commissioner and Planning Board shall be notified at least
30 days in advance of any proposed change in the owner or operator of
(8) Proof of liability insurance.
(9) Description of financial surety as required by § 200-19.11E.
Photometric plan for any required site lighting with specific
cutsheet details.
(10)
A rendering or photo simulation showing the proposed project at
completion.
(11)
Locations of wetlands and priority habitat areas defined by the
Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program (NHESP); the
applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with these
regulations.
(12)
Plans showing provision of water, including that needed for fire
protection.
(13)
(14)Plans showing existing trees of six inches' caliper or larger.
The Planning Board may waive documentary requirements as it deems
appropriate. All waiver requests must be written on the site plan.
B.
Notice of application to Planning Board shall be filed by the applicant
with the Town Clerk, who shall date stamp it and forward a copy of
the notice to the Planning Board. Upon receipt of an application, the
Town Planner shall review it for completeness and file a determination
of completeness or a notice of missing items with the Town Clerk within
21 days of the date stamped on the notice by the Town Clerk unless an
extension of time is agreed to in writing by the applicant. A copy of this
notice shall also be sent to the applicant.
A.
Following the procedures and review criteria of § 300-14.12 and the
requirements of this Article, the Planning Board shall review the
application and file its site plan decision with the Town Clerk within 120
days of a determination of completeness by the Town Planner. Failure
by the Planning Board to take final action and file its decision with
the Town Clerk within the allotted time, unless an extension of time is
agreed to in writing by the applicant, shall be deemed to be approval of
the site plan.
B.
§ 300-19.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.15
1:311
a large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which notice
shall include the contact information of the proposed new owner/operator.
A change in ownership shall require advance approval by the Planning
Board. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be based
principally on the experience and financial strength of the proposed new
owner.
§ 300-19.16. Annual reporting.
The owner or operator of the installation shall submit an annual report to
the Building Inspector and the Planning Board which certifies compliance
with the requirements of this Bylaw and their approved site plan, including
control of vegetation, stormwater, noise standards, emergency response
and adequacy of road access, by January 15 of each year.
§ 300-19.17. Severability.
If any provision herein is determined to be unlawful, it shall be severed from
this Article and all remaining provisions shall remain in force and effect.
§ 300-19.15 MEDFIELD CODE § 300-19.17
1:312
Division 2: Regulations
Chapter 310
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 150.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 210.
Streets, sidewalks and public places — See
Ch. 240.
Wells and cesspools — See Ch. 280.
Wetlands — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 300-19.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19.17
1:313

ARTICLE 1
Scope
§ 310-1.1. Title.
These rules and regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Land
Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town of
Medfield, Massachusetts."
§ 310-1.2. Authority.
These rules and regulations are hereby adopted by virtue of and pursuant
to the authority granted the Planning Board of the Town of Medfield by
MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, herein called the "Subdivision Control Law," as
now existing or hereafter amended. All forms, tables and figures appended
hereto shall be a part of the Land Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the
Planning Board of the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts.
§ 310-1.3. Purpose.
These rules and regulations have been adopted to fulfill the purpose of the
Subdivision Control Law as stated in the Massachusetts General Laws, MGL
c. 41, § 81M, and all other applicable sections.
§ 310-1.4. Definitions.
For the purpose of these rules and regulations, unless a contrary
intention clearly appears, the terms and words defined in the
Subdivision Control Law shall have the following meanings:
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
AGENT — Inspector appointed by the Superintendent of Public Works
acting as the agent of the Planning Board.
APPLICANT — All the owners of record of the land stated in the
application for subdivision. An agent, representative or his or her
assigns may act for an owner, provided written evidence of such fact,
signed and notarized by all owners of record, is submitted to the Board.
Evidence in the form of a list of their officers and designated authority
to sign legal documents shall be required for a corporate owner.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts.
DEFINITIVE PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision
of land drawn in accordance with § 310-4.2 of these rules and
regulations.
ENGINEER — A person registered or legally permitted to practice
professional engineering in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
GENERAL LAWS — The Massachusetts General Laws.
MDC — Metropolitan District Commission.
A.
§ 310-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-1.4
1:315
MDOT — Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or
resubdivision of land drawn in accordance with § 310-4.1 of these rules
and regulations.
STREETS — The meaning of streets shall include the traveled way,
curbing, grass strips, sidewalks, drainage and utilities.
SURVEYOR — A person registered or legally permitted to practice land
surveying in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
THESE RULES AND REGULATIONS — The Land Subdivision Rules
and Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town of Medfield,
Massachusetts.
Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts State Building Code shall have the meanings given
therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined
in either place shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary, Third Edition.
B.
§ 310-1.4 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-1.4
1:316
ARTICLE 2
Plans Not Requiring Approval
§ 310-2.1. Plans not requiring approval under Subdivision Control
Law.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds
or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land, and who believes that
his or her plan does not require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, may submit his or her plan to the Board as required by MGL c. 41,
§ 81P.
A.
The plan shall be drawn clearly and legibly to a scale of one inch equals
40 feet, on tracing paper, Mylar or cloth (as acceptable to the Registry
of Deeds). Said person shall file, by delivery or registered mail, a notice
(Form 1)33 with the Town Clerk with a copy to the Board stating the date
of submission for such determination. The Board, without unnecessary
delay, shall act upon the plan in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81P. The
plan shall contain the note "Approval under the Subdivision Control
Law not required," followed by sufficient space for the signature of all
members of the Board.
B.
Where a plan shows a combination of two or more existing lots, the
existing lot lines separating such lots shall be shown as a dashed line
labelled "Lot line to be abandoned."
C.
Where a plan shows a lot without adequate frontage, which lot is
intended to be conveyed to the owner of an adjacent lot with frontage,
such plan shall show the adjacent lot and designate the lot line between
the lot without frontage and the adjacent lot as a dashed line labelled
"Lot line to be abandoned."
D.
A person may also file a plan in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court
under Chapter 380 of the Acts of 1966 with the following statement:
"I hereby certify that the property lines shown on this plan are the
lines dividing existing ownerships, and the lines of the streets and
ways shown are those of public or private streets or ways already
established, and that no new lines for division of existing ownership or
for new ways are shown."
(Signed)
Registered Land Surveyor
Date
E.
33.Editor's Note: Form 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.1
1:317

ARTICLE 3
General Requirements for Subdivisions
§ 310-3.1. Administration.
General. No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law of any land within the Town, or proceed with
the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of
ways or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a
definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved
by the Board as hereinafter provided.
A.
Review by Town boards.
Review by Board of Health. At the time of filing of a definitive
subdivision plan, the applicant shall also file with the Board of
Health, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, two
contact prints of the definitive plan, dark line on white background.
The Board of Health shall, within the time prescribed by the
Subdivision Control Law after filing of the plan, report to the
Board, in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law.
(1)
Review by other Town boards. The Board shall accept comments on
the proposed subdivision from the Superintendent of Public Works
(particularly with respect to design of streets and of drainage and
sewerage systems and provisions for the safety and convenience
of inhabitants of the Town), the Water and Sewerage Board
(particularly as to the design of the water and sewerage systems)
and the Conservation Commission (particularly with respect to
open space and wetland impacts) for a period of 30 days. The
Medfield Historical Commission and the Committee to Study
Memorials shall be notified that the plan is on file with the Planning
Board. The failure of any of the above boards to respond will not
adversely affect the Board's decision on the definitive plan.
(2)
B.
Conditions recommended by the Board of Health. In the Board's
approval of a subdivision plan, the Board may incorporate conditions
for the protection of the public health that are recommended by the
Board of Health.
C.
Easements.
Easements for storm drains, sanitary sewers or water mains across
lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be at least 20 feet
wide and shall be constructed with a 12-inch gravel base covered
with six inches of loam, so that they shall be passable for a utility
vehicle. No easement shall be permitted across land of others
unless an agreement in proper form is obtained permitting such an
easement.
(1)
D.
§ 310-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.1
1:319
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the Board may require that there be conveyed
to the Town without cost a stormwater easement of adequate width
(20 to 100 feet, centered approximately on the center line of the
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream) depending upon the
width of the stream. This easement shall conform substantially to
the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream,
and shall provide for construction or other necessary purposes in
relation thereto.
(2)
No building or on-lot sewerage system shall be erected within an
easement.
(3)
Temporary slope easements shall be obtained to permit grading
of side slopes to meet sloping requirements of these rules and
regulations.
(4)
Tree planting easements, four feet in width, shall be obtained by
the Town to permit planting of street trees outside the public layout
along subdivision streets. The tree planting easement shall be as
shown in Form 13.34
(5)
Easements for access over subdivision ways for all purposes for
which roads are commonly used in the Town of Medfield shall be
conveyed to the Town without cost. The access easement shall be
in the form included in Form 13.
(6)
Where a proposed subdivision abuts or is located near existing
parks, conservation land or public recreational areas, the Board
may require that access easements through the subdivision be
conveyed to the Town without cost. Such easements shall be 20 feet
in width.
(7)
Easements shall be executed prior to the endorsement of the
definitive plan and recorded simultaneously with the plan.
(8)
Flagging of subdivision streets. Within two weeks after the receipt
of the application for approval of a preliminary subdivision plan and
again at least two weeks prior to the public hearing required by the
Subdivision Control Law, the center line of the proposed street(s) shall
be clearly marked on the ground at 50-foot intervals with colored flags
or stakes, and the Planning Board shall be informed in advance as to
when the flagging will be done.
E.
Recording of plan.
Within 10 days after the definitive plan and covenant, as approved
and endorsed, have been recorded at the Norfolk Registry of
Deeds, and in the case of registered land, with the recorder of
the Land Court, the applicant shall notify the Board in writing of
(1)
F.
34.Editor's Note: Form 13 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-3.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-3.1
1:320
§ 310-3.2. Performance guarantee.
the date of such recording, including book and page or document
numbers.
Upon receipt of notification of recording, the Board shall file one
print of the definitive plan with the Building Inspector. In
accordance with the statute, where approval with covenant is noted
thereon, the Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the
construction of a building on any lot within the subdivision without
receipt from the Board of a copy of the Certificate of Release of
Lots (Form 10).35
(2)
Acceptance by the Town. At the laying out and acceptance by the Town
of the streets or ways, all rights for use as public ways, all municipal
services within the ways and other appurtenances pertaining to these
municipal services will become the property of the Town of Medfield at
no cost to the Town.
G.
Before approval and endorsement of approval of a definitive plan of
a subdivision, the applicant shall agree to complete the required
improvements specified in these rules and regulations, such
construction and installation to be secured by the following method:
All applicants shall file a covenant (Form 6),36 executed and duly
recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby
such ways and services as specified in these rules and regulations
shall be provided to serve all lots within four years of the execution
of the covenant, or before any lots may be built upon or conveyed,
other than by mortgage deed.
(1)
Before any lots are released by the Board (Form 10),37 the applicant
shall either file a surety company performance bond or deposit
a sum of money or approved negotiable securities in an amount
determined by the Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of
all or any part of the improvements specified in these rules and
regulations. Such surety, whether bond, deposit of money or
securities, shall be on condition that the improvements shall be
completed within one year of the date of the acceptance of the
surety. The applicant shall file Form 1538 with the Planning Board
relative to performance guarantees.
(2)
The construction of all ways and the installation of all municipal
services within a portion of the subdivision covered by said surety
shall be completed in accordance with the applicable rules and
regulations of the Board before any additional portion of the
(3)
A.
35.Editor's Note: Form 10 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
36.Editor's Note: Form 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
37.Editor's Note: Form 10 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
38.Editor's Note: Form 15 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.2
1:321
subdivision will be released from the covenant. The failure to
complete the construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services within that portion of the subdivision covered by said
surety within a period of one year from the date of acceptance of
the surety or within four years of the execution of a covenant shall
automatically rescind approval of the subdivision plan except as to
those lots which have theretofore been released, unless additional
surety is accepted by the Board.
Release of performance guarantee.
Upon the completion of improvements required in these rules and
regulations, security for the performance of which was given by
bond, deposit, covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant
with respect to any lot, the applicant may request and agree on
terms of release with the Board, or he may send by registered
mail to the Town Clerk a written statement in duplicate that the
construction or installation in connection with such bond, deposit
or covenant has been completed in accordance with the
requirements contained in these rules and regulations, such
statement to contain the address of the applicant. The Town Clerk
shall forthwith furnish a copy of said statement to the Board.
(1)
If the Board determines that said improvements have been
completed, it shall release the interest of the Town by returning
the entire deposit or a portion thereof to the person who furnished
the same, and/or release the covenant by appropriate instrument,
Certificate of Release of Covenant (Form 12),39 duly acknowledged
with a copy to the Building Inspector.
(2)
If the Board determines that said improvements have not been
completed, it shall, within the time period required under the
Subdivision Control Law, specify to the applicant and to the Town
Clerk in writing the details wherein said improvements fail to
comply with its rules and regulations.
(3)
Prior to release of any such lots, evidence satisfactory to the Board
must be furnished of the necessary arrangements to maintain such
streets prior to acceptance by the Town in a condition reasonably
safe and convenient for travel, including, but not limited to, snow
removal and flooding prevention. Such evidence may take the form
of a Private Way Maintenance Agreement (Form 14)40 executed
by the applicant. If those streets are not so maintained, the Town
may take such action as it deems proper to assure safety and
convenience for travel, and the applicant shall indemnify the Town
against all claims for loss or damage that may result from such
action and shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred and
maintenance of subdivision roads shall be included in the bond.
(4)
B.
39.Editor's Note: Form 12 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Form 14 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-3.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-3.2
1:322
Evidence of satisfactory performance. Before the Board will release the
interest of the Town in the deposit or, in the case of approval with
covenant, issue a release of covenant:
The applicant shall file with the Board a certified copy of a separate
layout plan (with accompanying cross sections and profile) for each
street in the subdivision (or, in the case of approval with covenant,
of the street or streets serving the lots for which a release is
desired). Certification shall be by the engineer and surveyor
employed by the applicant at his or her own expense, and shall
indicate that all easements, streets, sidewalks, sewers, storm
drains, water lines, underground telephone, cable and electricity,
and their appurtenances have been constructed in accordance with
lines and grades of said plan and are accurately located as shown
thereon.
(1)
The Board shall obtain from the applicant a statement in writing
by the Highway Superintendent, Certificate of Construction (Form
9),41 that all work under his or her jurisdiction required by these
rules and regulations has been inspected and completed in each
street in the subdivision (or in the street or streets serving the
lots covered by the surety), including storm drains, bridges and
sidewalks, and that he has approved the construction and materials
used in the performance of such work.
(2)
The Board shall obtain from the applicant a statement in writing by
the Water and Sewerage Board (Form 9)42 that it has inspected and
the applicant has completed each water main and sanitary sewer
and their appurtenances in accordance with the requirements of
these rules and regulations, and that it has approved the
construction and materials used in the performance of such work.
(3)
The applicant shall execute an instrument (Form 13)43 transferring
to the Town, without cost, valid unencumbered title to all sanitary
sewers, storm drains and water mains and appurtenances thereto
constructed and installed in the subdivision or approved portion
thereof, and conveying to the Town, without cost and free of all
liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights and easements to
construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace, operate and forever
maintain such sanitary sewers, storm drains, and water mains, with
any manholes, pipes, conduits and other appurtenances, and to do
all acts incidental thereto, in, through and under the whole of all
streets in the subdivision or approved portion thereof, and if any
such sewers, storm drains or water mains have been constructed
and installed in land not within such streets, then in, through and
under a strip of land extending 10 feet in width on each side of the
center line of all such sewers, storm drains and water mains.
(4)
C.
41.Editor's Note: Form 9 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
42.Editor's Note: Form 9 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: Form 13 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.2
1:323
§ 310-3.3. Physical requirements.
The applicant shall provide the Town, at no cost, with final
acceptance plans for each street in the subdivision, including all
property lines.
(5)
Criteria for satisfactory partial completion. When only a portion of the
streets and other improvements shown on the definitive plan have been
constructed or installed and a release from the covenant is requested,
the Board shall consider as satisfactorily completed only such lengths
and parts thereof as will (in and of themselves) form convenient and
adequate systems without the necessity of further extension or
improvement, and shall consider as eligible for release only such lots
as front on, are connected, or are otherwise served by such streets,
utilities and other improvements.
D.
Reduction of surety. The sum of any required surety or the amount of
any deposit held hereunder may from time to time be reduced by the
Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by the Board
in whole or in part.
E.
General standards. Subdivisions shall be designed in accordance with
the following general standards:
Unless otherwise specified, all the work and the materials used in
the work to be done shall conform to the requirements of "The
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Transportation,
Standards Specifications for Highways, Bridges and Waterways,"
latest edition, or any amendment thereof, addition thereto, or
substitution therefor.
(1)
Unless otherwise specified, construction standards shall conform
to the most current revisions as published in the Construction
Manual, Part 3, Construction Standards of the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation.
(2)
Wherever in the documents referred to in Subsection A(1) and
(2) above, the following terms or pronouns in place of them are
used, the intent and meaning shall be interpreted by substitution
as follows:
COMMONWEALTH — Town of Medfield.
DEPARTMENT — Public Works Department of the Town of
Medfield.
ENGINEER — Superintendent of Public Works of the Town of
Medfield.
(3)
A.
Lots. All lots within the subdivision shall comply with the area, frontage
and width and all other requirements of the Zoning Bylaw44 for the
B.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 310-3.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-3.3
1:324
Town of Medfield, Massachusetts in force at the time of application
unless it is stipulated by the applicant that the lot is not buildable and
so endorsed on the plan.
Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all natural
features, such as topography, large trees, watercourses, scenic points,
historic spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and/or provide benefits
to the Town.
C.
Wetlands. If any wetlands, floodplains or inland waters are included in
the proposed subdivision, the attention of the applicant is directed to
the provisions of Chapter 784 of the Acts of 1972 (MGL c. 131, § 40),
Protection of Wetlands (new acts involving all wetlands and other areas
subject to flooding), Coastal Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 130,
§ 105), and Chapter 782 of the Acts of 1972 (MGL c. 131, § 40A), An
Act Further Protecting the Inland Wetlands and Floodplains of the
Commonwealth.
D.
Land adjoining natural watercourses. If the grades of the land are
changed in an area within 25 feet of a natural watercourse, the banks of
the watercourse shall be stabilized at the same time in accordance with
the instructions of the Planning Board, the Highway Superintendent, or
other required agency, if applicable.
E.
Open spaces. Before approval of a plan, the Board may also, in proper
cases, require the plan to show a park or parks suitably located for
playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law. The park or parks shall
not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided
and to the prospective uses of such land. Final disposition of such areas
shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law.
F.
Earth removal.
The tentative or final approval of a subdivision plan by the Planning
Board shall not be construed as authorizing the removal of material
from the premises, even though in connection with the construction
of streets shown on the plan.
(1)
All earth removal within subdivisions shall be in accordance with
the Rules and Regulations Governing Earth Removal Uses, Zoning
Bylaw for the Town of Medfield, Massachusetts.45
(2)
When blasting is required for development of a subdivision
roadway, the applicant shall file a notification of intent to
commence site preparation and/or construction with the Board of
Selectmen, who will publish a public notice at least two weeks
prior to actual work. Costs associated with this publication shall
(3)
G.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning, Art. 12.
§ 310-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.3
1:325
be borne by the applicant. This requirement shall be noted on the
definitive plan.
§ 310-3.3 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-3.3
1:326
ARTICLE 4
Subdivision Approval Procedure for Plans to be Approved Under
Subdivision Control Law
§ 310-4.1. Preliminary plan.
Application. An applicant may submit a preliminary plan of a
subdivision in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81S.
Application for approval by the Board shall be made on Form
2,46 accompanied by six contact prints of the preliminary plan,
prepared as hereinafter prescribed. The applicant shall also, by
delivery or registered mail, give notice to the Town Clerk stating
the date of submission of the preliminary plan. The applicant shall
further submit a preliminary plan of the subdivision to the Board of
Health for approval.
(1)
The application shall include payment in full of Planning Board
submission fees as noted in the Fee Schedule (Appendix A),47 and
proof of payment of Board of Health fees to the Board of Health.
(2)
A.
Plan form. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by an engineer and
surveyor and be drawn clearly and legibly with pencil on tracing paper
at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet, and in the case of
profiles, at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet and a vertical
scale of one inch equals four feet.
B.
Plan content. The preliminary plan shall show clearly the following:
Subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend and
title "Preliminary Plan."
(1)
Names of the record owner and the applicant and the name or
names of the engineer and surveyor.
(2)
Names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax list
and such others to whom notices are to be sent as required by law.
(3)
Locus plan showing proposed streets in relation to adjacent streets
and lots as shown on current Assessors' Maps.
(4)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, easements, and any public
areas within the subdivision.
(5)
Proposed system of drainage, including adjacent natural
waterways.
(6)
(7) Proposed sewerage system and water distribution system.
(8) Profile of all proposed streets and drains.
C.
46.Editor's Note: Form 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.1
1:327
§ 310-4.2. Definitive plan.
Approximate boundary lines of proposed lots with approximate
areas and dimensions.
(9)
(10)Names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets.
Existing and proposed topography of the land by contours at twofoot
intervals unless otherwise specified by the Board.
(11)
Zoning classification of the area, including Aquifer Protection,
Watershed Protection and Floodplain Districts.
(12)
(13)Such other information as the Board may require.
Approval or disapproval.
The Board and the Board of Health shall act upon the preliminary
plan and its accompanying materials in accordance with MGL c. 41.
Approvals, if given, do not constitute approval of a subdivision, but
do facilitate the process of securing approval of the definitive plan.
(1)
Any plan submitted to the Board in advance of the definitive plan
which does not conform to the requirements of a preliminary plan
shall not be considered to be a preliminary plan, nor shall such a
plan be acted upon by the Board.
(2)
Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of a
subdivision and the action of the Board on a preliminary plan shall
not prejudice its action on a subsequent definitive plan.
(3)
D.
Public notice. At the time of filing with the Planning Board, a public
notice of the filing of the preliminary plan will be circulated once in a
newspaper of general circulation at the applicant's expense.
E.
Submission. Any applicant who submits a definitive plan of a
subdivision to the Board for approval in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Law shall file the following with the Board:
At the time of filing a definitive subdivision plan, the applicant shall
submit an original drawing of the definitive plan, including plans
and profiles of all streets, water, utilities and drainage therein,
and seven dark line contact prints on white background and seven
copies of the Environmental Impact Statement for distribution to
the Superintendent of Public Works, the Water and Sewerage
Board, the Conservation Commission and the Planning Board's
consultant.
(1)
A properly executed application on Form 3 and a designer's
certificate on Form 4.48
(2)
A.
48.Editor's Note: Forms 3 and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 310-4.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-4.2
1:328
Notice filed with the Town Clerk of "Application for Approval of
Definitive Plan," in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law.
(Form 3 may be used for this purpose.49)
(3)
Proof of payment in full of the Planning Board submission as fee as
required in the Fee Schedule (Appendix A50).
(4)
Proof of payment of the Board of Health submission fee to the
Board of Health.
(5)
A list of all owners of land abutting the subdivision as shown on
the definitive plan, together with the address of each as determined
from the most recent local tax list, certified by the Board of
Assessors on Form 5.51
(6)
A sketch plan, acceptable to the Board, showing a possible or
prospective street layout for any adjacent land owned or controlled
by the owner or applicant of the subdivision.
(7)
Drainage calculations prepared by the applicant's engineer,
including design criteria used, and drainage area and other
information sufficient for the Board to evaluate the size of any
proposed or existing drain, culvert or bridge, or existing retention
area.
(8)
If private on-lot sewerage systems are proposed, the Board may
require the applicant to submit soil suitability data certified by
a registered sanitarian or a registered engineer concerning
observation of test pits.
(9)
Traffic impact statement. The traffic impact statement shall (i)
examine the existing traffic volumes (both average daily and peak
hour) on public ways significantly affected by the subdivision and
existing levels of service at nearby intersections; (ii) quantify the
anticipated trip generation of the proposed subdivision; and (iii)
analyze the effect of the additional traffic on the levels of service at
nearby intersections and any changes in traffic patterns, including
description of any required mitigation measures. The review should
also include a tabulation of historic occurrence of accidents for
the last three years. The traffic impact analysis should also review
the impact of entrances with respect to AASHTO standards to
subdivision roadways on the safety and convenience of vehicular
and pedestrian travel on the adjacent streets (including sight lines
for entering and merging traffic at street intersections). See
AASHTO 1990 Edition, Figure IX-40, page 762, for requirements.
(10)
Copies of any existing easements, covenants and restrictions
applying to the land to be subdivided.
(11)
49.Editor's Note: Form 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: Form 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.2
1:329
A proposed management plan for any park, open space or common
areas in the proposed subdivision.
(12)
Certificates regarding connection to the public water supply and
public sewers as required by § 310-5.2D(1) and E(1).
(13)
Environmental impact statement.
In connection with any definitive plan or plan for access ways
submitted to the Board, including access ways to multiplefamily
dwelling, industrial, retail and service facilities, there
shall be included with the submission seven copies of an
environmental impact statement prepared by a registered
professional engineer which shall show clearly the relation of
the proposed project to the total environment of the Town and
its inhabitants.
(a)
The environmental impact statement should examine the
existing conditions, identify all environmental impacts of the
proposed project, and analyze these impacts to determine the
significance of each. Where possible, quantitative measures
should be used to define the magnitude of the impacts.
Alternatives to the proposed project also should be discussed
in the environmental impact statement.
(b)
This statement shall include the following general categories
as a minimum of information:
Natural environment.
[a] Air.
[b] Noise.
[c] Land: types of vegetation and soils characteristics.
[d] Wildlife.
[e] Surface water.
Groundwater, including normal depth to high
groundwater on proposed streets.
[f]
(i)
Man-made environment.
[a] Surrounding land use.
[b] Density.
[c] Zoning.
[d] Architecture.
[e] Historic buildings or sites.
(ii)
(c)
(14)
§ 310-4.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-4.2
1:330
Public facilities.
[a] Water supply, flow pressure and distribution.
Sanitary sewerage, connection, distribution and
facilities.
[b]
[c] Storm drainage facilities.
[d] Disposition of stormwater.
[e] Solid waste disposal.
[f] Electric power.
[g] Gas.
(iii)
Community services.
[a] Schools.
[b] Recreation.
[c] Police.
[d] Fire.
[e] Public works.
(iv)
Economic considerations.
[a] Cost-benefit ratio.
[b] Time schedule.
(v)
Design considerations.
[a] Open space planning.
[b] Retention of natural vegetation and contours.
(vi)
Plan form.
The definitive plan shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a
registered land surveyor if surveying information is shown, and
also by a registered professional engineer if the plan shows the
design of road pavements, water pipes, sewerage or other utilities.
(1)
The definitive plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch equals 40 feet in black India ink, upon sheets of tracing
cloth or Mylar (as acceptable to the Registry of Deeds) measuring
24 inches by 36 inches, with a 1 1/2 inch border, except on the left
side which shall be 2 1/4 inch.
(2)
If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision at a scale agreed to by the
(3)
B.
§ 310-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.2
1:331
Board. The index sheet shall also show street stationing, utilities,
and direction of drainage and sewer flow as established by the
profile plans.
Plan content. The definitive plan shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
(1) Subdivision name, boundaries, true North arrow, date and scale.
Names and addresses of present record owner(s) and applicant
and name of the engineer and surveyor who prepared the plan;
certificates and seals of the engineer and surveyor that they
prepared the plan, and a certificate by the surveyor that all
surveying conforms to the requirements of the Massachusetts Land
Court.
(2)
Names of all owners of abutting land as determined from the most
recent local tax list, including owners of land separated from the
subdivision only by a street.
(3)
A location plan of the subdivision at a scale of one inch equals
800 feet, showing the exterior lines of all proposed streets in the
subdivision and their location in relation to the adjacent street
network.
(4)
A signature block on each sheet of the plan to record the action
of the Board, the date of approval, the date of endorsement, and
the signatures of the five Board members. A second signature block
shall be placed on the cover sheet of the plan for the Conservation
Commission, the Board of Health and the Water and Sewerage
Board.
(5)
(6) Zoning classification and zoning district boundaries, if any.
Location of the Watershed Protection District, Floodplain District,
Aquifer Protection District, wetlands as defined in the Medfield
Zoning Bylaw,52 and all swamps, brooks, marshy sections and
existing wells within the subdivision.
(7)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, rights-of-way, utility
easements, slope easements, and any public or common areas
within the subdivision.
(8)
Proposed street names, in accordance with the guidelines set out
in § 310-5.2A(14).
(9)
Proposed house numbers, in accordance with the "Street
Numbering System of the Town of Medfield," August 1966
(available at the Medfield Building Department).
(10)
C.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 310-4.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-4.2
1:332
Location, name and present width of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(11)
Boundary lines, area in square feet and dimensions of all proposed
lots, with all lots designated numerically and in sequence. Front
setback lines and width at setback for all lots.
(12)
Sufficient data, including lengths, bearings, radii and central
angles, to determine the exact location, direction and length of
every street line, lot line, easement line and boundary line and
sufficient survey data referred to existing permanent monuments
such that these lines may readily be established on the ground.
(13)
Sufficient permanent benchmarks, referred to the Massachusetts
Geodetic Base datum of 1929, properly identified.
(14)
Monuments at all points of curvature and at changes in directions
of street sidelines or where designated by the Board.
(15)
Street layout plan.
A separate "layout" plan for each proposed street in the
subdivision, including connection to existing paved way and
bridges, at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
showing for each such street:
(i) Side lines.
(ii) Center line.
(iii) Stations.
(iv) Points of tangency.
(v) Length of tangents.
(vi) Length of curves.
(vii) Intersection angles.
(viii)Radii of curves.
(ix) Location of permanent monuments and benchmarks.
All lot lines, easement lines, buildings and other major
features within 100 feet of the exterior lines of such street.
(x)
Size, material, type and location of all existing and
proposed drains, water lines, and electric, cable and
telephone lines, together with their appurtenances, within
and adjacent to the subdivision.
(xi)
Indication of depth to normal high groundwater within the
street layout.
(xii)
(a)
(16)
§ 310-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.2
1:333
On the same sheet there shall be drawn cross sections of
the proposed street, properly located and identified by station
number at such intervals along the street as will show
adequately any variations in the section. These shall be
supplemented where necessary by lines on the plan showing
the width and location of the proposed roadways, planting
strips, gutters, sidewalks and similar physical features.
(b)
Directly above or below the plan of each proposed street, a
profile shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of one inch equals
40 feet and vertical scale of one inch equals four feet showing
for such street the following information:
(i) Existing center line grades, in fine black solid line.
(ii) Existing exterior left sideline, in fine black short-dash line.
Existing exterior right sideline, in fine black long-dash
line.
(iii)
(iv) Proposed finished center line grades, in heavy solid line.
Proposed grade elevations, in figures, at beginning and
end of street, at 50-foot station intervals, and at beginning
and end of all vertical curves.
(v)
(vi) Rates of gradient in percentage.
(vii) Location of any intersecting public or private ways.
Location, size and gradient of existing and proposed public
utilities and their appurtenances.
(viii)
Rim and invert elevations for all manholes and catch
basins.
All elevations shall refer to Massachusetts Geodetic
Datum of 1929.
(ix)
(c)
Topography for the entire subdivision, including existing and
proposed grades, with two-foot contour intervals and elevations
related to the Massachusetts datum of 1929, unless otherwise
specified.
(17)
Major site features, such as existing topography, stonewalls,
fences, buildings, rock ridges, rock outcroppings, woods lines and
significant vegetation (including all trees within and/or at the edge
of the planting strips of the proposed street layout which exceed
eight inches in diameter, identified by species).
(18)
Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and
adjacent to the subdivision, and the entire watershed area within
which the subdivision is located, at a reduced scale if appropriate.
(19)
§ 310-4.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-4.2
1:334
For subdivisions with on-site septic systems, an overlay of the
Norfolk County Conservation Commission District Map entitled
"Soil Limitations for Septic Tank Sewage Disposal in the Town of
Medfield."
(20)
A plan for the control of erosion and siltation during and after
construction phases, including the proposed construction
sequencing, temporary and permanent erosion control plantings,
special constructions, and swale and stream scour protection.
(21)
Details of all construction, including information from the Plates of
these rules and regulations.53
(22)
A list of all waivers granted by the Board, preceded by the following
statement:
"Except for the following waivers (if any) granted by the Planning
Board, this plan conforms to the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations of the Town of Medfield."
(23)
(24)Park or open areas as required by § 310-3.3F.
Soil borings to the proposed depth of construction at 100-foot
intervals along the center line of proposed roadways, in order to
identify the presence of ledge.
(25)
Board of Health report. Refer to § 310-3.1B and C for Board of Health
requirements.
D.
Public hearings. Before approval, modification and approval, or
disapproval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall be held
by the Board in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law. Legal
notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Board to the applicant
and to all owners of property abutting upon the land, including owners
of land separated from the subdivision only by a street, all as appear
on the most recent tax list. These notices shall be mailed, with return
receipt requested. Publication of the legal notice and the mailing of the
notices to abutters shall be at the expense of the applicant.
E.
Plan revisions. For resubmission of a definitive plan showing revisions,
prior to Planning Board action on the plan, a fee shall be paid according
to Appendix A, Fee Schedule.54 The applicant shall accompany the
revised plan with a written description of all changes or additions, and
shall submit two extra copies of the plan with the changes and additions
highlighted with a yellow marker. The applicant shall address point-bypoint
in writing any correspondence they have received relating to the
plan from the Planning Board and/or its agents.
F.
G. Approval, modification or disapproval.
53.Editor's Note: The Plates are included as an attachment to this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.2
1:335
After the required hearing, but within the period specified in the
Subdivision Control Law after submission of the definitive plan, the
Board shall take final action in accordance with said law.
(1)
Compliance with zoning regulations is a condition for approval of a
subdivision plan.
(2)
The plan shall be endorsed in accordance with the format of Form
7.55
(3)
Certificate of approval.
The action of the Board in respect to said plan shall be by vote,
copies of which shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and
sent by registered mail to the applicant. If the Board modifies or
disapproves said plan, it shall state in its vote the reason for its
action. Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original
drawing of the definitive plan by the signature of a majority of the
Board, but not until the statutory 20-day appeal period has elapsed
following the filing of the certificate of the action of the Board with
the Town Clerk, and said Clerk has notified the Board in writing
that no appeal has been filed.
(1)
Within 30 days after the return to the applicant of the definitive
plan, as approved and endorsed, he shall obtain and furnish to the
Board one cloth transparency or Mylar and four prints of said plan
showing final endorsement. Transparency and prints shall be black
line on white background. No lots will be released by the Board
until the applicant has filed with the Board the above transparency
and prints.
(2)
Approval of the definitive plan shall not be deemed to constitute
the laying out or acceptance by the Town of any streets within a
subdivision.
(3)
H.
Medfield Historical Commission report. A written statement from the
Medfield Historical Commission describing any significant historical or
archaeological features on the site is required, with guidance to the
developer regarding compliance with any statutory regulations.
I.
J. Recording of plan. Refer to § 310-3.1F on recording of plan.
55.Editor's Note: Form 7 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-4.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-4.2
1:336
ARTICLE 5
Streets and Improvements
§ 310-5.1. General requirements.
Location of streets.
Streets in the subdivision shall be coordinated with each other
and with the existing-street system in a manner satisfactory to
the Board, with due regard to securing safety and convenience
of travel. Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider
to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the
maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision.
(1)
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
extension of streets, or for access to adjoining property which is
not yet subdivided.
(2)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips shall be in the public interest.
(3)
A.
Safe and adequate access from public way.
Public ways must provide safe and adequate access to a
subdivision. If in the opinion of the Board this condition has not
been met, then the Board may require physical improvements
within such public ways, such improvements to be completed at the
applicant's expense.
(1)
Where the physical condition or width of public ways from which
a subdivision has its access is considered by the Board to be
inadequate to carry the traffic expected to be generated by such
subdivision, the Board may require the subdivider to dedicate a
strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting public ways
to a width at least commensurate with that required within the
subdivision, and to make physical improvements to and within such
public ways to the same standards required within the subdivision.
Any such dedication of land for the purpose of such way and any
such work performed within such public way shall be made only
with permission of the Board of Selectmen, and all costs of such
widening or construction shall be borne by the subdivider.
(2)
B.
Access streets.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for any
purpose shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such
on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town, without the
consent of the Board, and such consent will be conditional upon the
providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each building site
in the same manner as otherwise required for lots in a subdivision.
(1)
C.
§ 310-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.1
1:337
§ 310-5.2. Design standards.
Plans for such access shall be furnished in the same manner as for
ways in a subdivision.
(2)
Roads.
Width. Street layouts shall not be less than 50 feet in width. (See
Plates 3A, 3B and 4 and Table 1.56)
(1)
Grades. Grades of less than 1% or more than 6% shall be approved
only under exceptional circumstances by the Board.
(2)
Cross section. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards as shown on the Typical Roadway Cross Sections. (See
Plates 3A, 3B and 4 and Table 1.)
(3)
Non-through streets. Any proposed street that intersects solely
with a non-through street shall be deemed to be an extension of
the non-through street. Where a non-through street is shown as
part of an approved subdivision plan, it shall be constructed in its
entirety in the normal course of construction of the subdivision.
Non-through streets and their extensions, if any, shall not be longer
than 500 feet (measured between the sideline of the first through
street and the center line of the turnaround) unless, in the opinion
of the Board, a greater length is necessitated by topography or
other local conditions. The non-through street shall be covered by
a bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities as described in
§ 310-3.2B.
Maximum length. The maximum length of a non-through street
and its extension shall be 500 feet, including turnaround.
(a)
Rotary circles or culs-de-sac. Rotary circles shall be
constructed at the terminus of non-through streets. (See Plates
5A, 5B and 7.57)
(b)
Temporary rotary circles or culs-de-sac. Temporary rotary
circles on non-through streets shall be constructed where
possible extension into adjacent land is anticipated. (See Plates
6 and 8.58)
(c)
Cross sections. Cross sections shall be in accordance with the
standards as shown on the Typical Roadway Cross Sections
which are herewith made a part of these rules and regulations.
(See Plates 3A, 3B and 4.59)
(d)
(4)
A.
56.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 and Table 1 are included as attachments to this chapter.
57.Editor's Note: Plates 5 and 7 are included as attachments to this chapter.
58.Editor's Note: Plates 6 and 8 are included as attachments to this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 310-5.1 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.2
1:338
Alignment, grade, dead-ends and intersections. Where streets
are to be constructed beyond an existing turnaround, it is a
condition of subdivision approval that the turnaround surface
be removed and the street constructed in accordance with
Table 1.60
(e)
Curbing.
Curbing required shall be sloped granite curbing with
appropriate transition pieces to the granite inlet stones as
shown on Plate 9A.61
(a)
Granite curbing on a radius connecting to an existing street
edge which has no berm must have a tapered end piece.
(b)
(5)
Driveway openings.
Curb openings for driveways shall be prohibited within 20
feet of any catch basin or hydrant. Curb roundings shall be
provided at driveway openings.
(a)
Radii for driveway openings shall be the same as the width of
the sidewalk. On the side of the street where the sidewalk is
not required, the same radii are required.
(b)
The driveway opening shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide
and shall be approved only on streets which are bonded or
otherwise released from the subdivision covenant.
(c)
The pitch of the sidewalk on either side of the driveway for a
distance of 20 feet shall be gradually and consistently reduced
so that at the driveway it is flat. By smoothly working the mix,
the sidewalk shall be gradually lowered two additional inches
at the driveway.
(d)
(6)
Access for handicapped. The construction of ramps and curb cuts
to facilitate the use of the project by the physically handicapped is
required. Ramps shall be located at intersections, crosswalks and
other locations as required by the Board. Design and construction
shall conform to Medfield's Rules and Regulations Relating to the
Architectural Barrier Board, 1975, or as amended.
(7)
Planting strips.
Grass strips of a width required by the Typical Roadway Cross
Sections, and so shown on the definitive plan, shall be provided
on each side of the roadway. The finished grade of such grass
strips in relation to the finished grade of the roadway shall be
as shown on the applicable cross section plan.
(a)
(8)
60.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Plate 9A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:339
Where the planting strip is not on the sidewalk side of the
street, an alternative ground cover such as clover may be
preferred to grass, subject to approval by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
(b)
Side slopes.
The areas in back of the sidewalk where slope is required shall
be graded to a slope of four feet horizontal to one foot vertical
as shown on the Typical Cross Section.
(a)
Any ledge at the edge of the street layout shall be cut back to
a slope not exceeding one foot horizontal to four feet vertical.
(b)
Fieldstone retaining walls may be used to reduce the sloping
limits, but not the sloping rate. The exposed face of the wall
shall not exceed four feet in height.
(c)
Slope limits shall be shown on the plan and easements shall
be granted to the Town for construction of all slopes and/or
retaining walls. [See § 310-3.1D(4).]
(d)
(9)
Loaming. The top six inches of grass areas and side slopes shall
consist of good quality loam. The good quality loam shall be
screened, with 100% passing the one-inch screen, raked, and rolled
with a hand roller to grade. The loam shall be seeded with lawn
grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure adequate
coverage and shall be rolled.
(10)
Tree planting.
Healthy trees shall be properly planted within tree planting
easements at 40-foot intervals as shown on the typical roadway
cross-sections, except that no tree shall be within 20 feet of an
intersection or a driveway. Trees shall have a caliper of 1 1/2
inches to two inches, and shall have a one-year warranty for
survival or replacement from the provider. They shall be of the
following types and subject to the Tree Warden's approval:
Acer saccharum (Sugar Maple)
Acer rubrum (Red Maple)
Acer platanoides (Norway Maple)
Quercus coccinia (Scarlet Oak)
Quercus rubra (Red Oak)
Platanus acerifolia (London Planetree)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis (Shademaster Locust)
Fraxinus penn. lanceolata (Marshall's Seedless Ash)
(a)
(11)
§ 310-5.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.2
1:340
The Board, with the advice of the Tree Warden, reserves the
right to identify existing trees within the layout which shall be
left in place.
(b)
Monuments and markers.
Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all
points of change in direction or curvature of streets and at
other points as shown on the definitive plan.
(a)
Granite or concrete monuments not less than four feet in
length dressed to six inches by six inches in section at the top,
and not less than six inches by six inches in section at the
bottom, shall be provided and shall be set to finish grade as
shown on the plans. The exact location point shall be indicated
by a hole having a diameter of 1/4 inch. After the bound has
been permanently set, the hole shall be drilled into the top of
the bound to a depth of 1/2 inch.
(b)
No permanent monuments shall be installed until all
construction which could destroy or disturb the monument
is completed. After the bounds have been set, bituminous
concrete shall be placed around the bounds and compacted to
the specified thickness.
(c)
A certification shall be made to the Board by the engineer or
land surveyor that the bounds have been set as shown on the
definitive plan.
(d)
(12)
Street signs.
Street signs shall be approved by the Highway Superintendent
and the Board. They shall bear the names of the streets as
indicated on the definitive plan and shall be erected by the
subdivider at all intersections of streets within the subdivision
and the intersection of any street of the subdivision with a
public way. These signs normally will be placed at the midpoint
of the arc and at the back of the sidewalk. The names of both
streets shall appear on the sign post at street intersections.
(a)
Temporary street signs shall be erected as soon as rough
grading is completed. These street signs shall also bear the
legend "PRIVATE WAY."
(b)
(13)
Street name guidelines.
Street names for new streets shall be selected from the official
street list comprised by the Committee to Study Memorials
unless an unusual situation warrants otherwise. In such
unusual situations, names not listed in the official street listing
may be approved if deemed suitable by a vote of the Board.
Copies of the list as it may be updated from time to time are
(a)
(14)
§ 310-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:341
available at the office of the Planning Board. Street names for
new streets are developed from the five categories listed:
(i) Local historical names.
(ii) Geographical names.
(iii) Plant life or wildlife names.
(iv) Memorial names.
(v) Names significant to a particular property.
The Committee to Study Memorials is available to research
names for specific sites in Town.
(b)
Streetlights. Streetlights shall be required at all intersections. They
shall be as specified in Plate 22, and located as shown on the
Typical Roadway Cross Sections.62
(15)
Bridges. Bridges shall be designed in accordance with Massachusetts
Department of Transportation Bridge Design Standards in force at the
time of filing of the application. Design of bridges shall be approved
by the Hydraulic Engineer of the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation where required.
B.
Drainage.
General requirements.
Drainage shall be designed to take care of the surface and
subsurface water of roadways and adjoining land.
(a)
Street drainage designs shall be of the type known as a
"manhole system." The "manhole system" is one in which the
water collected in the catch basins empties into an
intermediate manhole in a main drain laid in the street. (See
Plates 9 through 19.63) All water easements shall have a
12-inch gravel base and six inches of loam and seed for cover
over the full width of the easement.
(b)
Where groundwater is encountered at an elevation of less
than four feet below the proposed subgrade of the street,
drainage piping and/or subdrains shall be installed as shown
on Plate 2064 and shall meet the approval of the Highway
Superintendent.
(c)
At the request of the Board, a drainage system to eliminate or
remove any other water or waters within the subdivision limits
(d)
(1)
C.
62.Editor's Note: Plate 22 and the roadway cross-section diagrams are included as
attachments to this chapter.
63.Editor's Note: Plates 9 through 19 are included as attachments to this chapter.
64.Editor's Note: Plate 20 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.2
1:342
and not designated as roadway or subsurface water, and which
is otherwise not taken care of, shall be designed in a manner
approved by the Board.
Private drains may be installed to connect to the public
stormwater drainage system. Design and installation shall be
by agreement with the Town. A plan of the private drain shall
be furnished to the Board for approval.
(e)
Private drains shall be so located on the lot and so constructed
that no seepage from any on-lot sewerage system shall enter
the private drain.
(f)
All drainage easements shall have a 12-inch gravel base and
six inches of loam and seed for cover over the full width of the
easement.
(g)
All drainage basins, including but not limited to detention
basins, or retention basins, or enclosed leaching systems shall
have a no-disturb buffer zone extending 100 feet from the
maximum high water contour.
(h)
Drainage design standards.
Design criteria. The quantity of stormwater carried by drains
shall be determined by the Rational Method, and the design of
storm drainage shall be 10 years and for bridges and culverts
50 years.
FORMULA Q=ciA
Where:
Q = runoff, cubic feet per second
i = intensity of rainfall, inches per hour for duration
equal to time of concentration
c = runoff coefficient expressing the ratio of rate of
runoff to rate of rainfall
A = area of watershed in acres
The average rainfall intensity in inches per hour shall be
obtained from Plate 2.65
The runoff coefficients shall reflect developed conditions. The
following composite values may be used:
(a)
(2)
65.Editor's Note: Plate 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:343
Residential Areas
(lot size in square
feet)
Roof and
Pavements
%
Coefficient of
Runoff
12,000 30 0.44
20,000 26 0.42
40,000 22 0.40
80,000 16 0.35
Business areas 70 0.80
Industrial areas 50 0.58
Schools 10 0.32
Multiple-family 60 0.70
The time of concentration (t) shall be the total of overland
flow, channel flow and pipe flow. The Kutter and Manning
formula shall be standard for channel flow and pipe flow and
the overland flow time shall be determined from standard
MDOT or Elwyn Seelye's nomograph considering the factors
of length of slope, including slope and type of service.
Minimum time of concentration will be 10 minutes.
Drain and channel sizes. Pipe drains, where used, shall be
reinforced concrete Class III unless otherwise approved by the
Board and shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches. In
general, they should be designed to flow full with the hydraulic
gradient at the crown. In determining the capacity of concrete
pipe drains, the Manning formula should be used with the
coefficient of friction "an" equal to 0.013. The minimum
velocity at design flow should be 2.5 fops and the maximum 12
fops, unless otherwise approved by the Board.
(b)
Connection to public system.
Stormwater shall be directed to enter and discharge into
the nearest natural watercourse. If necessary, proper
easements must be secured by the applicant in the name
of the Town of Medfield. (See § 310-3.1D.)
(i)
Within the subdivision, stormwater runoff shall not be
permitted to flow upon the surface for a longer distance
than 300 feet before it enters the underground system.
Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway
on continuous grades at intervals of not more than 300
feet and at all low points in the roadway. The subdivision
drainage system shall be extended into existing
intersecting streets, with a catch basin installed at the
upstream side of the existing street.
(ii)
(c)
§ 310-5.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.2
1:344
Where public drainage systems exist with adequate
reserve capacity, connection thereto may be made, subject
to the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
(iii)
Manholes. All catch basins shall be set at the binder level
and finished surface shall be feathered down. All catch basins
shall be connected to the drainage system through manholes.
Manholes shall be provided at all changes in alignment, grade
or drain pipe size. The maximum distance between manholes
shall not exceed 300 feet.
(d)
Invert grades. A plan shall be submitted to the Board by the
engineer or land surveyor, indicating thereon the invert grades
of all storm drainage at all catch basins and manholes within
the subdivision. He or she shall certify that the grades shown
on this plan represent the grades as constructed.
(e)
Water supply.
General requirements.
Public water supply.
No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Planning
Board unless all lots therein are provided with water by
connection to the Town of Medfield's public water supply
system. Water mains and their appurtenances must be
installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Medfield Water and Sewerage Board and approved
by the Planning Board. Size of water mains shall be as
recommended by the Medfield Water and Sewerage Board
and as required by the Planning Board.
(i)
Connection to the public water supply shall be made at no
cost to the Town.
(ii)
The applicant shall include with his or her application a
certificate that arrangements have been made with the
Medfield Water and Sewerage Board for supplying water
to every lot in the subdivision.
(iii)
(a)
Connection to public system. Water mains and their
appurtenances must be connected to the Town water system
and shall be installed in accordance with the definitive plan
and with the rules of the Water and Sewerage Board and
approved by them.
(b)
(1)
Design and installation of water system.
Mains. The diameter of public water mains shall be determined
by the Water and Sewerage Board.
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 310-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:345
Mains and laterals. All water mains and laterals within the
exterior lines of the street shall be installed not less than five
feet below the finished grade of the street.
(b)
Hydrants. There shall be a hydrant within 500 feet of any
existing or potentially existing building.
In residential and industrial streets, all hydrants shall be
installed so that the center line of the hydrant is as shown
on Plates 3A, 3B, and 4.66
(i)
Each hydrant shall be served directly from the water main
through a six-inch lateral connection. It shall be gated
with a five-inch bottom valve and shall have two 2 1/2
inch hose outlets and one 4 1/2 inch pump outlet. Valves
shall be located in such number and locations that lines by
individual block maybe isolated for maintenance purposes.
Flanges of hydrants shall be level with the finished
sidewalk surface.
(ii)
(c)
Water service box castings. Water service box castings shall be
set in a full bed of mortar for a minimum of 12 inches around
the casting and to a minimum depth of nine inches.
(d)
Sewers.
Public sewers.
Connection to public sewers is required if any portion of the
subdivision is within 500 feet of the public sewerage system or
when required by the Board of Health.
The applicant shall include with his or her application a
certificate that arrangements have been made with the
Medfield Water and Sewerage Board for supplying sewer
to every lot in the subdivision if Subsection E(1)(a) is
applicable.
(i)
The sewer system shall be installed in accordance with
the definitive plan and shall conform with the rules of the
Water and Sewerage Board and shall be installed under
their direction. Connection to the public sewer system
shall be made at no cost to the Town.
(ii)
(a)
(b) Public sewers shall be not less than eight inches in diameter.
Lateral sewer connections shall be provided to all lots fronting
on the street.
(c)
Manholes shall be located at every change in grade, change in
alignment, and change in pipe size and not more than 300 feet
(d)
(1)
E.
66.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.2
1:346
apart. Ejector pumps may be permitted at the discretion of the
Water and Sewerage Board.
All sewer easements shall have a 12-inch gravel base and
six inches of loam and seed for cover over the width of the
easement.
(e)
Private on-lot sewerage systems.
Where a public sewerage system is located at a greater
distance from any portion of the subdivision than 500 feet and
connection to it is not required by the Board of Health, the
subdivider may install private on-lot sewerage systems.
(a)
Where private on-lot sewerage systems are installed, such
systems shall be designed in accordance with the Board of
Health, Town of Medfield, Massachusetts, Rules and
Regulations and the Environmental Code, Title 5, Minimum
Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage
or amended code of the Department of Environmental
Protection, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Health.
(b)
(2)
Utilities.
Electricity.
Electrical power lines shall be installed underground in PVC
conduit as shown on diagrams entitled Typical Roadway Cross
Sections, Plates 3A, 3B and 4,67 in accordance with the
requirements of the electrical company serving Medfield.
Service shall be provided in conduit to each lot fronting on the
street layout.
(a)
Electric service shall be supplied to proposed light installations
as shown on the approved plan.
(b)
At least two ties shall be shown to each electric service lot
connection and streetlight service.
(c)
(1)
Telephone. Telephone lines shall be installed underground as
shown on diagrams entitled Typical Roadway Cross Sections,
Plates 3A, 3B and 4,68 in accordance with the requirements of the
telephone company serving Medfield. Service shall be provided to
each lot fronting on the street.
(2)
Gas. Gas supply lines shall be installed underground and in
accordance with the requirements of the gas company serving
Medfield and as shown on the Typical Roadway Cross Sections,
Plates 3A, 3B and 4.69
(3)
F.
67.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:347
§ 310-5.3. Construction requirements.
Cable. Cable television lines shall be installed underground as
shown on diagrams entitled Typical Roadway Cross Sections,
Plates 3A, 3B and 4,70 in accordance with the requirements of the
cable company serving Medfield. Service shall be provided to each
lot fronting on the street.
(4)
Sidewalk construction requirements. The gravel base shall be laid in
two lifts of four inches each and compacted with a mechanical
compactor with a minimum centrifugal force of 2,500 pounds.
A.
Inspection and control.
The applicant shall employ, at his or her own expense, an engineer
to set all lines and grades in a manner satisfactory to the Highway
Superintendent and the Board.
(1)
The contractor shall notify the Highway Superintendent when each
stage of construction is completed and ready for inspection.
(2)
No succeeding operation shall be started until the prior operation
has been approved by the Highway Superintendent or the Board.
The contractor shall give the Highway Superintendent a 24-hour
written notice in hand when an inspection is required.
(3)
The applicant shall employ, at his or her own expense, a recognized
testing laboratory, acceptable to the Highway Superintendent and
the Board, to design, test and certify in writing to the Highway
Superintendent and to the Board that the following materials, the
aggregate base course, the binder course, the surface course, the
sidewalk course, and the curbing mixture, are in conformance and
are installed as specified in these rules and regulations.
(4)
The Board may, at the applicant's expense, require core tests to
assure itself that the minimum amount of bituminous concrete has
been uniformly spread through the roadway.
At intervals of 50 feet or less, tests shall be made in the
area of both gutters and the crown. It shall be the applicant's
contractor's responsibility to provide suitable and acceptable
coring equipment.
(a)
The Board or its representative shall be present when the
sampling is made.
(b)
It is the applicant's responsibility to collect the weight slips
and turn them over to the Highway Superintendent for
computation.
(c)
(5)
B.
69.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: Plates 3A, 3B and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 310-5.2 MEDFIELD CODE § 310-5.3
1:348
Damage to pavement. If upon the completion of the top course the
surface is marred, gouged, cut or otherwise damaged, a minimum
of 1/2 inch of "surface treatment" mix shall be evenly spread over
the damaged area to provide a smooth surface as directed by the
Planning Board or its agent.
(6)
Temporary barriers. During construction of streets, temporary street
barriers of a form acceptable to the Fire and Police Chiefs shall be
erected and maintained to prevent public vehicular access to portions
of streets where no occupied structure is present.
C.
Cleaning up.
The entire area within the street layout and required slopes and
easements must be cleaned up so as to leave a neat and orderly
appearance free from debris and other objectionable materials.
(1)
Following the completion of this and all other items of work, a final
inspection shall be made by the Highway Superintendent and the
Board's representative.
(2)
D.
Stump removal. All stumps removed in conjunction with construction
of the subdivision shall be disposed of off site in a Department of
Environmental Protection approved disposal site.
E.
Sanitary facilities. The applicant shall provide, at his or her own
expense, temporary sanitary facilities for all personnel either directly
or indirectly under his or her employment and shall be responsible for
proper use of such facilities.
F.
Erosion control. The erosion control plan must be implemented as
approved. In the event the plan does not adequately control and
prevent erosion, the Board reserves the right to require the plan to be
amended.
G.
§ 310-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.3
1:349
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1926 Bylaws to 2014 Code.
REP = Repealed
Article/Section from 1926 Bylaws Location in 2014 Code
Article I, Town Meetings Ch. 70
Article II, Town Administration and
Finance
Section 1 Ch. 30, § 30-1
Section 2 Ch. 10, § 10-1
Section 3 Ch. 10, Art. II, § 10-9
Section 4 Ch. 240, Art. I, § 240-1
Section 5 Ch. 40, § 40-2A
Section 6 Ch. 40, § 40-2B
Section 7 Ch. 230, Art. I
Section 8 Ch. 10, § 10-2
Section 9 Ch. 10, § 10-3
Section 10 Ch. 30, § 30-2
Section 11 Ch. 30, § 30-3
Section 12 Ch. 30, § 30-4
Section 13 Ch. 30, § 30-5
Section 14 Ch. 10, § 10-4
Section 15 Ch. 10, § 10-5
Section 16 Ch. 10, § 10-6
Section 17 Ch. 10, § 10-7
Section 18 (No text)
Section 19 Ch. 60, § 60-1
Section 20 Ch. 60, § 60-2
Section 21 Ch. 30, § 30-6
Section 22 Ch. 60, § 60-3
Section 23 Ch. 240, Art. I, § 240-2
Section 24 Ch. 60, § 60-4
Section 25 Ch. 60, § 60-5
§ 310-5.3 MEDFIELD CODE § DT-1
1:350
Article/Section from 1926 Bylaws Location in 2014 Code
Section 26 (No text)
Section 27 Ch. 60, § 60-6
Article III, Town Officers
Section 1 Ch. 10, Art. I, § 10-8
Section 2 Ch. 40, § 40-1A
Section 3 Ch. 40, § 40-1B
Section 4 Ch. 40, § 40-1C
Section 5 Ch. 40, § 40-2C
Section 6 Ch. 40, § 40-2D
Section 7 Ch. 40, § 40-2E
Section 8 Ch. 40, § 40-2F
Section 9 Ch. 40, § 40-3A
Section 9(A) Ch. 40, § 40-3B
Section 9(B) Ch. 170, Art. I
Section 10 Ch. 40, § 40-4
Section 11 Ch. 40, § 40-5
Section 12 (No text)
Section 13 Ch. 10, Art. II, §§ 10-10 through
10-13
Article IV, Police Regulations
Section 1 Ch. 50, Art. I, § 50-3
Section 2 Ch. 50, Art. I, § 50-4
Section 3 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-3
Section 4 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-4
Section 5 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-5
Section 6 Ch. 180, Art. I
Section 7 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-6
Section 8 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-7
Section 9 Ch. 120
Section 10 Ch. 160
Section 11 Ch. 240, Art. III
Section 12 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-8
Section 13 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-9
Section 14 Ch. 240, Art. IV
Section 15 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-10
Section 16 Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-11
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:351
Article/Section from 1926 Bylaws Location in 2014 Code
Section 17 Ch. 280
Section 18, Public Drinking Ch. 90
Section 19 Ch. 200, Art. I
Section 20 Ch. 50, Art. II
Section 21, Solicitation Ch. 220
Section 22, Driveway Permit Ch. 240, Art. V
Section 23, All-Night Gas Stations Ch. 180, Art. II
Section 24, Restrictions on the Hours
of Operation of Retail Stores
Ch. 180, Art. III
Section 25, Burglar Alarms Ch. 80, Art. I
Section 26, Fire Regulations Ch. 130, Art. I
Section 27, Secured Key Access Ch. 130, Art. II
Section 28, Scenic Roads Ch. 210
Section 29, Violation of Water Ban or
Water Conservation Measures
Ch. 270, Art. I
Section 30, Pooper Scooper Provision Ch. 100, Art. I
Section 31, Transfer Station
Regulations
Ch. 230, Art. II
Section 32, Signs in Public Ways Ch. 240, Art. II, § 240-12
Section 33, Floor Drains Ch. 110, Art. I
Section 34, Use of Buildings and
Facilities Under Control of Park and
Recreation Commission
Ch. 190, Art. I
Section 35, Public Consumption of
Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol
Prohibited
Ch. 175
Article V, Street Numbering Ch. 110, Art. II
Article VI, Snow Removal Ch. 260, Art. I
Article VII, Dog Control Ch. 100, Art. II
Article VIII, Council on Aging Ch. 10, Art. III
Section 6. Ch. 250, Art. I
Article IX, Wetlands Ch. 290
Article X, Parking for Handicapped
Persons
Ch. 260, Art. II
Article XI, Underground Utility
Installations
Ch. 110, Art. III
§ DT-1 MEDFIELD CODE § DT-1
1:352
Article/Section from 1926 Bylaws Location in 2014 Code
Article XII, Bylaw for Regulating
Underground Hazardous Materials
Storage
Ch. 140
Article XIII, Department of Civil Defense Ch. 20
Article XIV, Historic Districts Ch. 150, Art. I
Article XV, Fire Alarm Systems Ch. 80, Art. II
Article XVI, Demolition (Historic and
Archaeologic)
Ch. 150, Art. II
Article XVII, Bylaw Enforcement Ch. 1, Art. II
Article XVIII (No text)
Article XIX, Extensions of Public Sewer Ch. 110, Art. IV
Zoning Bylaw Ch. 300
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 30 4-27-2015 Cemetery areas Ch. 115
ATM, Art. 31 4-27-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 180
ATM, Art. 32 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 33 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 35 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 34 4-25-2016 Building construction:
Stretch Energy Code
Ch. 110, Art. V
ATM, Art. 40 4-25-2016 Historic preservation:
demolition delay
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
ATM, Art. 41 4-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 4 4-24-2017 Departmental revolving
funds
Ch. 117
ATM, Art. 16 4-24-2017 Affordable Housing
Trust Fund
Ch. 15
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:353
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 33 4-24-2017 Water: water
conservation: water use
restriction and ban
Ch. 270, Art. I
ATM, Art. 34 4-24-2017 Water: public water
supply system
Ch. 270, Art. II
ATM, Art. 37 4-24-2017 Stormwater
management
Ch. 235
ATM, Art. 38 4-24-2017 Water: water pollution
abatement
Ch. 270, Art. III
ATM, Art. 39 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 40 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 41 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 42 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 43 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 44 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 45 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 46 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 47 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 48 4-24-2017 Marijuana and
tetrahydrocannabinol
amendment
Ch. 175
ATM, Art. 49 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 28 4-30-2018 Licenses and Permits:
Revocation or Denial
for Failure to Pay Taxes
Amendment
Ch. 170, Art. I
ATM, Art. 37 4-30-2018 Boards, Commissions,
Committees and
Councils: Permanent
Planning and Building
Committee
Ch. 10, Art. IV
ATM, Art. 38 4-30-2018 Animals: Dog Control
Amendment
Ch. 100, Art. II
ATM, Art. 39 4-30-2018 Water: Public Water
Supply System
Amendment
Ch. 270, Art. II
ATM, Art. 40 4-30-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
ATM, Art. 41 4-30-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
§ DL-1 MEDFIELD CODE § DL-1
1:354

ZONING
300 Attachment 2
Town of Medfield
Table of Area Regulations
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 45; 4-29-2019 ATM by Art. 23]
Zone Standards
Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
Minimum Lot Frontage
Minimum Lot Width
Lot Depth
Front Yard
Side Yard
Rear Yard
RE 80,000 180 225 200 40 25 50
RT 40,000 142 175 150 40 15 50
RS 20,000 96 120 125 30 12 40
RUa 12,000 80 100 100 20 12 30
RUb 20,000 100 100 100 20 12 30
RUc 8,000 200 200 100 30 20 50
RUd 2,000 200 200 100 30 20 50
RUe 6,000 200x200 200 200 100 30 20 50


NOTES:
* Minimum lot area shall be calculated to include only contiguous land which is not in wetlands (see
definition of “wetlands” in § 300-2.1); which is not in the Watershed and/or Floodplain District; nor
in a detention pond, retention pond, or open drainage structure; and which does not have a slope
greater than 20% for a distance of 50 feet in its natural and unaltered state. A lot which fails to meet
these requirements by reason of excessive slope shall be subject to a special permit from the Board
of Appeals as set forth in § 300-14.10.
** No structure shall be built on any lot in any Residential Zoning District unless the lot is of sufficient
size and shape to contain a perfect square, as defined in this Bylaw, in accordance with the
dimensions set out in the Table of Use Regulations.
*** See § 300-6.2S.
**** See § 300-6.2Q.
300 Attachment 2:2 Supp 6, Apr 2019